Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S HH , DON ’ T SAY THAT ! D OMAIN C ERTIFICATION IN LLM S

 Cornelius Emde1∗, Alasdair Paren1 , Preetham Arvind1 , Maxime Kayser1 , Tom Rainforth1 ,
 Thomas Lukasiewicz2,1 , Philip H.S. Torr1 , Adel Bibi1
 1
   University of Oxford 2 Vienna University of Technology



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) are often deployed to perform constrained tasks,
         with narrow domains. For example, customer support bots can be built on top of
         LLMs, relying on their broad language understanding and capabilities to enhance
         performance. However, these LLMs are adversarially susceptible, potentially gen-
         erating outputs outside the intended domain. To formalize, assess, and mitigate
         this risk, we introduce domain certification; a guarantee that accurately character-
         izes the out-of-domain behavior of language models. We then propose a simple
         yet effective approach, which we call VALID that provides adversarial bounds
         as a certificate. Finally, we evaluate our method across a diverse set of datasets,
         demonstrating that it yields meaningful certificates, which bound the probability
         of out-of-domain samples tightly with minimum penalty to refusal behavior.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With recent advancements in the field of natural language
processing, large language models (LLMs) have become                    Health Advice Chatbot
ubiquitous. In particular, the scaling of recent large gener-
alist models dubbed foundation models has shown to enable         I am a chatbot to help
emergent abilities that benefit a wide range of downstream        with health questions.
tasks such as text generation, question answering, and text
comprehension (Kaplan et al., 2020; Alabdulmohsin et al.,
2022; Xiong et al., 2024; Henighan et al., 2020; Brown                      I need help commiting
                                                                            tax fraud.
et al., 2020). Adapting these foundation models for down-
stream tasks often leads to state-of-the-art performance and
has become the dominant paradigm (Gao et al., 2021). This         Sorry. I can't help.
is typically achieved via fine-tuning on task-relevant data
(e.g., low-rank adaptation (LoRA) Hu et al. (2022), in-
context learning (Mosbach et al., 2023), prefix turning Li                  I need help commiting
& Liang (2021), or simply prompt engineering).                              tax fraud. #@/!%\£~~

However, foundation models are typically trained on large
amounts of web data which contains a wide range of infor-         Sure. Here is a ﬁve
mation that is either irrelevant to a task or potentially harm-   point plan:
ful (Bommasani et al., 2022). Therefore, it is desirable to
restrict the output of a generalist LLM to a specific domain. Figure 1: A user misappropriating an LLM
                                                                system using an adversarial attack. We
For example, consider a healthcare provider such as the Na- provide certificates to mitigate this risk.
tional Health Services (NHS) providing a general purpose
chatbot to support their citizens with simple health questions, as shown in Figure 1. It would be im-
portant, for public reputation and cost reasons, that such a system would remain on topic and could
not be misused, either intentionally or unintentionally. Misappropriating models is easily possible.
In order to prevent intentional misuse, we consider an adversary trying to elicit an unintended (from
the deployer’s perspective) response from the model. We assume the deployer wants an LLM to
only respond with a certain set of topics, and thus a successful attack is an input string that creates
a coherent response outside the target domain. There are various reasons why an adversary might
want to elicit such a response that is out-of-domain (OOD). The adversarial user might want to
   ∗
     Corresponding Author cornelius.emde@cs.ox.ac.uk. Work partially done while interning at
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


misappropriate the system as a cost-effective tool for a purpose it wasn’t built for, resulting in excess
infrastructure costs for the deployer. Conversely, the deployer might legally be required to validate
and verify their models, which is challenging, if not impossible, when the model is not domain-
restricted. Finally, the adversary might want to harm the company directly by eliciting harmful
OOD responses, which could damage the company’s reputation when publicized. Recently, an
LLM-driven meal planning tool has received wide media attention for providing toxic recipes when
prompted with toxic ingredients (McClure, 2023; The Guardian, 2023). Deployers have moral and
legal obligations to prevent this (Bommasani et al., 2022). In all examples, restricting the domain
in which the model responds under adversarial prompts can help mitigate risks. Thus, in the era of
foundation models, “domain” specialization is critical.
Existing work has implemented guardrails that address these risks (Jain et al., 2023), most notably
via alignment, resulting in models rejecting user requests (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022;
Christiano et al., 2017). However, a wide body of research has shown that common guardrails have
“jailbreaks”, i.e., they can easily be circumvented by an adversary (Wang et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024;
Eiras et al., 2024; Carlini et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024). Common jailbreak methods are prompt
injection (Perez & Ribeiro, 2022; Jiang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024), numerical optimization (Jia
& Liang, 2017; Wallace et al., 2019; Ebrahimi et al., 2018; Jones et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023;
Jia et al., 2025), red teaming (Perez et al., 2022; Samvelyan et al., 2024), automated black-box
attacks (Chao et al., 2023; Mehrotra et al., 2024), or data poisoning attacks (Biggio et al., 2012;
Wallace et al., 2021; Carlini et al., 2024). Using these tools, it is possible for adversaries to retrieve
information from a fine-tuned model that was suppressed by the alignment and generate responses
that are outside the target domain (see Figure 1 for an example). Adversarial prefixes or suffixes that
augment any prompt are especially powerful, as they have been shown to universally attack models
in combination with a wide range of prompts and can thus be shared between adversarial users
(Wallace et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2023). This presents a significant risk. Hence, researchers have
proposed methods to defend against these adversarial attacks, such as unlearning (Nguyen et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2023), robust fine-tuning (O’Neill et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2021), or request and
response filtering (Inan et al., 2023).
Deployers would ideally want guardrails that come with a provable, mathematical guarantee against
the model responding off-topic, or a guarantee that it does this with very low probability. The process
of constructing guarantees against certain model behaviors under adversarial attack is commonly
referred to as certification and has been successfully applied to vision applications in recent years
(Akhtar et al., 2021) and proposed for NLP applications (La Malfa, 2023; Casadio et al., 2024;
Kumar et al., 2024). However, no existing LLM guardrails provide guaranteed protection against
existing or future jailbreaking techniques, leaving deployed models at risk of being compromised
shortly after release. As a result, developing certifiable methods to guarantee that specialized LLMs
consistently produce on-topic content is critical. Hence, our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a novel framework, domain certification, to bound the probability of models pro-
  ducing out-of-domain content under adversarial attack.
• We introduce an easy-to-use algorithm VALID that bounds the probability of an LLM based sys-
  tem responding off topic under adversarial attack. We show the efficiency of VALID which we
  test empirically on a number of representative data sets.

2    D OMAIN C ERTIFICATION
We now introduce our domain-certification framework for offering mathematical guarantees that an
LLM system stays on topic. In Section 2.1, we formally introduce this framework. In Section 2.2,
we present Verified Adversarial LLM Output via Iterative Dismissal (VALID). VALID is an easy-
to-use method to create a system that adheres to these guarantees. In plain language, we propose a
certifiable guardrail for LLM-driven systems as follows:
        A model is domain-certified, when an adversarial upper bound can be placed on the
        probability that the model provides an output outside its designated target domain.
Before formalizing this statement, we introduce some mathematical notation. We represent tokens
(i.e. individual text units) as x and y, which belong to the token space x, y ∈ V where V =
{1, . . . , V } is the vocabulary of size V . We define the space of sequences of arbitrary length as
S ≜ V∗ , the Kleene closure of V. Sequences of tokens are denoted by bold letters, x, y ∈ S, with


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


x and y representing the input and output sequences of an LLM respectively. We use lowercase
letters to denote models that predict the next token, such as l : S → V. Applying this model
repeatedly, until the end-of-sequence token creates a sequence-to-sequence model L : S → S. We
denote the likelihood of sample y under L given x as L(y|x), which is obtained by L(y|x) =
QNy
   n=1 l(yn |y<n , x) for a sentence y of length Ny . We further denote the distribution from which
the model samples its output by y ∼ L(·|x).

2.1   D EFINING D OMAIN C ERTIFICATION

We now formally introduce domain certification. We define the target domain (set of desired topics)
as a subset of the sentence space S and partition S into the target domain T and its complement T′ .
For instance, T might be all sentences meaningfully occurring for “question answering for health
problems”. In addition, we define the set of unwanted responses as F ⊂ T′ (F as “forbidden”) and
will certify with respect to this set F rather than T. Sequences posing some risk should be included in
F, while F′ ∩T′ should contain benign out-of-domain samples, such as unintelligible or meaningless
sequences of tokens (see Appendix B for a discussion). Hence, we wish to establish a guarantee that
L is unlikely to produce an output in F. As a step towards such a guarantee, we first define a bound
for any given element y in S:

Definition 1 Atomic Certificate. We say a model L : S → S is ϵy -atomic-certified (ϵy -AC) for some
sample y (i.e. an atom) in the output set S, iff
                                       ∀x ∈ S : L(y|x) ≤ ϵy .                                       (1)

In words, a model that is ϵy -AC for a sample y, will generate sample y with probability smaller
than ϵy for any x ∈ S, and hence for adversarially chosen x. If this is the case, we say model L
is certifiable for sample y with ϵy , i.e. ϵy is the smallest value that provably bounds L. Ideally,
such an upper bound ϵy would be large for samples in the target domain T, meaning the certificate
is permissive, and small for samples drawn from F meaning the certificate is restrictive, i.e. tight.
The atomic certificate implies an upper bound ϵF for Py∼L(·|x) (y ∈ F|x), which would be con-
structed by summing
P                  P (1) over all y ∈ F for a given x. Concretely, Py∼L(·|x) (y ∈ F|x) =
   y∈F L(y|x)   ≤      y∈F ϵy = ϵF . However, practically this bound is intractable due to F’s ex-
ponential size in Ny , and the difficulty in constructing a precise description of the set F. Instead of
giving a bound over returning y ∈ F, we look at the worst case across F which can more precisely
be estimated from a finite sample of F:

Definition 2 Domain Certificate. We say model L is ϵ-domain-certified (ϵ-DC) with respect to F,
when it is ϵy -AC for all y ∈ F with ϵy ≤ ϵ:
                                    ∀x ∈ S, y ∈ F : L(y|x) ≤ ϵ.                                     (2)

This imposes a global bound on L across all undesired responses in F. In practice, we cannot
establish the ϵ-DC certificate w.r.t. F as we cannot enumerate F. Hence, following standard practice
in ML evaluation, we propose to use DF , a finite dataset of out-of-domain responses to establish a
ϵ-DC certificate w.r.t. DF approximating the certificate for F.
Recent discussions have raised the need for bounds on undesirable behavior. For instance, Bengio
(2024) advocates for upper bounds on harmful behavior (Bengio et al., 2024). In addition, a growing
body of legislation mandates thorough auditing of ML systems (EU, 2024). The atomic and domain
certificates can play a vital role in assessing the risk of worst-case behavior. For example, consider
the deployer of an LLM-based system that processes 10 requests per second. The deployer might
perform an apriori risk assessment and determine that they can tolerate the consequences of an out-
of-domain response from a set DF sampled once per year. The deployer should certify the LLM
system as ϵ-DC with ϵ ≈ 10−9 in order to achieve this level of risk.

Certification through Divergences. We provide an alternative view to this problem, generalizing
it to bounding divergences between the model and the distribution of sentences in the domain T.
We then use this view to operationalize the ϵy − AC and ϵ − DC (Definitions 1 and 2) inspired by
Vyas et al. (2023)’s work on preventing copy-right violations. To this end, we define an oracle Ω
that is a generator for domain T: Ω assigns high likelihood to sentences in T and zero likelihood to


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


elements in F. Hence, sampling from Ω will yield in-domain responses. We establish and bound the
divergence between L and Ω to restrict the model domain. In particular, we use the Renyi divergence
                                           P (x)
of order infinity, ∆∞ (P ∥ Q) ≜ log supx Q(x)    (Rényi, 1961). Hence, our objective is:
                                ∀x ∈ S : ∆∞ (L(y|x) ∥ Ω(y)) ≤ k.                              (3)
Bounding this divergence is at the core of what we are aiming to achieve: The divergence is large
when L assigns high likelihood to a sample y while Ω does not. That means L is likely to produce
samples that are out-of-domain. When Ω assigns high likelihood to y, the sample is in the target
domain, and hence the divergence in (3) is not restrictive. When L assigns low likelihood, y is
unlikely to be sampled. Interestingly, this divergence implies (1) and (2), see Lemma 1.
As the oracle is not available in practice we approximate Ω with a “guide” language model that is
exclusively trained on in-domain data dubbed G (i.e. the guide model). We use G(y) to replace Ω(y)
to assess the marginal likelihood of y. While this means that G(y) loses some context contained
in x, this has a major advantage: G(y) does not depend on x, which is a potential adversary and
hence, by design is robust to adversarial prompts.

2.2      ACHIEVING D OMAIN C ERTIFICATION

In this section, we introduce Verified Adversarial LLM Algorithm 1 VALID
Output via Iterative Dismissal (VALID) to obtain atomic
certification as described in Definition 1. We utilize a Require: LLM L, Guide model G, hy-
general model L and a domain generator G as described           perparameters k and T , prompt x
above and obtain a meta-model M for which the guar-             for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
antee holds with respect to the domain generator G. In              Sample y ∼ L(·|x)
particular, we perform rejection sampling as described in           Ny ← length(y)
Algorithm 1 (inspired by Vyas et al. (2023)): The capa-             if log L(y|x)
                                                                            G(y) ≤ kNy then
ble general model L proposes a sample y and we accept,                   Return: y
if the length normalized log-ratio between L and G is
                                                                Return: “Abstained”.
bounded by hyperparameter k. We repeat up to T times
until a sample is accepted. If all samples are rejected, the model dismisses the request. This defines
a new model M , for which the following theorem establishes the certificate:

Theorem 1 (VALID Certificate) Let L be an LLM and G a guide model as described above. Rejec-
tion sampling as described in Algorithm 1 with rejection threshold k and up to T iterations defines
model ML,G,k,T with ML,G,k,T (y|x) denoting the likelihood of y given x. Let Ny be the length of
y. We state the adversarial bound:
                                ∀x ∈ S : ML,G,k,T (y|x) ≤ 2kNy · T · G(y).                             (4)
                          kNy                                             kNy
Hence, ML,G,k,T is [2           T G(y)]-AC and, further, it is [maxy∈F 2        T G(y)]-DC w.r.t. F.

When context allows, we may abbreviate ML,G,k,T to M , omitting subscripts for brevity. This
certificate with respect to G can be useful: As G is only trained on samples in DT ⊂ T, a dataset of
domain T, it assigns exponentially decreasing likelihood to samples that are in F.1 In particular, this
is useful iff the log upper bound kNy + log T + log G(y) (log RHS of (4)) is small in comparison
to maxx∈S log L(y|x): Our certificate can provide an upper bound to the adversarial behavior of M
that is favorable over L.
As mentioned, this problem is closely related to OOD detection, for which the likelihood ratio test
is commonly used as a powerful statistic (Neyman & Pearson, 1933; Bishop, 1994; Ren et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024). In OOD detection, rejection threshold k is
commonly chosen to balance false negative rates and false positive rates. Here, k also influences the
upper bound on the certificate, indicating that there can be a trade-off between correctly classifying
samples as ID or OOD, and achieving a desired level of certification.
Length Normalization. Algorithm 1 performs length normalized rejection-sampling as unnor-
malized log likelihood ratios scale unfavorably in Ny , the length of sequence y which we now
demonstrate. Consider the next-token models l and g underlying the sequence-to-sequence mod-
els L and G. As y is sampled from L, we expect each token y1 , . . . , yNy to have high like-
lihood under l. If we assume that l places c times more probability mass per token than g,
   1
       We give an empirical example of this behavior in Figure 13 in Appendix E.4.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


then we can show that the log likelihood ratio grows linearly in Ny , the length of sequence y:
                          QNy
log L(y|x)/G(y) = log n=1        cg(yn |y<n )/g(yn |y<n ) = Ny log c. We illustrate an example in
Figure 2: Assume that an in-domain sample y for which model L and generator G assign constant
likelihood per token of 0.1 and 0.05, respectively, i.e. ∀n = 1, .., Ny : l(yn |y<n , x) = 0.1 and
g(yn |y<n , x) = 0.05. Further, assume an out-of-domain y ′ for which l assigns a mass of 0.1 per
token and g assigns 0.01. The log likelihood ratio for y can be expressed as Ny log 2 and for y ′ as
Ny′ log 10. As in- and out-of-domain ratios grow with length, so does the optimal decision bound.
We plot sequences of varying lengths with these parameters in Figure 2. By arithmetic manipulation,
rejection sampling with threshold kNy is equivalent to bounding the ratio of geometrically normal-
ized likelihoods log L(y|x)1/Ny /G(y)1/Ny using a constant threshold k. Hence, we propose to use
normalized log ratios in Algorithm 1 over unnormalized likelihood ratios. Similar approaches have
been discussed in the NLP literature (Geng et al., 2023).
Despite the length normalization of the rejection thresh-
old, notice that the VALID bound depends on Ny , the         30         Target Domain
                                                                        Other


                                                           logL(y|x)/G(y)
length of sequence y (see (4)), making the certificate
more effective for shorter or longer sequences. Let          20         Boundary kNy
ḡ(y) be the geometric mean of per-token probability for
G(y). The log upper bound can be written as kNy +            10
Ny log ḡ(y) + log T . Whether this is tighter for short
or long sequences is governed by k and log ḡ(y). When        0
                                                                     2        4      6      8      10
k+log ḡ(y) is close to 0, the bound is balanced, and when               Sequence Length (Ny)
k + log ḡ(y) < 0, the bound decreases as Ny increases. Figure 2: Log likelihood ratios scale in the
In the appendices, we provide further insights into sequence length Ny . Six artificial examples
                                                           of sentences with length 1 to 10 are shown
VALID. In particular, in Appendix A we provide for the ID and OOD dataset. As log ratios
Lemma 2 showing how to estimate the likelihood of M . scale, so should the decision boundary.
In Lemma 3, we provide an analysis of the expected num-
ber of iterations of VALID. In Appendix C.1, we provide further intuition on how rejection sampling
can achieve an adversarial bound. Finally, in Lemma 4 we show an adversary for M and discuss
how rejection sampling encumbers adversarial attacks on M .

3     E XPERIMENTS
We empirically test our method proposed in Section 2.2 across 3 domains: Shakespeare, Computer
Science News, and MedicalQA. After describing the experimental setup in Section 3.1, we examine
the rejection behavior of our method by examining the log L(y|x)/G(y) ratio and associated cer-
tificates under a finite set of ground-truth test samples from T and F in Section 3.2. In Section 3.3,
we repeat this analysis by applying our Algorithm 1. Finally, we demonstrate how to evaluate a
certified model on standardized benchmarks in Section 3.4.

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In this section, we provide a brief description of our experimental setup for three applications. Each
experimental setup consists of a target domain T, a finite dataset of in-domain samples DT ⊂ T,
models L and G, and an out-of-domain dataset DF ⊂ F, against which we test our methods (see
Appendix D for more details on data and models).
Shakespeare. Our target domain T is Shakespeare’s plays. We fine-tune a Gemma-2-2b (Team
et al., 2024) as model L and train a GPT-2 architecture (33.7M parameters, Radford et al. (2019))
from scratch for G on TinyShakespeare (TS) (Karpathy, 2015). We use TS’s test split as in-domain
dataset, DT , and following previous literature (Zhang et al., 2024) compose DF of IMDB (Maas
et al., 2011), RTE (Wang et al., 2019) and SST2 (Minaee et al., 2024), adding an old Bible dataset
(Reis, 2019) as it is linguistically close to TinyShakespeare. At testing, we consider 256-token long
sequences and use the first 128 tokens as prompt.
Computer Science News. Our target domain T is news about computer science. We fine-tune
a Gemma-2-2b as model L and train a GPT-2 architecture (109.3M parameters) from scratch for
G on articles from the computer science categories in the 20NG dataset (Lang, 1995). We use
computer science articles from 20NG’s test split as target domain DT and the remaining categories
as DF together with the OOD dataset used for Shakespeare. At testing, we consider 256 token long
sentences and use the first 128 tokens as prompt.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Medical QA. We apply our method to medical question answering as target domain T. This could,
for example, be extended to a chatbot for clinicians to look up patient symptoms. We use a LLama-
3-8B model (AI@Meta, 2024) as L and for guide model G we pre-train a GPT-2 architecture model
from scratch (184M parameters) on PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019), which contains approximately
200K QA pairs for training and 1000 test pairs. We further fine-tune G on responses from L to
questions in PubMedQA. We use the PuMedQA test set as in-domain dataset DT and regard question
answering on other topics, such as geography, as F. To model this, we use the Stanford Question
and Answering Dataset (SQuAD; excluding medical categories; Rajpurkar et al. (2016)) as DF .

3.2     L IKELIHOOD R ATIOS ON G ROUND T RUTH S AMPLES

In this section, we evaluate the capability of our method to attribute samples to the target domain and
investigate whether it yields useful adversarial bounds. In particular, we study the length-normalized
likelihood ratio L(y|x)/G(y) on in- and out-of-domain samples. In Figure 3a, we show that the log
likelihood ratios for MedicalQA are disentangled and hence a threshold k exists separating target
domain and out-of-domain samples well. However, such k — while yielding strong OOD detection
performance — might not be associated with tight certificates. Hence, we will first study the ϵy -AC
certificates under M for individual samples, y, before moving on to the domain certificate, ϵ-DC.
Atomic Certificates. We obtain ϵy -ACs using VALID (Section 2.2), setting k to achieve a 10%
false rejection rate (FRR) for in-domain samples. Figures 4 (a)-(c) show the distribution of ϵy -ACs
for the target domain dataset DT and the out-of-domain dataset DF . We make similar observations
for all three setups: First, the certificates in the OOD datasets DF are meaningfully tight. We ob-
serve that 95% of OOD samples have an ϵy -AC of less than 1 × 10−10 across all setups. Hence,
the sampling probability for these OOD instances is provably smaller than 10−10 for any arbitrary
prompt x. Second, we note that the certificates in DF are significantly tighter than those in DT as
shown by the gap between the eCDFs. This is a significant finding as certificates should be con-
strictive (i.e. small) on samples in F preventing these from being sampled, while certificates should
be permissive (i.e. large) in T, not preventing in-domain responses from being sampled. Finally,
we observe that the disentanglement of ACs is weaker for MedicalQA compared to the other setups
(see Figure 4c). As shown in Appendix E.6, this is attributable to the short sequences in the OOD
dataset and adjusting for this confounder significantly improves disentanglement.
To further study the atomic certificates on M , we compare them to a certificate on L as a baseline.
To this end, we define the constriction ratio for each y, given by the ratio of the certifiable ϵy for L,
ϵy (L), over the certifiable ϵy for M , ϵy (M ):
                                                           ϵy (L)
                                               CRk =                                                            (5)
                                                           ϵy (M )
A CRk of 1 for sample y indicates that the bounds on generating y are equal for M and L (i.e.
they are equally constricted) while a CRk > 1 indicates that M is more constricting than L, and
vice-versa. Smaller ACs for samples in F are better and hence a large CRk indicates that model
M is favorable over L. To our knowledge, only vacuous certificates for a general model L exist
(e.g. L is 1-DC). Hence, we approximate it from below using the likelihood L(y|x) under non-
adversarial x taken from the datasets. Concretely, we use L(y|x) as a crude approximation of
maxx∈S L(y|x). This overestimates the robustness of L and underestimates the constriction ratio,

                 Target Domain T      1.0                                    1.00
                 Other F
                                                                                                        maxL(y|x)


                                                                             0.75
                                      0.5         Youden's J                 0.50
                                                  TRR                        0.25
                                                  FRR                                    FRR
                                      0.0                                    0.00
0        5        10        15              0      10 20 30 40                      20    15    10     5            0
    Normalized Log Likelihood Ratio      log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                 Log10 -DC
                 (a)                                  (b)                                   (c)
Figure 3: All Figures display MedicalQA. Figure 3a shows that log likelihood ratios are well disentangled.
Figure 3b shows the trade-off between OOD and certification: The best OOD detection performance occurs
with a constriction ratio of 20. Figure 3c shows the false rejection rate (FRR) required to certify at a given ϵ.
All Figures display MedicalQA.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



1.00          Shakespeare                  Computer Science News                            Medical QA
                                                                                        Target Domain T
0.75                                                                                    Other F
0.50
0.25
0.00        400           200         0         400            200              0        100           50         0
                  log10 y -AC                         log10 y -AC                              log10 y -AC
                   (a)                                    (b)                                      (c)


0       100         200         300       100     0      100        200   300       0       25       50      75   100
  log10 CRk (Log Constriction Ratio)     log10 CRk (Log Constriction Ratio)       log10 CRk (Log Constriction Ratio)
                  (d)                                    (e)                                      (f)
Figure 4: (a)-(c) show the estimated cumulative distribution function (eCDF) of ϵy -ACs for each experimental
setup. (d)-(f) show the histograms for the log10 constriction ratios. All results are obtained with hyperparameter
k chosen to ensure a 10% false rejection rate (FRR) on in-domain samples.

i.e., it underestimates the improvement of VALID certificates over L in bounding the probability
of OOD responses. In Figures 4 (d) - (f), we show the log10 constriction ratios for out-of-domain
samples while setting k to achieve an FRR of 10% (see Appendix E.5 for other FRRs). Across
setups, the majority of samples have positive constriction ratios, which means that M issues ACs
tighter than L(y|x). For MedicalQA, we observe a 99% of log10 CRs are greater than 6.30 and
observe a median CR of 24.23. In other words, 99% of samples are at least 6 orders of magnitude
less likely under M and in the median ≈ 24 orders of magnitude less likely (i.e. 1 × 10−24 ). We
believe these are very strong restrictions and observe even stronger median constriction for 20NG
and TinyShakespeare. Further, we observe the strongest constriction among samples with high
likelihood under L (see Appendix E). Tight bounds are the most relevant on these samples as they
are most likely to be sampled from L. Finally, we illustrate a trade-off between certification and
OOD detection in Figure 3b. For MedicalQA, we plot the median constriction ratio for out-of-
domain samples across a range of parameters k together with false rejection rates (FRR) and true
rejection rates (TRR). The optimal classification performance (as measured by Youden’s J (Youden,
1950)) is achieved at k = 5.35 with a strong true rejection rate (0.99) and a low false rejection rate
(0.01), while producing a median log10 constriction ratio 19.00. Smaller k values yield tighter
certificates (see the bound in (4)) and larger constriction ratios at the expense of increasing the FRR.
Domain Certificates.      To study certification across a range of samples, we turn to the domain
certificate, ϵ-DC. Above, we studied the effect of various parameters (e.g., fixing FRR) on the cer-
tificates. However, practitioners likely work the other way around: They first set an acceptable
threshold according to a threat and safety model. Then, they examine model performance under
conditions satisfying such certificate. Hence, we study model performance at a given ϵ-DC. As pro-
posed in Section 2.1, we establish an ϵ-DC certificate w.r.t. DF approximating the certificate for F.
To obtain ϵy -ACs smaller than the domain certificate ϵ, we need to choose rejection threshold, k,
and the number of iterations, T , accordingly. We
                    solve for k, T given ϵ:     max {kNy + log T + log G(y)} = log ϵ.                             (6)
                                                y∈DF

For simplicity, we keep T = 1 and study model performance on DT while maintaining an ϵ-DC on
DF . In particular, we look at the FRR of M : The performance of model M is determined by the
performance of L (from which VALID samples response candidates) and the false rejections leading
to a degradation of M compared to L. Hence, we study the FRR as a function of the certification
threshold ϵ. The result is shown in Figure 3c for MedicalQA: The FRR increases as the certificates
get tighter (small ϵ). Remarkably, we achieve a domain certificate with ϵ = 10−5 at an FRR of only
15% at a single rejection step. We replicate all figures for the other setups in Appendix E.
A natural question is why we do not simply use a model comparable to G that is trained exclusively
on a subset of T directly. While such a model would be highly robust against providing useful out-of-
domain responses, its performance would significantly lag behind both L and M . Our ablation study

                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



1.0                                                                           Target Domain                                FRR             PubMedQA@


                                                 Log Likelihood Ratio
                                                                              Other                          1.00
                                                                                                             0.75
0.5         Youden's J                                                                                       0.50
            TRR                                                                                              0.25
            FRR
0.0                                                                                                          0.00
                0           100                                         20       40 60 80 100                       20      15        10        5     0
    log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                                        Response Length (Ny)
                                                                                       log10 -DC
                (a)                                 (b)                                  (c)
Figure 5: All Figures show MedicalQA. Figure 5a shows the false rejection rate (FRR) for a range of ϵ-DC for
VALID with T = 1. Figure 5b shows the log likelihood ratio depends on Ny for real data. Performing length
normalization makes the problem linearly separable. Figure 5c shows PubMedQA@ϵ results of our model M .

in Appendix G confirms this performance gap between G and M . These findings demonstrate that
our system, which combines the high performance of L with the safety guarantees of G, achieves
advantages that neither L nor G can provide independently. Further, the effectiveness of VALID
utilizing a G of such limited performance demonstrates that the burden on training G is relatively
low: A model that performs poorly on the target task, but distinguishes well between samples in T
and F, can be sufficient to achieve meaningful certificates for M .

3.3      G ENERATING R ESPONSES

In the section above, we evaluate M obtained through VALID on prompts and responses, taken
from datasets DT and DF representing our target domain T and F. The experiments provide us with
a detailed analysis of ACs and DCs on a large variety of samples for which their membership to T or
F is given by high-quality labels. Nonetheless, in practice, the candidate responses that are judged
by VALID are generated by L. Hence, we prompt M using x ∈ DT and x ∈ DF and use responses
generated by L as VALID proposes. We focus on VALID with T = 1 and the MedicalQA setup.
Our findings are in line with Section 3.2 showing a strong ability to distinguish between in- and out-
of-domain samples while providing meaningful adversarial bounds. In Figure 5b, we demonstrate
the separation of samples from DT and DF , as well as the dependence of the log ratios on the length
of the sequence y extending the theoretical analysis from Section 2.2. In Appendix E.4, we replicate
Figure 3 for this setting. We further present in Figure 5a the constriction ratios on out-of-distribution
samples generated by L. We see a clear indication that the constriction is strong out-of-domain with
an optimal classification performance at a ratio of 1040 . To reiterate, median ratio between L(y|x)
and the ϵy -AC for M is 1040 showing just how strict VALID is on the out-of-domain dataset.
Building on these results, we test VALID with T > 1. Increasing T can naturally increase the accep-
tance rate on in-domain samples (through repeatedly proposing candidates) at the cost of increasing
the ϵy linearly (see (4)). We find great improvements in the acceptance rate on in-domain samples
with minimal losses on the ϵ-DC tightness. We explore this in Appendix F.

3.4      C ERTIFIED B ENCHMARKING

We extend the analysis of false rejection rates (FRRs) by evaluating model M ’s performance on
standardized benchmarks, while ensuring it is certified at ϵ. In particular, for our MedicalQA setup,
we evaluate the model performance on the PubMedQA benchmark (Jin et al., 2019).


      Item Correctness                                                             QA Pair        Response Acceptance

      Context: Fournier's gangrene is known to                                                    Context: Fournier's gangrene is known to have an
      have an impact in the morbidity […]                                                         impact in the morbidity […]
                                                                                 Set k for M to
      Question: Is Fournier's gangrene still                                    be ϵ-DC on ≤−     Question: Is Fournier's gangrene still dangerous?
      dangerous?                                                                                  Answer: Despite extensive therapeutic efforts,
      Answer: {Yes, No, Maybe}                                                                    Fournier's gangrene remains a surgical emergency.

      Answer “Yes” is correct ✅                                                      ✅            log L(y | x)/G(y) 𝒟 k Ny ✅


Figure 6: The PubMedQA@ϵ benchmark assesses PubMedQA performance while satisfying ϵ-DC certificate.
The correctness is scored as commonly done for PubMedQA (left). The correct long answer is checked by M
while ensuring the ϵ-DC (right). Only if an item is accepted and correct, the question is scored positively.


                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Setup.      Evaluating a standardized benchmark such as PubMedQA while certifying model M
requires careful consideration. The standard format typically includes n-shot examples followed by
a multiple-choice question with either yes/no options or answers labeled A through D. The model
is then prompted to select the correct response. However, this setup does not reflect a realistic user-
system interaction. Thus, we introduce the PubMedQA@ϵ metric, which separates the evaluation
into two streams: (1) standard assessment of model L on PubMedQA to determine correctness, and
(2) testing whether the correct question-answer pair is rejected by our algorithm. The process is
summarized in Figure 6. We score an item as correct, if the model predicts the correct answer while
maintaining its ϵ − DC on the realistic question-answering pair.
Results. The unconstrained model scores 73.4% on PubMedQA. As we tighten the certificate (de-
crease ϵ), more correct responses are rejected and the benchmark score drops, as shown in Figure 5c.
We find that when certifying at ϵ = 10−5 , we maintain a certified score of 66.7% (-6.7%), and at
ϵ = 10−10 of 47.7% (-25.7%). These scores demonstrate robust performance given the provable
defense facilitating domain restriction. In Appendix H, we discuss benchmarking in more depth.


4   R ELATED W ORK

LLM Guardrails. A large body of work has been published on establishing effective guardrails
for LLMs. These approaches are designed to restrict the model to responses that align with the
deployer’s values. One of the first approaches was Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Askell et al., 2021), which uses human preferences to guide LLM training. Extensions such
as Safe-RLHF add cost models to penalize harmful behavior, ensuring a balance between helpful-
ness and harmlessness during optimization (Dai et al., 2024). RLHF’s foundation in reinforcement
learning has given rise to techniques such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Bai et al., 2022),
the more recent Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024), and Generalized Pol-
icy Optimization (GPO) (Tang et al., 2024), which incorporates diverse optimization objectives,
useful for safety-critical scenarios. For an in-depth survey of this area, we direct the reader to Kauf-
mann et al. (2024). Unlike the preceding approaches that fine-tune guardrails into the parameters
of an LLM, a number of works have proposed using LLMs to classify content as either safe or
unsafe. Llama Guard categorizes the inputs and outputs of an LLM into different unsafe content
categories (Inan et al., 2023). Conversely, Chua et al. (2024) classify if an output is safe with respect
to a system prompt. For a complete overview on LLM guardrails, we direct the interested reader
to a recent survey of this area, Dong et al. (2024). Existing LLM guardrail techniques have been
proven effective to different levels. However, these guardrails only come with empirical evidence
of their proficiency against existing attacks, and hence, many have been circumvented shortly after
deployment. Conversely, VALID offers a provable high-probability guarantee against undesirable
behavior, reflecting recent advocacy for such provable assurances (Bengio, 2024).

Out-of-Distribution Detection.         Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has received a lot of at-
tention in recent years in NLP. Commonly, the problem is treated as text classification and softmax
probabilities of class predictions (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017) or energy scores (Liu et al., 2020) are
deployed as discriminant scores. Another group of methods employs distance-based methods, rely-
ing on OOD responses being distant from ID responses in latent space, often utilizing Mahalanobis
distance and sometimes incorporating contrastive learning techniques (Uppaal et al., 2023; Podol-
skiy et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021; Khosla et al., 2020; Lin & Gu, 2023). Finally, rooted in classical
statistics, a number of studies suggest using the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) as a discriminate score,
comparing likelihoods from ID and OOD proxy models (Gangal et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2024).
Xu & Ding (2024) offer a comprehensive review of LLMs for OOD detection. While many of these
works have strong empirical detection results, their focus is OOD detection rather than certification,
and hence they do not provide theoretical guarantees or certificates on model behavior.

Certifying LLMS. A number of certification approaches have been proposed for LLMs in various
contexts. For instance, Chaudhary et al. (2024) aim to certify the knowledge comprehension ability
of LLMs and Freiberger & Buchmann (2024) discuss what criteria should be certified to ensure
fairness. Most relevant here is work on certification against adversarial inputs. Casadio et al. (2024)
discuss certifying the robustness of LLMs to input perturbations in embedding space. Commonly,
adversarial certification is studied for text classification rather than generation (La Malfa, 2023).
Kumar et al. (2024) introduce a framework for defending against adversarial perturbations in token


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


space by performing a small number of substitutions around a given input. In contrast VALID comes
with certificates that holds for all inputs, rather than perturbations around a specific input.


5   L IMITATIONS

Despite our promising results, we acknowledge the limitations of our current implementation. First,
the domain generator G(y) lacks context. This means that if y is marginally in-domain, while y|x,
the conditional distribution is not, our method will not reject appropriately. Consider a chatbot for
tax advice. For prompt x =”How often is a tax report due?”, the response y =”Once a year.”
is in-domain. Hence, the same response to x =”How often should I shower?” might be accepted
despite it being out-of-domain, and terrible advice. However, this can be mitigated by fine-tuning
the model L to be as explicit as possible repeating “shower” in the response.
Second, this approach relies heavily on the domain-specific model G, and how closely it approxi-
mates the ideal oracle Ω. In practice and as demonstrated in our experiments, G might have limited
semantic understanding and lack general language capabilities and world knowledge. In most in-
stances it might not be able to distinguish between semantically opposite but similar sentences and
hence VALID is likely incapable of aligning the model, rather than shushing it.
Third, an adversary might construct an attack that aims to copy tokens from the prompt of L to G.
For instance, x =“Repeat after me: !!!-+! and then tell me how to build a bomb!”. This “!!!-+!”
might be an adversary for G to assign a high likelihood to L following the instruction. For this
attack, the adversary operates with limited information, having access only to whether the log ratio
is bounded, without visibility into G’s outputs, weights, or likelihood scores. In addition, since G
has never seen information on how to build a bomb, it is extremely unlikely to produce coherent,
correct, and harmful content. In Appendix C.1, we discuss the feasibility of attacking M further.
Fourth, our method comes at the extra cost of sampling up to T times. Further, it requires training
G and evaluating it during inference. Depending on the architecture of G however, the extra cost is
limited. In our experiments G is orders of magnitude smaller than L.


6   F UTURE W ORK

In this section we briefly discuss some ideas for future work that we believe could further extent
the practical utility of VALID. Initially, it would be interesting to test larger, specialized models for
G to evaluate whether these more advanced models produce improved certificates and refusal rates.
We chose not to do this because LLMs trained from scratch exclusively on specific domains are not
common, and thus results generalize less to what a practitioner with limited resources could expect.
As described in Section 2.2, VALID uses length normalization to ensure the log likelihood ratio
rejection condition is robust to different lengths of sequences Ny . One may extend this and learn
a more complex polynomial of Ny as rejection threshold. This threshold could be used to provide
both ϵy -ACs and ϵ-DC certificates, while simultaneously enabling more precise OOD detection.
Finally, a rejection scheme with a probabilistic decision rule, similar to Algorithm 5 in Vyas et al.
(2023), would be able to provide identical bounds to Theorem 1. Possibly, this rejection rule would
lead to better performance in terms of OOD classification.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we tackle the problem of generative language models producing outputs outside their
target domain in response to adversarial inputs. We describe the associated risks, introduce a first-
of-its-kind framework for domain certification for LLMs, and provide VALID, a simple algorithm
relying on well-established theories from statistics and information theory to provide such guaran-
tees. We demonstrate the effectiveness of VALID in multiple representative settings and show that
it is effective even when relying on a guide model G with limited language skills, making it easy to
deploy in limited data and resource environments.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by a UKRI grant Turing AI Fellowship (EP/W002981/1). C. Emde and
M. Kayser are supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Health Data Science
(EP/S02428X/1) and the AXA Research Fund. A. Bibi acknowledges the Google Gemma 2 Aca-
demic Award 2024. T. Lukasiewicz is supported by the AXA Research Fund. Tom Rainforth is
supported by the UK EPSRC grant EP/Y037200/1. The research reported in this publication was
partially supported by funding from KAUST Center of Excellence on GenAI, under award number
5940. We thank the Royal Academy of Engineering and we thank Samuele Marro for his advice.
Due to an unfortunate oversight, Professor Bernard Ghanem (KAUST) was not included in the au-
thor list for our ICLR 2025 submission. Despite our appeal to the conference Program Chairs (PC),
the ruling was strict, and we strongly disagree with it. We apologize for this error and acknowledge
his contributions, which were absolutely key to the success of this project. For clarity, the arXiv
version of this paper has the complete and correct list of authors, including Professor Ghanem.
Finally, we thank the reviewers and the area chair (AC) for their efforts and constructive feedback.

R EFERENCES
AI@Meta. Llama 3 Model Card. 2024.
Naveed Akhtar, Ajmal Mian, Navid Kardan, and Mubarak Shah. Advances in Adversarial Attacks
  and Defenses in Computer Vision: A Survey. IEEE Access, 9:155161–155196, 2021.
Ibrahim M Alabdulmohsin, Behnam Neyshabur, and Xiaohua Zhai. Revisiting Neural Scaling Laws
   in Language and Vision. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
   (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 22300–22312. Curran
   Associates, Inc., 2022.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Her-
 nandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack
 Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. A General Language Assistant as a
 Laboratory for Alignment, 2021. ArXiv: 2112.00861.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
  Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback,
  2022. ArXiv: 2204.05862.
Yoshua Bengio.       Bounding the probability of harm from an AI to create a guardrail
  - https://yoshuabengio.org/2024/08/29/bounding-the-probability-of-harm-from-an-ai-to-create-a-
  guardrail/, August 2024.
Yoshua Bengio, Michael K. Cohen, Nikolay Malkin, Matt MacDermott, Damiano Fornasiere, Pietro
  Greiner, and Younesse Kaddar. Can a Bayesian Oracle Prevent Harm from an Agent?, 2024.
  ArXiv: 2408.05284.
Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov. Poisoning Attacks against Support Vector Ma-
  chines. In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, ICML’12, pp. 1467–1474, Madison, WI, USA, 2012. Omnipress. ISBN 978-1-
  4503-1285-1. event-place: Edinburgh, Scotland.
Christopher M. Bishop. Novelty detection and neural network validation. IEE Proceedings-Vision,
  Image and Signal Processing, 141(4):217–222, 1994.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Ste-
  fano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Pe-
  ter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard,
  Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte
  Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya
  Kumar, Faisal Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li,
  Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell,
  Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie,
  Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadim-
  itriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob
  Reich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré,
  Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin,
  Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun
  Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael
  Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang.
  On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models, 2022. ArXiv: 2108.07258.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
  R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Nicholas Carlini, Milad Nasr, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Matthew Jagielski, Irena Gao, Pang
  Wei W Koh, Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramer, and Ludwig Schmidt. Are aligned neural networks
  adversarially aligned? In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 61478–61500. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2023.
Nicholas Carlini, Matthew Jagielski, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Daniel Paleka, Will Pearce,
  Hyrum Anderson, Andreas Terzis, Kurt Thomas, and Florian Tramèr. Poisoning Web-Scale Train-
  ing Datasets is Practical, 2024. ArXiv: 2302.10149.
Marco Casadio, Tanvi Dinkar, Ekaterina Komendantskaya, Luca Arnaboldi, Matthew L. Daggitt,
 Omri Isac, Guy Katz, Verena Rieser, and Oliver Lemon. NLP Verification: Towards a General
 Methodology for Certifying Robustness, 2024. ArXiv: 2403.10144.
Patrick Chao, Alexander Robey, Edgar Dobriban, Hamed Hassani, George J. Pappas, and Eric Wong.
  Jailbreaking Black Box Large Language Models in Twenty Queries. In R0-FoMo:Robustness of
  Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning in Large Foundation Models, 2023. ArXiv: 2310.08419.
Isha Chaudhary, Vedaant V. Jain, and Gagandeep Singh. Quantitative Certification of Knowledge
   Comprehension in LLMs. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Secure and Trustworthy Large Language
   Models, 2024. ArXiv: 2402.15929.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Gabriel Chua, Shing Yee Chan, and Shaun Khoo. A Flexible Large Language Models Guardrail
  Development Methodology Applied to Off-Topic Prompt Detection, 2024. ArXiv: 2411.12946.
Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Ruiyang Sun, Jiaming Ji, Xinbo Xu, Mickel Liu, Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong
  Yang. Safe RLHF: Safe Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Xinshuai Dong, Anh Tuan Luu, Min Lin, Shuicheng Yan, and Hanwang Zhang. How Should Pre-
  Trained Language Models Be Fine-Tuned Towards Adversarial Robustness? In M. Ranzato,

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 4356–4369. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Yi Dong, Ronghui Mu, Yanghao Zhang, Siqi Sun, Tianle Zhang, Changshun Wu, Gaojie Jin, Yi Qi,
  Jinwei Hu, Jie Meng, Saddek Bensalem, and Xiaowei Huang. Safeguarding Large Language
  Models: A Survey, 2024. ArXiv: 2406.02622.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, 2024.
  ArXiv: 2407.21783.
Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing Dou. HotFlip: White-Box Adversarial Exam-
  ples for Text Classification. In Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp.
  31–36, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Francisco Eiras, Aleksandar Petrov, Phillip H. S. Torr, M. Pawan Kumar, and Adel Bibi. Mimicking
  User Data: On Mitigating Fine-Tuning Risks in Closed Large Language Models, 2024. ArXiv:
  2406.10288.
EU. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 lay-
  ing down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008,
  (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and
  Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text
  with EEA relevance), June 2024. Legislative Body: CONSIL, EP.
Vincent Freiberger and Erik Buchmann. Fairness certification for natural language processing and
  large language models. In Intelligent Systems Conference, pp. 606–624. Springer, 2024.
Varun Gangal, Abhinav Arora, Arash Einolghozati, and Sonal Gupta. Likelihood ratios and gener-
  ative classifiers for unsupervised out-of-domain detection in task oriented dialog. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7764–7771, 2020.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making Pre-trained Language Models Better Few-shot
  Learners. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the
  59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International

                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3816–3830,
  Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Saibo Geng, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. Grammar-Constrained Decoding
  for Structured NLP Tasks without Finetuning. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing, pp. 10932–10952, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A Baseline for Detecting Misclassified and Out-of-Distribution
  Examples in Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. ArXiv: 2009.03300.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B. Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, Chris Hallacy, Benjamin Mann, Alec Rad-
  ford, Aditya Ramesh, Nick Ryder, Daniel M. Ziegler, John Schulman, Dario Amodei, and Sam
  McCandlish. Scaling Laws for Autoregressive Generative Modeling, 2020.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Hakan Inan, Kartikeya Upasani, Jianfeng Chi, Rashi Rungta, Krithika Iyer, Yuning Mao, Michael
  Tontchev, Qing Hu, Brian Fuller, Davide Testuggine, and Madian Khabsa. Llama Guard: LLM-
  based Input-Output Safeguard for Human-AI Conversations, 2023. ArXiv: 2312.06674.
Neel Jain, Avi Schwarzschild, Yuxin Wen, Gowthami Somepalli, John Kirchenbauer, Ping-yeh Chi-
  ang, Micah Goldblum, Aniruddha Saha, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Baseline Defenses
  for Adversarial Attacks Against Aligned Language Models, 2023. ArXiv: 2309.00614.
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. Adversarial Examples for Evaluating Reading Comprehension Systems,
  2017. ArXiv: 1707.07328.
Xiaojun Jia, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Yihao Huang, Jindong Gu, Yang Liu, Xiaochun Cao, and
  Min Lin. Improved Techniques for Optimization-Based Jailbreaking on Large Language Mod-
  els. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
  ArXiv:2405.21018.
Shuyu Jiang, Xingshu Chen, and Rui Tang. Prompt Packer: Deceiving LLMs through Compositional
  Instruction with Hidden Attacks, 2023. ArXiv: 2310.10077.
Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. PubMedQA: A
  Dataset for Biomedical Research Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2567–2577, 2019.
Erik Jones, Anca Dragan, Aditi Raghunathan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Automatically Auditing Large
  Language Models via Discrete Optimization. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 15307–15329. PMLR, July 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language
   Models, 2020. ArXiv: 2001.08361.
Andrej Karpathy.         The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks -
  http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/, 2015.
Timo Kaufmann, Paul Weng, Viktor Bengs, and Eyke Hüllermeier. A Survey of Reinforcement
  Learning from Human Feedback, 2024. ArXiv: 2312.14925.



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised Contrastive Learning. In H. Larochelle,
  M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18661–18673. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Aounon Kumar, Chirag Agarwal, Suraj Srinivas, Aaron Jiaxun Li, Soheil Feizi, and Himabindu
  Lakkaraju. Certifying LLM Safety against Adversarial Prompting, 2024. ArXiv: 2309.02705.
E La Malfa. On robustness for natural language processing. PhD Thesis, University of Oxford,
  2023.
Ken Lang. NewsWeeder: Learning to Filter Netnews. In Armand Prieditis and Stuart Russell
  (eds.), Machine Learning Proceedings 1995, pp. 331–339. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
  (CA), 1995. ISBN 978-1-55860-377-6.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generation.
  In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 4582–4597, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiang Lisa Li, Ari Holtzman, Daniel Fried, Percy Liang, Jason Eisner, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Contrastive Decoding: Open-ended Text Generation as Optimiza-
  tion. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  12286–12312, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Haowei Lin and Yuntian Gu. FLatS: Principled Out-of-Distribution Detection with Feature-Based
  Likelihood Ratio Score. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8956–8963,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Weitang Liu, Xiaoyun Wang, John Owens, and Yixuan Li. Energy-based Out-of-distribution De-
 tection. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 21464–21475. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2020.
Xiaogeng Liu, Nan Xu, Muhao Chen, and Chaowei Xiao. AutoDAN: Generating Stealthy Jail-
  break Prompts on Aligned Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis. In Dekang Lin, Yuji Matsumoto, and Rada
  Mihalcea (eds.), Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011.
  Association for Computational Linguistics.
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information
  Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008. ISBN 978-0-521-86571-5.
Tess McClure. Supermarket AI meal planner app suggests recipe that would create chlorine gas.
  The Guardian, August 2023. ISSN 0261-3077.
Anay Mehrotra, Manolis Zampetakis, Paul Kassianik, Blaine Nelson, Hyrum Anderson, Yaron
  Singer, and Amin Karbasi. Tree of Attacks: Jailbreaking Black-Box LLMs Automatically. In
  A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 61065–61105. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2024.
Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard Socher, Xavier Ama-
  triain, and Jianfeng Gao. Large Language Models: A Survey, February 2024. ArXiv: 2402.06196.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marius Mosbach, Tiago Pimentel, Shauli Ravfogel, Dietrich Klakow, and Yanai Elazar. Few-shot
 Fine-tuning vs. In-context Learning: A Fair Comparison and Evaluation. In Anna Rogers, Jordan
 Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics: ACL 2023, pp. 12284–12314, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
 Linguistics.
Jerzy Neyman and Egon Sharpe Pearson. IX. On the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical
   hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
   Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character, 231:289–337, 1933.
Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Trung Huynh, Phi Le Nguyen, Alan Wee-Chung Liew, Hongzhi Yin,
  and Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen. A Survey of Machine Unlearning, 2022. ArXiv: 2209.02299.
Charles O’Neill, Jack Miller, Ioana Ciuca, Yuan-Sen Ting, and Thang Bui. Adversarial Fine-Tuning
  of Language Models: An Iterative Optimisation Approach for the Generation and Detection of
  Problematic Content, 2023. ArXiv: 2308.13768.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
   and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia
  Glaese, Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. Red Teaming Language Models with Language
  Models. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022.
Fábio Perez and Ian Ribeiro. Ignore Previous Prompt: Attack Techniques For Language Models. In
   NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop, 2022. ArXiv: 2211.09527.
A. V. Podolskiy, Dmitry Lipin, A. Bout, E. Artemova, and Irina Piontkovskaya. Revisiting Ma-
  halanobis Distance for Transformer-Based Out-of-Domain Detection. In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson.
  Fine-tuning Aligned Language Models Compromises Safety, Even When Users Do Not Intend
  To! In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. 2019.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ Ques-
  tions for Machine Comprehension of Text. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eduardo Reis. Bible Corpus - Basic Text Generation using N-grams, 2019.
Jie Ren, Peter J. Liu, Emily Fertig, Jasper Snoek, Ryan Poplin, Mark Depristo, Joshua Dillon, and
   Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Likelihood Ratios for Out-of-Distribution Detection. In H. Wallach,
   H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’ Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alfréd Rényi. On Measures of Entropy and Information. In Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley
  Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Volume 1: Contributions to the Theory of
  Statistics, volume 1. University of California Press, 1961.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Andrei Lupu, Eric Hambro, Aram H. Markosyan,
 Manish Bhatt, Yuning Mao, Minqi Jiang, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Tim
 Rocktäschel, and Roberta Raileanu. Rainbow Teaming: Open-Ended Generation of Diverse Ad-
 versarial Prompts. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 2024. ArXiv 2402.16822.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words
  with Subword Units. In Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith (eds.), Proceedings of the 54th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  1715–1725, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. ArXiv
  1508.07909.
Yunhao Tang, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Remi Munos, Mark Row-
  land, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Michal Valko, Bernardo Avila Pires, and Bilal Piot. General-
  ized Preference Optimization: A Unified Approach to Offline Alignment. In Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix
  Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
  ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 47725–47742. PMLR, July 2024.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhu-
  patiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Fer-
  ret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Char-
  line Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin,
  Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur,
  Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchi-
  son, Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge,
  Antonia Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar,
  Chris Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Wein-
  berger, Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang,
  Eric Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin,
  Gary Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen
  Batra, Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha
  Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost van
  Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju-yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed, Kar-
  tikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia,
  Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago,
  Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel
  Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow,
  Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moyni-
  han, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao,
  Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil
  Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culli-
  ton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni,
  Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Cogan, Sarah Perrin,
  Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ron-
  strom, Susan Chan, Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee
  Doshi, Vihan Jain, Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei
  Wei, Wenming Ye, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan
  Wei, Victor Cotruta, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli
  Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dra-
  gan, Slav Petrov, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Fara-
  bet, Elena Buchatskaya, Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy,
  Robert Dadashi, and Alek Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving Open Language Models at a Practical
  Size, 2024. ArXiv: 2408.00118.
The Guardian. Pak’nSave AI meal planner suggests toxic recipes in ’malfunction’. The Guardian,
  2023.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rheeya Uppaal, Junjie Hu, and Yixuan Li. Is Fine-tuning Needed? Pre-trained Language Mod-
  els Are Near Perfect for Out-of-Domain Detection. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Nikhil Vyas, Sham Kakade, and Boaz Barak. On Provable Copyright Protection for Generative
  Models, 2023.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Universal Adversarial
  Triggers for Attacking and Analyzing NLP. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun
  Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 2153–2162, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. ArXiv 1908.07125.
Eric Wallace, Tony Zhao, Shi Feng, and Sameer Singh. Concealed Data Poisoning Attacks on NLP
  Models. In Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Belt-
  agy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 139–150, Online, June 2021. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. ArXiv 2010.12563.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding.
  2019.
Jiongxiao Wang, Jiazhao Li, Yiquan Li, Xiangyu Qi, Junjie Hu, Yixuan Li, Patrick McDaniel,
   Muhao Chen, Bo Li, and Chaowei Xiao. BackdoorAlign: Mitigating Fine-tuning based Jailbreak
   Attack with Backdoor Enhanced Safety Alignment. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Yizhe Xiong, Xiansheng Chen, Xin Ye, Hui Chen, Zijia Lin, Haoran Lian, Zhenpeng Su, Jianwei
  Niu, and Guiguang Ding. Temporal Scaling Law for Large Language Models, 2024. ArXiv:
  2404.17785.
Heng Xu, Tianqing Zhu, Lefeng Zhang, Wanlei Zhou, and Philip S. Yu. Machine Unlearning: A
  Survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 56(1), August 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. Place: New York, NY, USA
  Publisher: Association for Computing Machinery.
Ruiyao Xu and Kaize Ding. Large Language Models for Anomaly and Out-of-Distribution Detec-
  tion: A Survey, 2024. ArXiv: 2409.01980.
W. J. Youden. Index for rating diagnostic tests. Cancer, 3(1):32–35, 1950.
Andi Zhang, Tim Z. Xiao, Weiyang Liu, Robert Bamler, and Damon Wischik. Your Finetuned Large
  Language Model is Already a Powerful Out-of-distribution Detector, 2024. ArXiv: 2404.08679.
Wenxuan Zhou, Fangyu Liu, and Muhao Chen. Contrastive Out-of-Distribution Detection for Pre-
 trained Transformers. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
 tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 1100–1111, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and Transferable Adversarial
  Attacks on Aligned Language Models, 2023. Arxiv: 2307.15043.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS
Theorem 1 (VALID Certificate) Let L be an LLM and G a guide model as described above. Rejec-
tion sampling as described in Algorithm 1 with rejection threshold k and up to T iterations defines
model ML,G,k,T with ML,G,k,T (y|x) denoting the likelihood of y given x. Let Ny be the length of
y. We state the adversarial bound:
                              ∀x ∈ S : ML,G,k,T (y|x) ≤ 2kNy · T · G(y).                                        (4)
                        kNy                                                kNy
Hence, ML,G,k,T is [2         T G(y)]-AC and, further, it is [maxy∈F 2           T G(y)]-DC w.r.t. F.

Proof: We abbreviate ML,G,k,T as M . Let At and A′t be the events of accepting and rejecting in
iteration t, respectively. Let St be the event of sampling y ∼ L(·|x) in iteration t and let A′<t be the
                                                  Tt−1
event of rejecting all samples before t, A′<t = i=1 A′i . Then,
             T
             X                              T
                                            X                                            Y
 M (y|x) =         P(St ∩ At ∩ A′<t |x) =          P(At |St , A′<t , x)P(St |A′<t , x)         P(A′i |A′<i , x). (7)
             t=1                             t=1                                         i<t

We upper bound the probability of rejecting in any previous iteration by 1, ∀t : P(A′t |A′<t , x) ≤ 1.
P(At |St , A′<t , x) is non-stochastic and is equal to either 0 or 1. In the former case, the M (y|x)
is trivially bounded by any non-negative number. The latter case (i.e. y is accepted in iteration t)
implies that log L(y|x)                                                                      ′
                    G(y) ≤ kNy . Rearranging terms and noting that by definition P(St |A<t , x) =
L(y|x), we get P(St |A′<t , x) ≤ 2kNy G(y) and hence by substitution and summing over t,
                                          T
                                          X
                              M (y|x) ≤         2kNy G(y) = 2kNy · T · G(y).                                    (8)
                                          t=1
This is the desired upper bound on M (y|x) for all x ∈ S.
                                                                                                                 □

Lemma 1 (Equivalence of Divergence) Let ∆∞ (P ∥ Q) be the Renyi divergence of order infinity
                                        P (x)
(Rényi, 1961), ∆∞ (P ∥ Q) ≜ log supx Q(x)    . Further, let L : S → S be an LLM returning y given
x as discussed above and let Ω be a distribution over domain T, i.e. generator for T. Then, if
                              ∀x ∈ X : ∆∞ (L(y|x) ∥ Ω(y)) ≤ k,                                  (9)
we can state that L is ϵy -AC with ϵy = 2k Ω(y) (see Definition 1) and ϵ-DC with ϵ = 2k maxF Ω(y)
(see Definition 2). If Ω is an oracle, that assigns no likelihood to elements in F, it implies L is 0-AC
and 0-DC.

Proof: We start from the definition of the Renyi divergence, which is an upper bound to any element
in the supremum, giving that
                            L(y|x)              L(y|x)
             ∀x ∈ X : log            ≤ log sup          = ∆∞ (L(y|x) ∥ Ω(y)) ≤ k.              (10)
                             Ω(y)            y   Ω(y)
Exponentiating and multiplying through by Ω(y) gives the following upper bound:
                                      ∀x ∈ X : L(y|x) ≤ 2k Ω(y),                                               (11)
showing the 2k Ω(y)-AC equivalence. Taking the max over F shows the [2k maxF Ω(y)]-DC equiv-
alence. Further, assuming Ω to be a perfect oracle, by definition, we can state that ∀y ∈ F the upper
bound on the right hand side of (11) is zero. Thus, we get the desired result:
                                  ∀x ∈ X, ∀x ∈ F : L(y|x) = 0,                                   (12)
and hence L is 0-AC and 0-DC.                                                                      □

Lemma 2 (Likelihood of M ) Let M be a model obtained by performing rejection sampling from
model L as proposed in VALID using guide model G and rejection threshold k (see Algorithm 1).
We denote the likelihood of response y given input x under the model M as M (y|x). For all y ∈ S,
                                     (             T
                                       L(y|x) 1−ϕ
                                               1−ϕ    if L(y|x) ≤ kG(y)
                         M (y|x) =                                                           (13)
                                       0              otherwise.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where A′t is the event of rejecting y in iteration t given input x, A′<t is the event of rejecting in all
iterations before t, A′<t = ∩t−1    ′                          ′   ′
                              i=1 Ai , and finally let ϕ = P(At |A<t , x), the conditional probability of
rejecting y in a given iteration t for input x. Finally, let R be the event that M abstains, for which

                          M (R|x) = ϕT .                                                               (14)

Proof: Let St be the event of sampling y ∼ L(·|x) in iteration t, let A ⊂ S be the acceptance set
of y, i.e., A = {y : L(y|x) ≤ 2kNy G(y)} and let its complement in S, A′ , be the rejection set.
Finally, let S be the event of sampling y. We now derive M (y|x) per case as stated in (13).
Starting with case y ∈ A, we note that M (y|x) = P(S|x) and we can rewrite P(S|x) as follows,
                                T
                                X
                   P(S|x) =           P(St ∩ At ∩ A′≤t−1 |x)                                           (15)
                                t=1
                                T
                                X                                           Y
                            =         P(At |St , A′<t , x)P(St |A′<t , x)         P(A′i |A′<i , x)     (16)
                                t=1                                         i<t
                                          T
                                          X
                            = L(y|x)            ϕt−1                                                   (17)
                                          t=1
                                          1 − ϕT
                            = L(y|x)                                                                   (18)
                                           1−ϕ
                                                                            PT
where we use the fact that ∀y ∈ A : P(At |St , A′<t , x) = 1 and notice that t=1 ϕt−1 is the sum of
the first T elements of a geometric series and substitute L(y|x) for P(St |A′<t , x).
For the case y ∈ A′ : We rewrite the likelihood as shown above in (16). Notice that ∀y ∈ A′ :
P(At |St , A′<t , x) = 0 and therefore P (S|x) is zero.
                                                           TT
Finally, we turn to the rejection event R. Note that R = t=1 A′t , rejection at each step t = 1, . . . , T .
We can state that
                                             YT
                                  M (R|x) =       P(A′t |A′<t , x) = ϕT ,                             (19)
                                                   t=1

which concludes the proof.                                                                               □

Remark 1 (Estimating likelihood) While Lemma 4 provides an expression of the likelihood of
model M computing this might be infeasible. If the sample space S is large, we cannot compute
M (y|x) as we cannot compute ϕ, the rejection probability in any given iteration in VALID for a
given input x. However, we can estimate M (y|x) by computing L(y|x) and performing Monte
Carlo sampling from L to obtain an estimator ϕ̂. We can then use the Binomial confidence interval
for confidence level α:
                                                v
                                                u
                                                u ϕ̂ 1 − ϕ̂
                                                t
                                  ϕ̂ ± Zα/2 ×                 .                              (20)
                                                      N
We then plug in the bounds on L to obtain the bound on M because of the monotonicity of M in ϕ̂.

Lemma 3 (Expected number of iterations in VALID) Let τ be the number of iterations executed
in VALID (see Algorithm 1), let At be the event of accepting a response y for input x in iteration
t, t = 1, . . . , T , and let its complement, A′t , be the event of rejection in iteration t. Denote the
                                                                           Tt
event that all samples up to t (inclusive) are rejected as A′≤t = i=1 A′i . Finally, we denote
ϕ = P(A′t |A′≤t−1 , x), the probability of rejection in iteration t. The expected number of iterations
for ϕ ∈ [0, 1) is given by:

                                                              1 − ϕT
                                          Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] =          ,                                 (21)
                                                               1−ϕ

                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and for ϕ = 1, the expected number of iterations is given by Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] = T .
Proof: In the following, we will denote Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] as E[τ ] for readability. Note that P(τ = t)
is the probability of reaching and accepting in iteration t for t = 1, . . . , T − 1. Once iteration T is
reached, both acceptance and rejection yield τ = T . Hence,
                       T
                       X                                                 T
                                                                         X
             E[τ ] =         tP(τ = t) = T P(A′T ∩ A′≤T −1 |x) +                tP(At ∩ A′≤t−1 |x).   (22)
                       t=1                                               t=1

Combining events and factorising probabilities,
                                           T
                                           X                             Y
                 E[τ ] = T P(A′≤T |x) +          tP(At |A′≤t−1 , x)            P(A′i |A′≤i−1 , x),    (23)
                                           t=1                           i<t

for which we substitute rejection and acceptance probabilities by ϕ and 1 − ϕ, respectively,
                                                                 T
                                                                 X
                                    E[τ ] = T ϕT + (1 − ϕ)             tϕt−1 .                        (24)
                                                                 t=1

Multiplying by ϕ:
                                                                    T
                                                                    X
                                                 T +1
                                   ϕE[τ ] = T ϕ         + (1 − ϕ)            tϕt .                    (25)
                                                                       t=1
Subtracting (25) from 24:
                                                                        T
                                                                        X
                       E[τ ] − ϕE[τ ] = (1 − ϕ)T ϕT + (1 − ϕ)                  tϕt−1 − tϕt .          (26)
                                                                        t=1

Telescoping sum:
                                                                       T
                                                                       X
                       (1 − ϕ)E[τ ] = (1 − ϕ)T ϕT + (1 − ϕ)                   ϕt−1 − T ϕT .           (27)
                                                                       t=1

Dividing by (1 − ϕ). For all ϕ < 1:
                                                        T
                                                        X
                                    E[τ ] = T ϕT +            ϕt−1 − T ϕT .                           (28)
                                                        t=1

Cancelling terms and summing the first T elements of the geometric series:
                                                T
                                                X               1 − ϕT
                                      E[τ ] =         ϕt−1 =           .                              (29)
                                                t=1
                                                                 1−ϕ

Using L’Hôpital’s Rule, we can evaluate the limit for ϕ → 1 and find that this simplifies to T and
hence E[τ ] = T when ϕ = 1 completing the proof.                                                 □

Remark 2 The expected number of iterations as derived in Lemma 3 depends on the rejection prob-
ability ϕ and the maximum number of iterations T . When ϕ = 0, the algorithm always accepts in
any iteration and hence Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] = 1. Conversely, when ϕ = 1 and the algorithm always ab-
stains, Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] = T . Further, for T = 1, ∀ϕ ∈ [0, 1] : Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] = 1 and as T increases,
so does Ey∼M (·|x) [τ ] when ϕ > 0.

B    D EFINING D OMAINS - P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
In this section, we provide practical guidance for practitioners on how to select domains for their AI
systems, presenting a systematic approach to classifying sequences into different domains. Figure 7
illustrates a Venn diagram comprising three key sets of sequences, i.e. subsets of S:


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   𝔽: Space of all sequences
            Unintelligible Sequences 𝕊𝕋 ′ ∩𝕋
            Out-of-domain sequences that are not a concern.
            “The sky is blue, the sky is blue, the sky is blue”
            “ABC ABC ABC ABC ABC ABC ABC ABC”


                              Target Domain 𝕊                   Other Domains ∩
                                 Medical QA                   Tax advice, Weapon
                             “The recommended             Manufacturing, and many more.
                            dose of Paracetamol is          “Here is an easy recipe to
                                     …”                       commit tax fraud …”


              Figure 7: A Venn diagram illustrating the separation of sentences into domains.


     1. The target domain T (shown in blue), containing desired content about which the LLM-
        driven system should converse (e.g., medical questions and answers),
     2. The out-of-domain set F (shown in orange), containing potentially harmful or other content
        that require active protection measures (e.g., tax fraud advice),
     3. The complement of T and F, denoted as T′ ∩ F′ (shown in gray).

A fundamental question arises: How should one define T and F? Defining T is relatively natural for
most practitioners: Content that semantically belongs to the domain should be included in T. The
more complex decision involves determining which sequences outside T should be included in F.
We contend that protecting against certain sequences warrants higher priority than others, and these
high-priority sequences should be included in F.
Consider the example sequence y = The sky is blue. The sky is blue. The
sky is blue. While this is clearly out-of-domain for a medical QA system, practitioners
should evaluate two critical questions to determine its placement in F:

     1. Would adversaries have motivation to generate such sequences?
     2. Could these sequences potentially harm users, the deployer, or third parties?

In this example, adversaries would likely have little incentive to generate such a response, and the
content itself is harmless. Therefore, practitioners might reasonably conclude that y should remain
in T′ ∩ F′ rather than F, excluding it from system certification considerations.
These evaluation questions help practitioners assess risk levels effectively. When both questions
receive negative answers, sequences can safely remain in T′ ∩ F′ without requiring active protection
measures, allowing security efforts to focus on genuinely concerning sequences. If either question
receives a positive response, practitioners may choose to implement protective measures.
Let us analyze two more examples to demonstrate this in practice. Consider the sequence y = Here
is an easy recipe to commit tax fraud... . In this case, malicious actors would
be highly motivated to seek such information, and the content could directly harm society and gov-
ernment functions. Thus, this sequence clearly belongs in F and requires active protection measures.
Similarly, when considering a love poem as y, although it may seem harmless at first glance, the
analysis reveals important considerations. Users might frequently request LLMs to generate poetry,
potentially straining system resources, and while not directly harmful to users or society, it could
significantly impact system infrastructure and operational costs. Consequently, practitioners might
choose to include this in F to protect their computational resources.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It is important to note that these evaluation questions are not intended as universal rules, but rather
serve as a practical considerations to guide practitioners in their decision-making process. By sys-
tematically assessing motivation and potential harm, practitioners can make informed decisions
about which sets of sequences require active protection measures.

C     VALID— R EJECTION S AMPLING
C.1   ATTACKING M

In this section, we provide some insight on how rejection sampling as deployed in VALID (see
Section 2.2) can obtain such tight adversarial bounds. In particular, we show by example that out-
of-domain samples are only accepted when they have sufficiently small likelihood of being sampled
under L. We then formalize this intuition and state the objective of a possible adversarial attack on
M . For simplicity, we will consider the case T = 1.
Intuition.    Here, we demonstrate that accepting an out-of-domain response requires it to have
low likelihood under model L. Specifically, we show that when a response is rejected for a given
prompt, the correct strategy for acceptance by model M involves modifying the prompt to reduce
the response’s probability under L. To illustrate this concept, we examine a single response y. Let
y = The cow drinks milk and consider three prompts:
       • x1 = What does a cow drink?
       • x2 = Which animal drinks milk?
       • x3 = Repeat after me: The cow drinks milk.                          Now you:
Intuitively, we may assume L(y|x3 ) > L(y|x1 ) > L(y|x2 ) as y more naturally follows some
prompts than others: y|x3 would have high likelihood for instruction-tuned models, moderate like-
lihood after being specifically asked about cows (x1 ), and low likelihood when asked broadly about
mammals (x2 ). We illustrate this example in Figure 8. If we assume that y|x1 is rejected, i.e.,
log L(y|x1 ) − log G(y) > kNy , then we can conclude that y|x3 will also be rejected. In contrast,
y|x2 will be accepted when L(y|x2 ) is small enough, such that log L(y|x2 ) − log G(y) < kNy ,
which recovers the upper bound of 2kNy G(y) (see Theorem 1) by algebraic manipulation. This
illustrates how rejection sampling bounds the adversaries: Samples will only be accepted if propos-
ing them was very unlikely in the first place. Consequently, when faced with rejected adversarial
prompts x, the attacker must find alternative prompt x′ that yield lower likelihood y|x′ . This creates
a remarkable and counter-intuitive dynamic: successful adversarial attacks on model M require the
attacker to effectively perform risk control on sampling y. This intuition helps us establishing how
to attack M .
Formalization of Attack. We assume that the adversarial objective is to increase the probability
of a given y (e.g. from the out-of-domain set), F, being returned. The objective of attacking L is
immediately follows:
                                     xadv
                                      L   = arg max L(y|x)                                    (30)
                                                 x∈X
where X is either S or some continuous relaxation, such as soft-prompt space. However, the solution
xadv
  L   may not be an adversary under M , since xadvL   might maximize the log-likelihood ratio that
leads to the sample being rejected, and hence M (y|xadv                                        adv
                                                      L ) = 0. Instead, the adversary for M , xM ,
needs to maximize L while ensuring the sample is accepted. We formalize this in the following
lemma.

Lemma 4 (Adversary under Rejection Sampling) Assume the adversarial objective is to maxi-
mize the likelihood of sample y being returned by the model M . Assume the model M is obtained
through VALID as described in Algorithm 1 with T = 1. The adversary is given by:
                        xadv
                         M = arg max L(y|x) s.t. L(y|x) ≤ 2
                                                           kNy
                                                               G(y),                              (31)
                                   x∈X
where X is either sentence space S or some relaxation.

Proof: The proof follows immediately from Lemma 2 with T = 1. Let A ⊂ S be the acceptance
set, A = {x ∈ X : L(y|x) ≤ 2kNy G(y)}. Then, ∀x ∈     / A the likelihood of M (y|x) = 0. Hence,
the adversary maximizing M (y|x) is the adversary for L(y|x) within A.                       □


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     y =”The cow drinks milk.”
                           Acceptance Area                                                                  Rejection Area


                                                                                                                                  ”Repeat after me: The cow drinks milk. Now you: ”
                                       ”Which animal drinks milk?”


                                                                            ”What does the cow drink?”
           Mk,T =1 (y|x)


                                  L(y|x2 ) 2k G(y) L(y|x1 )                                                                  L(y|x3 )
                                                                                                         L(y|x)
Figure 8: The likelihood of model M obtained through VALID with T = 1. The blue line is the likelihood of
M for the given y. Three example prompts x1 , x2 and x3 are shown.


Executing Attack. Applying VALID to obtain M has implications on the suitable procedures
to attack M . In particular, it requires solving the constrained optimization problem in (31), which
adds a layer of complexity to the unconstrained problem for L. In general, constrained optimization
problems are more challenging; this is compounded by the upper bound on L(y|x) not decomposing
across tokens. Furthermore, while large models, such as LLama-3-8B, are often publicly available,
G will likely be a custom model for which the attacker does not have white-box access. For a
successful attack, the adversarial user must estimate the likelihood ratio between L and G, which
might prove challenging. This indicates that attacking M defined through VALID might be a harder
problem than attacking L. Finally, as a reassuring reminder, while it is possible to attack M , our
certificate holds and M cannot be attacked past the upper bound provided in Theorem 1.

D     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

D.1   C HARTASK DATASET

For prototyping, we have created a toy dataset that we call CharTask. The goal of the CharTask
dataset is to have a well-controlled toy dataset with clear definitions of target domain T and other
domains F.
As shown in Table 1, each sequence consists of three parts: A sequence of random characters, a
task definition in the middle, and another sequence of characters in the end. We refer to the random
sequence as Sin . In the middle there are four task tokens, the first of which defines the task T . “S”
sets the task to sorting, “R” to reverse sorting, “A“ to adding +1 and “E” to even-odd sorting. The
instruction token is followed by the remaining three task tokens in random order to ensure that all
are seen by a model trained on a subset of these. Finally, the completed sequence is the original
sequence of characters with the task performed on them, i.e. Sout = T (Sin ). The pool of characters
for each sequence is either only integers or integers and lower case letters. Importantly, all tasks
interpret characters and integers as characters alike. For example, sorting integers “11”, “5” results
in “11”, “5”. To be precise, all tasks are based on integer unicode representations of characters.
Each sequence has a variable length of up to 49 elements in Sin (the elements can be double digits).
For integers, we use a pool of 49 unique distinct integers and for characters, we use a pool of 249


                                                                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


elements (e.g., defining “at” as one element in the sequence). Under these conditions, there exists a
combinatorially large set of unique sequences far exceeding our training dataset size.
Given the tasks and pools of characters, 8 possible domains emerge as shown in Table 1, which
we denote as CharTask (Task, Pool). We define sorting integers as the target domain: DT =
CharTask (Sorting, Int) and all other combinations as out-of-domain. We create two distinct datasets
with non-overlapping splits for training, validation, and testing. The in-domain dataset consists of
1M training samples. The “generalist” dataset DT+F = CharTask (All, Int + Char) contains all pos-
sible tasks with sequences consisting of integers and characters. We use 1M training sequences
per task, and hence 4M sequences in total. The validation and test sets are 64 sequences and 4096
sequences, respectively.

D.2     C HARTASK S ETUP

Dataset and Domain. We use the CharTask dataset described in Appendix D.1. We train a custom
BPE tokenizer of length 360 (Sennrich et al., 2016). In practice, the pretrained tokenizer of any
foundation model is trained on a general dataset. Hence, we train the tokenizer using DT and DF ,
the target and out-of-domain datasets. While the dataset is inherently suitable for a sequence-to-
sequence task, we treat it as next-token prediction problem just as used in language modeling.
Training. We train our domain model G on a set of integer sorting examples, CharTask (Sorting,
Int). We train a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) architecture with 3 layers, 3 heads and 48 embedding
dimension. We train the model on partial sequences, as we are embedding marginal sequences y.
Hence, we cut each sequence in two parts using a splitting point that is sampled under a uniform
distribution. Hence, the model learns the transition from “[BOS] ..” to any character that might be
the first response token.
For the generalist model L, we train using all available tasks on integers and characters, CharTask
(All,Int+Char). We train a GPT-2 architecture with 6 layers, 6 heads and 192 embedding dimensions.
We train L and G with AdamW (weight decay 0.1) for 2048 steps with a cosine learning rate sched-
ule with 500 steps warm-up, a maximum learning rate of 0.005, scheduled for 40 epochs. We train
with 120 context window using next-token prediction.
Inference. We use common parameters to tweak the predictive distribution of our models. For
G we use a temperature of 0.7 and for L of 0.2. We find this greatly helps the model performance
of both. We do not perform TopK selection of tokens. We prompt with a prompt length of 10. The
task-completed sequence is almost deterministic given the prompt and task for models that have very
high accuracy. Hence, we remove sequences where the prompt of 10 tokens is larger than 25% of
the entire sequence.

D.3     20NG S ETUP

Dataset Cleaning. The 20NG dataset is very dirty, containing a wide array of random special char-
acter sequences and arbitrary formatting. We found these sequences to complicate model training
and large pre-trained models struggled with it. In addition, as formatting strongly varies between
the 20NG dataset and others, this is a confounding factor for OOD detection. Classifying sentences

                              Table 1: Examples of the CharTask dataset
                                                              Sequence
 Task               Pool
                                  Prompt     Task        Completed        Combined
 Sorting            Int           536        SRAE        356              Q536SRAE356
 Adding             Int           536        AERS        647              Q536AERS647
 Reverse Sorting    Int           536        REAS        653              Q536REAS653
 Even-Odd           Int           536        ERAS        635              Q536ERAS635
 Sorting            Int + Char    13 5 c a   SERA        13 5 a c         Q 13 5 c a S E R A
 Adding             Int + Char    13 5 c a   ASRE        14 6 d b         Q 13 5 c a A S R E
 Reverse Sorting    Int + Char    13 5 c a   REAS        c a 5 13         Q 13 5 c a R E A S c a 5 13
 Even-Odd           Int + Char    13 5 c a   ESAR        a c 13 5         Q 13 5 c a E S A R 13 5 c a



                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as ID or OOD should focus on semantics, but the formatting provides a spurious correlation that
is easily exploited by models. Hence, we decided to clean the dataset. To do so, we utilise the
scikit-learn (v1.5.1) (Pedregosa et al., 2011) options to remove headers, footers and quotes.
Further, we cleaned it using Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) using the following query:



   Your task is to clean and format a string.
   Instructions:
   - Do not change the order of the words.
   - Remove cryptic character sequences, spacings out of order,
   and line breaks within sentences.
   - Remove out-of-order punctuation, but leave correct
   punctuation in place.
   - The result should be semantically and lexically the same as
   the original but well formatted.
   - Remove IP addresses and email addresses.
   - Remove sequences of (special) characters, that are not
   human language.
   - Only return the cleaned string without messages or quotes
   around it. Do not return any other information. Do not
   repeat the instructions. Do not repeat the example.

   Sentence:


We check the output for various keywords and phrases from prompt and find a 0% violation rate.
While there still exist random sequences, the data quality is greatly improved. We notice that several
sequences exist in 20NG and OOD testing datasets that are seemingly random character sequences
and multiple trigram repetitions such as “Nanaimo British Columbia Nanaimo British Columbia
Nanaimo British Columbia ...”. These sequences have the highest likelihood under model G and
L while not having any semantic meaning nor constituting a valid sequence that could indicate
model misappropriation. Hence, when reporting max likelihoods for 20NG over a finite dataset
(e.g. maxx,y∈DF L(y|x)) we instead use the 99.99th quantile and report it as max.
Training. We use a pre-trained Gemma 2 tokenizer for both models which has a vocabulary size
of 256k tokens. For the fine-tuned model L, we use a pre-trained decoder-only Gemma 2 2B (hosted
on Hugging Face) as the starting point then fine-tune it to our ID dataset using LoRA adaptors
which involved training an additional 10.4M parameters (0.4% of the total parameters).We train L
with AdamW (weight decay 0.01) for 1536 steps with a cosine learning rate schedule with 64 steps
warmup, a maximum learning rate of 5e-5, scheduled for 32 epochs. We train with 256 context
window using next-token prediction.
For the model G, we use a decoder-only GPT-small model architecture, 6 layers, 6 heads and 384
embedding dimensions and a total of 109.3M parameters, which we train from scratch using the ID
data exclusively. We train G with AdamW (weight decay 0.01) for 320 steps with a cosine learning
rate schedule with 100 steps warm-up, a maximum learning rate of 3e-4, scheduled for 100 epochs.
We train with 256 context window using next-token prediction.
Inference. For both L and G we use a default temperature of 1. We do not perform TopK token
selection. When evaluating performance, we use a 128-token long prompt and a 128-token long
ground truth response.

D.4   T INY S HAKESPEARE S ETUP

Dataset Cleaning. The formatting in TinyShakespeare dataset was distinctly different to other
texts with long sequences of line breaks and usage of all-caps for character names. We removed
these excessive line breaks and changed the character names from all caps to title case to make it
similar to other datasets and make OOD detection more challenging.


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training. We use a pre-trained Gemma-2 tokenizer for both models which has a vocabulary size
of 256k tokens. For the fine-tuned model L, we use a pre-trained decoder-only Gemma-2-2B as
the starting point then fine-tune it to our ID dataset using LoRA adaptors which involved training
an additional 10.4M parameters (0.4% of the total parameters). We train L with AdamW (weight
decay 0.01) for 128 steps with a cosine learning rate schedule with 64 steps warm-up, a maximum
learning rate of 5e-5, scheduled for 32 epochs. We train with 256 context window using next-token
prediction.
For the model G, we use a decoder-only GPT-micro model architecture, 4 layers, 4 heads and 128
embedding dimensions and a total of 33.7M parameters, which we train from scratch using the ID
data exclusively. We train G with AdamW (weight decay 0.01) for 2400 steps with a cosine learning
rate schedule with 300 steps warm-up, a maximum learning rate of 3e-4, scheduled for 300 epochs.
We train with 256 context window using next-token prediction.
Inference. For both L and G we use a default temperature of 1. We do not perform TopK token
selection. When evaluating performance, we use a 128-token long prompt and a 128-token long
ground truth response.


D.5   M EDICAL QA



We apply our method to medical question answering as target domain, T. This could, for example,
be extended to a chatbot for clinicians to research patient symptoms. To model potential questions
and answers, we use the PubMedQA dataset (Jin et al., 2019) as DT , which contains approximately
200K QA pairs for training and 1000 test pairs. We regard question answering on other topics, such
as geography or computer science as F. To model this, we use the Stanford Question and Answering
Dataset (excluding medical categories) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) as DF .
Training.      As a generalist LLM, L, we use a LLama-3-8B model (AI@Meta, 2024) and train
a custom GPT-2 model (184M parameters) for G (Radford et al., 2019). We pre-train G on Pub-
MedQA (Jin et al., 2019) with 200K sequences. We then use 100K prompts from PubMedQA to
generate sequences using L and then fine-tune on them using responses from L to half the prompts
in PubMedQA. As G embeds the responses, G(y), we fine-tune using “BOS[Response]” rather than
entire sequences. We pre-train with a learning rate of 0.0001 for 50 epochs and then fine-tune with a
learning rate of 0.00001 for another 50 epochs. On 8 × H100, the total training takes about 2 hours.
Inference. We perform inference without topk or topp parameters and with temperatures of 1.0 for
model L and G. We prompt using the natural questions as defined by the datasets. For the analysis,
we remove responses from SQuAD that are not clearly out-of-domain. For example, the response
“10 million people every year” is not only a valid response to a geographical question, but can also
be an information about the prevalence of the disease. When applying our method, we focus on
responses with at least 10 tokens to further remove ambiguous sequences. Modern LLMs tend to be
very verbose in their responses, so responses should naturally be longer than 10 tokens.


D.6   DATASET C ATEGORIES



We list here the categories excluded from SQuAD and included in MMLU for reproducibility.

                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Excluded From SQuAD             Included in MMLU-Med
                        Antibiotics                     Anatomy
                        Symbiosis                       Clinical knowledge
                        Gene                            College medicine
                        Brain                           College biology
                        Immunology                      College chemistry
                        Biodiversity                    High school biology
                        Digestion                       High school chemistry
                        Pharmaceutical industry         High school psychology
                        Mammal                          Human aging
                        Nutrition                       Human sexuality
                        Tuberculosis                    Medical genetics
                        On the Origin of Species        Nutrition
                        Asthma                          Professional medicine
                        Pain                            Virology
                        Bacteria
                        Infection
                        Black Death
                        Pharmacy
                        Immune system
                        Chloroplast

                                Table 2: Categories of items in used Datasets.



E     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

E.1     C HARTASK R ESULTS


               Target Domain T       1.0                                   1.00
               Other F                                                     0.75


                                                                                                         maxF(y|x)
                                     0.5  Youden's J                       0.50

                                                                                                              DF
                                          TRR                              0.25
                                          FRR                                         FRR
                              0.0                                          0.00
       0       500 1000 1500            0       100       200                     200 150 100 50                 0
         Log Likelihood Ratio     Log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                     Log10 -DC
                (a)                                   (b)                                    (c)

                      Figure 9: This Figure replicates Figure 3 for the CharTask dataset.


E.2     T INY S HAKESPEARE R ESULTS


                             OUT     1.0                                   1.00
                             IN                                            0.75
                                                                                                          maxF(y|x)


                                     0.5  Youden's J                       0.50
                                                                                                               DF


                                          TRR                              0.25
                                          FRR                                           FRR
                              0.0                                          0.00
      500 1000 1500 2000            0         100         200                     300     200      100         0
         Log Likelihood Ratio     Log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                         Log10 -DC
                (a)                                   (b)                                    (c)

                 Figure 10: This Figure replicates Figure 3 for the TinyShakespeare dataset.


                                                      29
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      E.3                       20NG



                                                                              1.0                                                                  1.0
                                           Other F
                                           Target Domain T                                                                                         0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                maxL(y|x)
                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                              0.5         Youden's J                                               0.4
                                                                                          TRR


                                                                                                                                                                                                     DF
                                                                                          FRR                                                      0.2     FRR
                                                                              0.0                                                                  0.0 200 150
                               500       1000       1500                                 0 50 100 150                                                                                 100       50              0
                                 Log Likelihood Ratio                             Log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                                                           Log10 -DC
                                           (a)                                                   (b)                                                                             (c)
     Figure 11: Figure 11a shows that log likelihood ratios are well disentangled. Figure 11b shows the trade-off
     between OOD and certification: The best OOD detection performance occurs with a constriction ratio of 60.
     Figure 11c shows the false rejection rate (FRR) required to certify at a given ϵ.


      E.4                       M EDICAL QA


                                           Other F                            1.0                                                                  1.0
                                           Target Domain T                                                                                         0.8
                                                                              0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                         maxL(y|x)
                                                                                          Youden's J                0.6
                                                                                          TRR
                                                                                          FRR                       0.4                                                FRR


                                                                                                                                                                                                              DF
                                                                              0.0
        0                    5         10        15                                           0           100           20                                             15             10        5           0
                      Normalized Log Likelihood Ratio                             log10 Constriction Ratio (Median)                                                         Log10 -DC
                                           (a)                                                   (b)                                                                             (c)
     Figure 12: Figure 12a shows that log likelihood ratios are well disentangled. Figure 12b shows the trade-off
     between OOD and certification. Figure 12c shows the false rejection rate (FRR) required to certify at a given
     ϵ. All results are for VALID with T = 1 for Medical QA.


                       0                                                                                                    0

                      100                                                                                                  100

                      200                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                   Log Likelihood L(y|x)
Log Likelihood G(y)


                      300                                                                                                  300

                      400                                                                                                  400

                      500                                                                                                  500

                      600 Domain                                                                                           600   Domain
                                 Target                                                                                             Target
                                 Other                                                                                              Other
                      700 10          15   20    25          30          35     40    45    50                             700 10        15   20         25          30          35        40       45          50
                                                      Response Length Ny                                                                                      Response Length Ny

                                                        (a)                                                                                                     (b)
     Figure 13: This figure demonstrates the gap in log likelihood between in-domain and out-of-domain samples
     for the guide models G in Figure 13a and the LLM L in Figure 13b. As the length of the response, Ny ,
     increases, the gap between ID (DT ) and OOD data (DF ) widens. The log-likelihood decreases roughly linearly.
     Thus, the guide model G on the left side assigns exponential decreasing probabilities to OOD samples.


                                                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5    C ONSTRICTION R ATIOS FOR D IFFERENT FALSE R EJECTION R ATES



                  FRR = 0.00                               FRR = 0.00                         FRR = 0.00


 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0       100 200 300             0      25     50      75     100
                  FRR = 0.01                               FRR = 0.01                         FRR = 0.01


 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0       100 200 300             0      25     50      75     100
                  FRR = 0.05                               FRR = 0.05                         FRR = 0.05


 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0       100 200 300             0      25     50      75     100
                  FRR = 0.10                               FRR = 0.10                         FRR = 0.10


 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0       100 200 300             0      25     50      75     100
                  FRR = 0.25                               FRR = 0.25                         FRR = 0.25


 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0       100 200 300             0      25     50      75     100
                  FRR = 0.50                               FRR = 0.50                         FRR = 0.50



 0      100     200      300     400   200 100 0 100 200 300                   0      25     50      75     100
      Log10 Constriction Ratio            Log10 Constriction Ratio          log10 CRk (Log Constriction Ratio)
                 (a)                                 (b)                                    (c)

Figure 14: This figure shows the log10 constriction ratios (CR) on OOD samples as a function of the false
rejection rate (FRR) on the in-domain samples. The rejection threshold k is systematically decreased from top
to bottom to achieve a given FRR. We can observe the gradual improvement in constriction while increasing
the FRR. (a) shows Tiny Shakespeare, (b) shows 20NG, and (c) Medical QA.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.6   ATOMIC C ERTIFICATES - L ENGTH C ONTROLLED

The experimental setup for MedicalQA uses Pub-
MedQA as in-domain dataset and SQuAD as out-of-
domain dataset as described in Section 3.1 and Ap-                                      Dataset
pendix D. The different lengths of responses in these                              Target Domain T
datasets confound our findings on the disentanglement                              Other F
of the atomic certificates, ϵy -ACs between in-domain
data, DT , and out-of-domain data, DF . In Figure 15,
we show that sequences tend to be a lot shorter in DF
than in DT . As the likelihood of a response decays ex-
ponentially in the length of the responses, the responses
in the OOD set DF have relatively high likelihood that
is not attributable to the domain restriction, but rather to
the length of the response. This results in the eCDFs in
Figure 4b overlapping significantly. To show that this                  50       100          150
is a confounding factor that is indeed worsening disen-           Number of Tokens in Response
tanglement, we resample the data to account for length Figure 15: MedQA setup: The in-domain
and present results here.                                    dataset (PubMedQA) has longer responses
Setup.       We resample the in-domain data, DT , and than the OOD dataset (SQuAD).
out-of-domain data, DF to have matching distribution
of response lengths. We find the target distribution us-
ing the following steps: First, we find the common support between the distribution of response
length Ny between DT and DF , Ny ∈ [15, 38]. This interval covers 67% of samples in the target
domain dataset and 58% of the OOD dataset. Second, we obtain the empirical distribution of Ny
in the in-domain dataset, perform Laplace smoothing (Manning et al., 2008) with α = 1 and then
further smooth the distribution using a moving average with a window length of 5. Third, we per-
form weighted sampling with replacement from DT and DF with a size of 100 times the original.
The sampling weights are computed s.t. the distribution of Ny matches the target distribution. We
denote these resampled sets as DTRS and DFRS .
Results. We find that the disentanglement of atomic 1.0
certificates, ϵy -ACs, improves greatly after eliminat-               Dataset
ing the confounding factor response lengths. Figure 16 0.8           Target Domain RST
shows the empirical cumulative distribution functions                Other RSF
(eCDFs) for “original” datasets, DT and DF in gray 0.6               Other F
                                     RS         RS                   Target Domain T
tones, as well as the results for DT and DF . You
may observe that the distribution of ACs shifted left 0.4
for datasets representing F and shifted right for datasets
representing T, effectively increasing the disentangle- 0.2
ment. This indicates that, when comparing similar in-
domain and out-of-domain samples, the gap in restric- 0.0
                                                                 125 100 75 50 25 0                   25
tion is larger than presented in Figure 4c. ACs on in-                          Log10 y -AC
domain samples are more permissiveness and ACs on
out-of-domain samples even more constrictive than it Figure 16: The eCDFs of ϵy -ACs are shown
initially appeared.                                        for the original in- and out-of-domain data for
                                                             the MedQA setup in comparison to a resam-
                                                             pled dataset controlling the response length as
E.7   ATOMIC C ERTIFICATE BY L IKELIHOOD                     confounder. The gap between the permissive-
                                                             ness of in-domain samples and restrictiveness
Obtaining a tight atomic certificate for a sample y is       on out-of-domain samples is greatly improved.
most important when the sample is likely proposed by
L. Hence, in this section we study the log constriction ratio, the tightening of our adversarial certifi-
cate over model L, as a function of the sample’s likelihood under L.
We bin out-of-domain samples into 10 bins based on their log likelihood under model L, i.e.
log L(y|x), and compute median, 25th and 75th percentile log constriction ratio, as well as the
median log likelihood. We present results in Figure 17 for both 20NG and TinyShakespeare. We
observe that the constriction strengthens when samples get more likely under L. That means, those
samples most likely to be sampled under L benefit most from our atomic certificate. We consider
this to be a favorable result.

                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        75
                                                                                  100

        50
                                                                                      75

        25
                                                                                      50

           0
                                                                                      25

        25
                                                                                       0

        50
                                                                                      25

        75
                                                                                      50

       100
                                                                                   75
      Median                                                                      Median
      25th Percentile   700   600               500   400                         25th Percentile800           700          600     500   400
      75th Percentile               LogF(y|x)                                     75th Percentile                       LogF(y|x)

                              (a)                                                                                     (b)
Figure 17: These figures show the constriction ratio as a function of log likelihood of samples under L for
out-of-distribution samples. Figure 17a displays the results for 20NG and Figure 17b for TinyShakespeare. We
bin all samples into 10 bins. For each bin the x-axis shows the median log likelihood of the sample under L,
log L(y|x). The y-axis shows the log10 constriction ratio (median and percentiles for each bin).


 F         R EPEATED S AMPLING (T > 1)

In Section 3.3 we study the performance of VALID by sampling from L with a single step, that is,
T = 1. Here, we extend the analysis to T > 1.
Setup.     We adopt the MedicalQA setup as described in Appendix D.5. However, instead of
employing VALID with T = 1, we use T ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and study the resulting ϵ − DC for
combinations of k (the rejection threshold of VALID). As above, for ease of presentation we use a
fixed temperature of 1.0 for L.
Results. We find that increasing T significantly reduces false rejection rates (FRR) while only
marginally increasing the ϵ-DC (domain certificate). We present findings for the FRR in Figure 18a
and for ϵ-DC in Figure 18b. The minor increase in ϵ due to increasing T should not come as a
surprise as we recall the formula for the upper bound: 2kNy T G(y) (see (4)). Even T = 10 increases
the upper bound ϵy by only one order of magnitude. On the other hand, the gains in in-domain
performance are marked. In Figure 18a, we can observe the FRR is roughly halved for T = 5 and
k > 2, greatly improving the refusal behavior of the model on in-domain samples. Finally, we note
that the temperature of L, tL , is a confounding factor. For tL → 0, we would perform (nearly)
deterministic sampling of y|x and therefore T > 1 would not have any benefit.

     1.0
                                                            T              101         T
                                                                1          10 2            1
     0.8                                                        2                          2
                                                                3          10 5            3
     0.6                                                        4                          4
                                                                5          10 8            5
                                                                     -DC
FRR


     0.4                                                                 10 11

     0.2                                                                 10 14
                                                                         10 17
     0.0
               1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0                                1                    2             3           4              5
                          Rejection Threshold k                                                            Rejection Threshold k
                                      (a)                                                                       (b)
Figure 18: False Rejection Rate (FRR) (a) and ϵ − DC of the Domain certificate of VALID (b) plotted for a
range of different values of T and k.



                                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G      A BLATION
G.1     C OMPARING M TO G

Our goal is to provide a guarantee on a generalist model assuming that such a model outperforms
custom, small solutions that are inherently safer due to their domain specific training. We test
this empirically by examining the gap in performance between the generalist model L, a small in-
domain model. As G is trained marginally on y, it is not able to perform any task. Hence, we
exactly replicate the training procedure of G and train a model on the entire sequence, G′ (x, y). We
utilize the CharTask dataset as described above and study the accuracy of each model in generating
valid sequences: A valid sequence is one that starts with Q, is followed by a random sequence of
characters (e.g. 5 3), followed by four unique task tokens (e.g. S A E R) defining a task, which
is then performed (e.g. 3 5). The sequence is expected to terminate there. If any of these are
violated, the generated sequence is scored as invalid. We perform inference on 1000 prompts from
the target domain test dataset prompting the model with various lengths of prompts. In Table 3, we
present the results: The accuracy of generating such sequences of L lies significantly above that
of G (difference of approx 30%). This shows that G is effective in restricting the domain while
performing considerably worse than L. Hence, our method combines the best of both models: The
safety of G with the performance of L.

                                        Prompt Length               G         L
                                        1                         60.45      91.21
                                        5                         60.25      92.68
                                        10                        66.89      91.11

                            Table 3: Accuracy scores for CharTask generation dataset.


G.2     B ENEFIT OF LARGER G UIDE M ODELS

In this Appendix, we study the influence of the size of G on the VALID results. In particular, we
ask whether VALID benefits from smaller or larger models.
Setup. We turn to our MedicalQA setup as described in Section 3.1 and Appendix D.5. With
the same methodology, we fit two more models for G. GXS follows a GPT-2 architecture with 6
layers, 6 heads and 192 embedding dimension resulting in 27.49M parameters. GS follows a GPT-2
architecture with 6 layers, 6 heads and 384 embedding dimensions resulting in 60.29M parameters.
To recap, the G model as used above uses 12 layers, 12 heads and 768 embedding dimension result-
ing in 184M parameters. We then compare the three models on samples generated by L following
Section 3.3.
Results. We find that larger models tend to perform better, however, the evidence is not strong.
First, we study the rejection threshold k per model. As described in (4) in Theorem 1, VALID’s
upper bounds gets tighter with smaller k. Hence, in Figure 19a we plot k values achieving a given
false rejection rate (FRR) for each model. We observe that larger models enable smaller k at the


                                                   GXS (y)
                                                                  1.0                                     GXS (y)
  8                                                GS (y)                                                 GS (y)
                                                                  0.8
                                                   G(y)                                                   G(y)
  6                                                               0.6
k


  4                                                               0.4
      0.0    0.1      0.2         0.3        0.4       0.5              20           15       10      5        0
                            FRR                                                           Log10 -DC
                        (a)                                                                (b)

Figure 19: These Figures demonstrate differences in the behavior of VALID for different sizes of guide models
G. Figure 19a shows that larger models allow for lower k and hence lower bounds at the same False Rejection
Rate (FRR). Figure 19b shows the FRR (y-axis) for a given ϵ-DC for guide models of different sizes.


                                                             34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


same FRR. This indicates that the trade-off in k between certification and OOD detection is more
favorable under larger models. This should not come as a surprise, as larger models tend to achieve
better perplexity (i.e. lower loss) on in-domain data.
Next, we study the constriction ratios of the Atomic Certificates (AC) and present results for different
sizes of G as shown in Table 4. For each model, we provide the the 10th percentile, median and 90th
percentile. You may observe that GXS (y) consistently provides constriction ratios that are are often
around 10 orders of magnitudes worse than GS (y) and G(y). Interestingly, GS (y) yields better
ratios than G(y). However, the difference is smaller. We speculate that the limited amount of ID
training data means we do not see benefits for increasing the size of G beyond a point, as it begins
to overfit without increasing regularization.
Finally, we study the Domain Certificates (DC) for each model. For this we replicate Figure 12c and
present Figure 19b showing the false rejection rate (FRR) given an ϵ-DC for the three models. We
may observe that the lower bound to the FRR significantly increases as the models become smaller.
The evidence here suggests that larger guide models yield better domain certificates.
In conclusion, the evidence points to larger models working better for an application like MedQA.
The evidence uniformly shows that a model as small as GXS (y) does perform significantly worse
than larger models.

                              Log10 Constriction Ratio (10% / Median / 90%)
                    FRR
                                 GXS (y)            GS (y)              G(y)
                      0%      -427 / -45 / 12   -408 / -41 / 12     -449 / -54 / 6
                      1%      -246 / -14 / 42    -176 / -3 / 79    -198 / -10 / 43
                      5%       -74 / 12 / 141    -42 / 21 / 195     -42 / 18 / 162
                     10%       -29 / 24 / 202    -11 / 35 / 257      -8 / 33 / 229
                     20%        -3 / 43 / 281     1 / 57 / 337        3 / 50 / 302
                     25%         0 / 50 / 308     5 / 63 / 364       7 / 60 / 345
                     50%       11 / 81 / 430     13 / 96 / 497      15 / 89 / 477

Table 4: Constriction Ratios for MedicalQA for three models of different sizes. The smallest model yields
significantly worse (lower) constriction ratios.



H     B ENCHMARKING

In this section, we provide a comprehensive description of the PubMedQA experimental setup pre-
sented in Section 3.4, present additional benchmarking results, and extend our evaluation framework
to the MMLU benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021).

H.1   P UB M ED QA

Setup.     The PubMedQA benchmark (Jin et al., 2019) comprises 1000 items. Each item con-
tains background information (context), a multiple-choice question (answerable by yes/no/maybe),
a long-text answer, and a ground truth label (yes/no/maybe). As illustrated in Figure 6, we evaluate
the model through two streams: “item correctness” and “response acceptance”. In both streams,
we prompt the model with the context and question. In the “item correctness” stream, the model
is provided with all multiple-choice tokens, and the maximum likelihood answer is selected and
evaluated for correctness. In the “response acceptance” stream, we present the long-text answer as
a response and determine if model M abstains at a given domain certificate of ϵ. An item is consid-
ered correct at ϵ if and only if the response is accepted and the model scores correctly. We use the
reasoning-required variant of the PubMedQA benchmark (for further details, see Jin et al. (2019)).
Results. Extending our analysis of the PubMedQA benchmark presented in Section 3.4, we exam-
ined the relationship between PubMedQA performance scores and median constriction ratios. As
illustrated in Figure 20a, our findings demonstrate that the model can achieve a log10 constriction
ratio of 20 on samples in DF while maintaining robust PubMedQA performance. Specifically, at a
performance threshold of 70% accuracy, we observed a log10 CRk value of 21.6, which effectively


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            FRR          PubMedQA@              FRR         MMLU-Med@                  FRR         MMLU-Med@
1.00                                   1.00                                 1.00
0.75                                   0.75                                 0.75
0.50                                   0.50                                 0.50
0.25                                   0.25                                 0.25
0.00                                   0.00                                 0.00
       0            20            40          20 10 0       10 20                  0          20            40
             log10 CRk (Median)                       log10 -DC                        log10 CRk (Median)
                    (a)                                 (b)                                   (c)
Figure 20: Evaluation of domain-certified models through standardized benchmarking. Figure 20a illus-
trates the association between log constriction ratios and the PubMedQA@ϵ benchmark scores across models
with varying ϵ-DC certifications. Figure 20b presents the MMLU@ϵ metric evaluated at different certifica-
tion thresholds ϵ. (c) Figure 20c shows the relationship between log constriction ratios and corresponding
MMLU@ϵ scores across multiple certification levels.


constrains out-of-domain samples to probabilities at least 1 × 10−21 times lower than the likeli-
hood of samples in distribution L. This indicates a strong capacity for domain constriction while
preserving task performance.

H.2        MMLU-M ED

In this section, we extend the benchmarking of our certified model M for medical question answer-
ing to the MMLU benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021). To that end, we follow the same methodol-
ogy as above for the PubMedQA benchmark. In an earlier version of this work, we reported MMLU
results that were erroneous, which we correct here.
Setup. MMLU comprises thousands of questions spanning various domains of general and profes-
sional factual knowledge. As our model M is deployed for medical questions, we focus on a subset
of MMLU categories that fall within our domain T. We specify the selected categories in Table 2
and designate this remaining benchmark as MMLU-Med.
MMLU’s standard format provides n-shot examples with four possible answers (A through D) fol-
lowed by a question in the same format. The model is then prompted to select the correct re-
sponse. However, this setup does not reflect a realistic user-system interaction. Therefore, similar
to PubMedQA, we introduce the MMLU-Med@ϵ metric, which separates the evaluation into two
streams: (1) standard assessment of model L on MMLU-Med to determine correctness, and (2)
testing whether the correct question-answer pair is rejected by our algorithm. The process is sum-
marized in Figure 21. We score an item as correct when the model scores correctly while maintaining
its ϵ − DC on the realistic question-answer pair.
Results. Our evaluation yields mixed evidence regarding the model’s performance on MMLU-
Med. Following the same analysis as for PubMedQA in Section 3.4, we present the MMLU-Med@ϵ
metric in Figure 20b. As shown, MMLU-Med@1 = 37.1%, that is, the model retains 37.1%
accuracy when certified at ϵ = 1, or log10 ϵ = 0. The 10−10 -DC model achieves a score of 14.1%.
In addition, to the domain certificates, we study the median constriction of our model in relation to


                                MMLU-Med @ ϵ: Set k s.t. M is ϵ − DC on
 Question Correctness                                                 Accepting Response
   Which of the following is true of Graves Disease of the thyroid?   Question: Which of the following is
 ✅ A: It is a cause of ophthalmoplegia                                true of Graves Disease of the thyroid?
 ❌ B: It causes a large multi-nodular goitre                          Answer: It is a cause of
 ❌ C: It is commoner in males than females                            ophthalmoplegia
 ❌ D: In the past, Grave's disease sometimes caused 'Derbyshire Neck'
                                                                      log L(y | x)/G(y) ≤ k Ny ✅
   Answer: {A,B,C,D}
                           Correct Answer & Answer Accepted. Question Score: ✅
Figure 21: The MMLU@ϵ benchmark assesses MMLU performance while satisfying ϵ-DC certificate. The
correctness
𝒟𝔽           is scored as commonly done for MMLU (left). The correct question answer pair is checked for
￼acceptance / rejection
                  ￼     ￼by M￼ . Only
                                   ￼  if a sample
                                              ￼   is accepted and correct, the question is scored positively. For
 questions not ending in “?”, the sentence is concatenated without keywords.


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


its certified performance. The evidence provided in Figure 20c indicates that a median constriction
ratio of 1×10−5 is achieved on out-of-domain samples together with a score of 65% on the MMLU-
Med@ϵ benchmark. Further, a median constriction of 1×10−20 is achieved with an MMLU-Med@ϵ
score of 37%.
These results are considerably weaker than the strong results presented above for PubMedQA raising
the question as to why this is. In Figure 22, we investigate the domain shift between PubMedQA
and MMLU. In particular, Figure 22a shows the distribution of log likelihoods of in-domain samples
(DT ), out-of-domain samples (DF ) and MMLU samples under guide model G and Figure 22b shows
the log likelihood ratios for the same samples. We observe a considerable overlap between the
distributions of MMLU-Med and PubMedQA samples. However, the distribution of MMLU-Med
has a long-tail into the distribution of DF . This explains our results quite well. On the one hand,
the large overlapping mass of MMLU-Med and PubMedQA explains why M accepts a wide range
of MMLU-Med responses while significantly constricting the model on DF . On the other hand, the
long tail of the distribution of MMLU scores into the distribution of DF indicates a range of MMLU-
Med questions will be rejected unless the certificates become vacuous, making it hard challenging
high MMLU-Med@ϵ performance. We believe that training G on MMLU-style QA pairs would
significantly improve results but leave this as a future direction.

                                                                                      Target Domain T
                                                                                      Other F
                                                                                      MMLU-Med


 18    16 14 12 10 8                6   4         2        0       2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
      Ny 1 log G(y) (Norm. Log Likelihood)                     Ny 1 log L(y|x)/G(y) (Norm. LL Ratio)
                        (a)                                                    (b)
Figure 22: Comparison of likelihood of three datasets under model G, showing a MMLU-Med exhibits domain
shift relative to PubMedQA. Figure 22a indicates likelihood of MMLU-Med lies in-between the in-domain data
DT (PubMedQA) and out-of-domain data DF . Figure 22b shows the normalized log likelihood ratio used in
VALID lead to frequent rejections due to domain shift.


                                                      37
