Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


WEAK-TO-STRONG PREFERENCE O PTIMIZATION :
S TEALING REWARD FROM WEAK ALIGNED MODEL
 Wenhong Zhu1,2 , Zhiwei He1 , Xiaofeng Wang1 , Pengfei Liu1,2 , Rui Wang1∗
 1
   Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
 {zwhong714, wangrui12}@sjtu.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT

             Aligning language models (LMs) with human preferences has become a key area
             of research, enabling these models to meet diverse user needs better. Inspired by
             weak-to-strong generalization, where a strong LM fine-tuned on labels generated
             by a weaker model can consistently outperform its weak supervisor, we extend this
             idea to model alignment. In this work, we observe that the alignment behavior in
             weaker models can be effectively transferred to stronger models and even exhibit
             an amplification effect. Based on this insight, we propose a method called Weak-
             to-Strong Preference Optimization (WSPO), which achieves strong model align-
             ment by learning the distribution differences before and after the alignment of the
             weak model. Experiments demonstrate that WSPO delivers outstanding perfor-
             mance, improving the win rate of Qwen2-7B-Instruct on Arena-Hard from 39.70
             to 49.60, achieving a remarkable 47.04 length-controlled win rate on AlpacaEval
             2, and scoring 7.33 on MT-bench. Our results suggest that using the weak model
             to elicit a strong model with a high alignment ability is feasible. The code is avail-
             able at https://github.com/zwhong714/weak-to-strong-preference-optimization.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Cutting-edge large language models (LLMs) are trained through a three-phase process (OpenAI,
2024). Initially, these models undergo pre-training on extensive corpora, using next-token prediction
to build a foundational understanding (Radford et al., 2018; 2019). Following this, the pre-trained
models are fine-tuned using supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to better align with specific instructions
(Wei et al., 2021). However, these models have flaws, as they can sometimes produce factual inac-
curacies, exhibit biases, and display other undesirable behaviors (Bai et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b).
Learning from human preferences (Christiano et al., 2017) is a paradigm in the final phase aiming
to better align pre-trained and instruction-followed generative LMs with human values and goals.


Figure 1: Pipeline for LM alignment. (1) Perform SFT on the pre-trained model using expert data.
(2) Current approaches incorporate explicit or implicit reward mechanisms to fine-tune the model
further, aligning its behavior with human preferences. (3) WSPO aligns strong models by utilizing
the distributional differences observed before and after aligning the weak model.
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As shown in Figure 1, the alignment method in RLHF traditionally involves training an explicit
scalar-valued reward model that captures human judgment. This reward model is then used to fine-
tune the LM through reinforcement learning (RL) (Christiano et al., 2017), such as proximal policy
optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm. This pipeline is considerably more complex
than SFT, involving training multiple LMs and sampling from the LM policy in the training loop,
incurring significant computational costs. More recent research has explored alignment approaches
that eliminate the need for a separate reward model, instead aligning the LM directly based on human
preferences, named Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024).
Learning from human feedback preferences, whether online or offline, is crucial in PPO and DPO.
A phenomenon known as weak-to-strong generalization (Burns et al., 2023) demonstrates that a
strongly pre-trained model, when fine-tuned on labels generated by a weaker model, consistently
outperforms the weaker supervised model. This intriguing result prompts the question: Can we
leverage the alignment signal from the weak models to align a strong model?
This paper introduces a novel method called Weak-to-Strong Preference Optimization (WSPO), a
loss function designed to effectively transfer the alignment capability from a weaker model to a
stronger one. Our results show that the stronger model can amplify this transferred alignment.
Instead of using data generated by the weaker model as labels for aligning the stronger model, we
establish a relationship between the weak model (serving as a reward model) and the strong model
in the context of RL optimization. By learning the differences before and after the alignment of the
weak model, we can effectively enhance the alignment ability of the stronger model.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

       • We introduce the WSPO method, a loss function that transfers the alignment capability of
         the weak model to the strong model by learning the distributional differences before and
         after the weak model’s alignment.
       • We find that the alignment capability of the weaker model can be effectively transferred to
         the stronger model, amplifying the stronger model’s alignment performance.
       • Our experimental analysis reveals that the proposed method improves the win rate of
         Qwen2-7B-Instruct on Arena-Hard from 39.70 to 49.60, achieving an impressive 47.04
         length-controlled win rate on AlpacaEval 2, and obtaining a score of 7.33 on MT-bench.
         Results on various common sense, mathematical, and other reasoning tasks demonstrate
         that our method preserves the knowledge embedded in the strong model.

2     P RELIMINARIES
Given a query sequence x := (x1 , . . . , xm ) ∈ X , an auto-regressive LM defines a probability
distribution over possible response sequences y := (y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) ∈ Q
                                                                             Y. The probability πθ (y | x)
                                                                               n
can be decomposed using the chain rule of probability as πθ (y | x) = t=1 πθ (yt | y<t , x), where
y<t denotes {y1 , y2 , ..., yt−1 }. Typically, an LM is pre-trained on a large, unlabeled text dataset
using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). This process can be viewed as learning a distribution
that narrows the gap with the true data distribution.

2.1   S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING

Following initialization with a pre-trained LM πbase , the model undergoes further fine-tuning on
smaller, meticulously curated datasets containing expert demonstrations of high-quality responses.
This results in the model πsft . These datasets emphasize desired behaviors such as following instruc-
tions (Wei et al., 2021), engaging in dialogue (Li et al., 2016), and other similar tasks.

2.2   F INETUNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

Learning from human feedback (Christiano et al., 2017) has garnered significant attention due to its
potential to use human-labeled datasets for aligning LMs with human preferences (Wei et al., 2021).
In these alignment approaches, the optimization objective is generally to maximize the expected
reward from an implicit or explicit reward function while including a KL-divergence term from the
reference policy as a penalty for divergence (Shi et al., 2024).


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2.1    RLHF
Learning the reward model. Learning a reward model typically involves training a binary clas-
sifier to distinguish between preferred and less preferred actions using a logistic regression loss. A
commonly used classifier for this task is the Bradley-Terry model (David, 1963). In this model, for
a given context x and response y, the pointwise reward of selecting y given x is denoted by r(x, y).

Policy Optimization with the learned reward. Once the reward model is established, the model
alignment process maximizes the expected reward while preserving the original distribution πref .
This is often achieved using a family of f -divergence regularization methods (Rafailov et al., 2024;
Shi et al., 2024). For example, when using KL divergence, the optimization problem on a static
                                n               oN
                                        (i) (i)
dataset of comparisons D = x(i) , yw , yl            , where yw and yl represent the preferred and
                                                 i=1
dispreferred completions, respectively, can be formulated as follows:
                   max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) [r(x, y)] − βDKL [πθ (y | x)∥πref (y | x)] ,                  (1)
                    πθ

where β is a parameter that controls the degree of deviation from the reference policy πref . If β is set
too high, KL regularization forces the aligned model to closely mimic the SFT model, potentially
limiting the effectiveness of the alignment (Geist et al., 2019). On the other hand, if β is set too
low, the aligned model may diverge excessively from the SFT model, leading to reward hacking
(Skalse et al., 2022). This overfitting problem can compromise critical capabilities developed during
pretraining or SFT (Stiennon et al., 2020).

2.2.2    DPO
An alternative approach to learning from the human preference paradigm described above is DPO
(Rafailov et al., 2024), which completely bypasses the need to train a reward model. The loss
function that DPO optimizes is expressed as a function of πθ as follows:

                                                      πθ (yw | x)           πθ (yl | x)
    LDPO (πθ ; πref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ β log                 − β log                  . (2)
                                                     πref (yw | x)          πref (yl | x)

While DPO simplifies the process by bypassing the need for reward function training, this may result
in a final strategy that is less regularized and robust compared to RLHF. In RLHF, the underfitted
reward function is crucial in balancing and optimizing the final strategy (Azar et al., 2024).

3     M ETHOD

Building on the concept of weak-to-strong generalization, where a strong model is capable of gen-
eralizing beyond weak labels rather than simply imitating the behavior of the weaker model, in this
section, we leverage RL theory to demonstrate that it is possible to train a strong alignment model
using the distributional differences before and after weak model alignment.

3.1     YOUR L ANGUAGE M ODEL I S S ECRETLY A R EWARD M ODEL

Prior work (Rafailov et al., 2024) shows that given a specific reward model r(x, y), the optimal
solution to the KL-constrained reward maximization problem in Objective 1 takes the form:

                                       1                      1
                           πr (y | x) =    πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y) ,                       (3)
                                     Z(x)                     β

where Z(x) = y πref (y | x) exp β1 r(x, y) is the partition function, and πr (y | x) represents the
                P

model after alignment. The reward function can be shown as follows by rearranging Equation 3:

                                                 πr (y | x)
                              r(x, y) = β log                + β log Z(x).                           (4)
                                                πref (y | x)

                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1. Under mild assumptions, all reward classes consistent with the Plackett-Luce (and
Bradley-Terry in particular) models can be represented with the reparameterization r(x, y) =
β log ππ(y|x)
       ref (y|x)
                 for some model π(y | x) and a given reference model πref (y | x).

Based on Theorem 1 proposed by Rafailov et al. (2024), we know that the reward function can be
expressed as the difference in distributions before and after model alignment.

3.2   W EAK - TO -S TRONG PREFERENCE OPTIMIZATION

Before introducing our method, we define πrweak (y | x) as a weak model aligned using specific
                                                  weak
algorithms, such as PPO or DPO. Similarly, πref        (y | x) denotes the reference model, which may
correspond to either πsft or πbase . These notations also apply to strong models.

Derive the WSPO objective. Theorem 1 demonstrates that a reward model trained on the pref-
erence dataset D can be expressed as the distribution difference before and after model alignment.
Consequently, we can align a weak model and derive an aligned weak model πrweak (y | x). Thus,
                                                                  π weak (y|x)
the reward model r(x, y) can be formulated as β log πrweak (y|x) . Next, we employ this transformed
                                                                    ref
                                      strong
reward model to align a strong model πref    (y | x), allowing us to derive that

                                                                                        weak          1/γ
                           1                              1                            πr (y | x)
   πrstrong (y | x) =          π strong (y | x) exp                    strong
                                                            r(x, y) ∝ πref    (y | x)                     ,              (5)
                        Z ′ (x) ref                       λ                             weak
                                                                                       πref  (y | x)
                 P strong
where Z ′ (x) = y πref     (y | x) exp λ1 r(x, y) , λ is the regularization strength to align strong LM


using Obejctive 1, and γ equals to λ/β. Although r(x, y) is analytically tractable, substituting it
into Obejective 1 for policy optimization poses challenges due to the absence of a partition function.
However, we can optimize Equation 5 to minimize the difference in distance between the logarithmic
probability distributions before and after aligning the strong and weak models. Therefore we obtain
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   2
                                      1       π strong (y | x)      π weak (y | x)
                  LWSPO = E(x,y)∼D      γ log θstrong         − log rweak                             .                (6)
                                     |y|      πref (y | x)          πref (y | x)
                                                                                                   2

Derivation see in Appendix A.3. An intuitive explanation is that we leverage the change in the weak
model’s alignment before and after as a supervisory signal to guide the alignment of the stronger
reference model.

The role of the hyperparameter γ. The hyperparameter γ plays a dual role: it maximizes the
                      π weak (y|x)
reward function β log πrweak (y|x) , while simultaneously constraining the proximity of the original dis-
                             ref
           strong
tribution πref    (y | x) to the optimized distribution πθstrong (y | x).

What does the WSPO do? The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:


            |y|
                  "                                                              !                               #
            X          2         π strong (y<t | x)      π weak (y<t | x)
 E(x,y)∼D                   γ log θstrong           − log rweak                      ∇θ log πθstrong (y<t | x)       .   (7)
            t=1
                      |y|        πref (y<t | x)          πref (y<t | x)
As shown in Equation 7, the direction of the gradient is influenced by the contents of the parentheses,
while the extent of gradient descent is not dictated by the model’s likelihood on the dataset. Deriva-
tion see in Appendix A.4. This may help mitigate the overfitting problem commonly associated with
DPO alignment algorithms (Azar et al., 2024).

WSPO outline. The general WSPO pipeline operates as follows: 1.) Utilize offline datasets D =
n            oN
         (i)
 x(i) , yw      , such as the selected preference or SFT datasets; paired datasets are not required.
             i=1


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Appendix C, we demonstrate that even the rejected preference dataset remains effective for the
WSPO algorithm. 2.) Prepare the weak model, both pre-and post-alignment. 3.) Optimize the
LM πθstrong (y | x) to minimize the objective LWSPO for the specified dataset. The only parameter
requiring tuning is γ.

4     E XPERIMENTS

This section empirically evaluates WSPO’s ability to align strong models by learning from weaker
ones. Our findings reveal that aligned weak models can successfully transfer their alignment be-
haviors to stronger models, often resulting in an enhanced alignment effect. Additionally, WSPO
demonstrates competitive performance compared to strong models trained using PPO and DPO. We
begin by illustrating the feasibility of our method with a toy example. Next, we analyze the stability
of WSPO algorithm training. Finally, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the algorithm’s
overall performance.

4.1     SUMMARIZATION WITH A L ENGTH R EWARD

4.1.1    E XPERIMENT SETUP
Task. We employ a toy summarization task with a hardcoded reward function that incentivizes
models to generate summaries with lengths falling within the range of [Lmin , Lmax ]:


                                                 0,    if |y| ∈ [Lmin , Lmax ]
                                r(x, y) :=                                                                 (8)
                                                 −1,   otherwise

Models. We employ the Qwen2-1.5B-base and Qwen2-7B-base models (Yang et al., 2024a) as
                                weak                         strong
our pre-trained weak model, πbase    , and strong model, πbase      , respectively. To train the SFT models,
  weak       strong
πsft and πsft , we utilize the training split of the XSUM dataset (Narayan et al., 2018). Subse-
quently, the validation split is employed for further fine-tuning, leading to the development of the
                                          weak      strong
corresponding PPO-aligned models, πppo         and πppo    . When training with WSPO, we directly use
                                           weak       weak               strong             strong
the distributional differences between πbase and πppo to align πbase            and derive πwspo   , because no
additional knowledge is required to output a summary in the summary task.

Evaluation. The parameters Lmin and Lmax are set to 20 and 30, respectively. We use the test
split for evaluation to guarantee no data contamination (Zhu et al., 2023). Detailed experimental
settings are provided in Appendix B.1.

4.1.2    R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS
We visualize the lengths generated by various alignment algorithms across models of different sizes
and calculate the win rate, which represents the proportion of lengths falling within the [Lmin , Lmax ]
range.

WSPO exhibits comparable alignment capability against PPO. As shown in Figure 2, the PPO
and WSPO alignment algorithms address variable generation lengths arising from SFT training. The
left figure illustrates how our method, using the greedy decoding algorithm, performs similarly to
the PPO algorithm and can effectively mitigate outliers. In the right figure, we present the averaged
results from three samplings. From the error lines, it is evident that both PPO and WSPO exhibit high
stability during generation. Notably, our method is better at lower temperatures than the performance
of the PPO-aligned strong model.

WSPO embraces certain generalizations. On the left in Figure 2, we can observe that the weak
model performs quite well on the alignment task, with the results predominantly concentrated in the
reward area. Additionally, we can see that the strong LM, obtained through WSPO alignment with
the weak model, exhibits a different length distribution in its generated outputs. This indicates that
the strong LM is not merely imitating the behavior of weak models.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Left. PPO and WSPO alignment methods vary in the length of generated sequences
compared to the reference SFT model using greedy decoding. Right. PPO and WSPO alignment
methods show variation in reward hits compared to the reference SFT model, using the top-p sam-
pling algorithm at different temperatures.


WSPO provides a faster alignment process. Traditionally, model alignment involves performing
SFT on pre-trained LMs first, then applying PPO algorithms for alignment. In this section, we merge
these two stages. Using the same amount of alignment data typically reserved for PPO training,
WSPO achieves comparable alignment effects in a more streamlined process. This demonstrates that
a pre-trained model can effectively perform alignment by learning differential distribution signals,
provided it has acquired sufficient knowledge.

4.2     S INGLE - TURN DIALOGUE

4.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Task. In single-turn dialogue, when prompt x is a human query, the model must either politely
respond to the query or refuse to answer.

Models. In this scenario, we fine-tune the Qwen2-1.5B-base and Qwen2-7B-base models (Yang
                                                                                           weak        strong
et al., 2024a) exclusively on the preferred completions, resulting in two models: πsft          and πsft      .
We refer to these models collectively as Preferred-FT models. Subsequently, we apply the DPO
algorithm to perform alignment training using the Anthropic Helpful and Harmless conversation
                                                                                       weak       strong
training dataset (Bai et al., 2022). This step produces two alignment models: πdpo          and πdpo     . To
address potential biases introduced by the base models pretrained on the high-quality corpus, we
                                                weak      weak
utilize the distributional differences between πsft  and πdpo  . These differences guide the alignment
     strong                                                                   strong
of πsft through the WSPO algorithm, ultimately resulting in the model πwspo          .

Evaluation. We use the test split of the Anthropic HH dataset to assess alignment performance,
evaluating through a single-step human-assistant interaction. The evaluation leverages preferred
completions from the test set as references to calculate the win rates of different methods. Tak-
ing cost into consideration, we selected the GPT-4o-mini as the judge model. We use Qwen2.5-
72B (Qwen, 2024) to verify the validity of the evaluation. Detailed experimental settings are pro-
vided in Appendix B.2.

4.2.2    R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The alignment signal from the weak model plays a crucial role. As shown on the left side of
Figure 3, unlike DPO, which requires distinguishing the likelihood between preferred and dispre-
ferred pairs in preference data, WSPO, based on the Preferred-FT model, continues to leverage
the alignment signal from the weak model on preferred data to perform alignment. Consequently,
WSPO adjusts the distribution learned exclusively from the preferred data, resulting in improved
alignment ability compared to the Preferred-FT model.

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Left. Win rates computed by GPT-4o-mini for Anthropic-HH single-step dialogue at
different temperatures. Right. The win rates for different sampling temperatures remain relatively
stable throughout the training process. WSPO demonstrates consistent performance across varying
sampling temperatures over time.


WSPO exhibits better alignment capability compared to DPO. Tuning the parameters for DPO
proves to be quite challenging, as seen in Appendix B.2. After several adjustments, we achieved a
relatively favorable outcome with the hyperparameter β = 0.5, which was determined by testing a
range of values {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0} for the 7B model. As illustrated on the left side of Figure 3,
surprisingly, our model demonstrates better alignment performance than DPO with the hyperparam-
eter γ = 0.1.

WSPO exhibits fast convergence and stability. As shown in the right part of Figure 3, the model
achieves a high win rate after just 1k fine-tuning steps, demonstrating fast convergence. Addition-
ally, the training process remains stable throughout.

4.3     A COMPLEX EVALUATION

4.3.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Models. We train the base models on the UltraChat-200k (Ding et al., 2023) dataset to obtain
the SFT models. We use the off-the-shelf instruction-tuned models as the SFT models. Then, we
perform alignment using DPO on the UltraFeedback dataset (Cui et al., 2024) using the SFT model
as the starting point. The process of obtaining the models is largely consistent with that of Exp 4.2.

Evaluation. We evaluate our models primarily on three widely-adopted, open-ended instruction-
following benchmarks: MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2024a), AlpacaEval 2 (Dubois et al., 2024), and
Arena-Hard v0.1 (Li et al., 2024c). These benchmarks assess the models’ conversational versatility
across diverse queries and are commonly used by the community (Meng et al., 2024). Besides,
fine-tuning LMs is challenging, notably since it can cause forgetting (French, 1992) of pre-trained
knowledge. To demonstrate that the strong model can generalize beyond weak labels instead of
merely imitating the behavior of weak models. We use zero-shot or few-shot learning to test the
reasoning ability across five benchmarks, including MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021), CMMLU (Li
et al., 2024a), Truthful-QA (Lin et al., 2021), GSM-PLUS (Li et al., 2024b), and GSM8K (Cobbe
et al., 2021). We evaluate these benchmarks by using llm-evaluation-harness (Gao et al., 2024) repo.
Evaluation details are in Appendix B.3.

4.3.2    R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
As shown in Table 1, the Instruct setting consistently outperforms the Base setting. This is primarily
because the Instruct model utilizes high-quality demonstration and preference data for SFT and
RLHF (Yang et al., 2024a).

DPO shows limited improvement for the Instruct model. The SFT-trained model demonstrates
limited effectiveness across the three benchmarks, highlighting areas for potential enhancement.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Evaluation results of models across different settings and benchmarks. LC and WR refer
to length-controlled and raw win rates, respectively. We train SFT models under the Base settings
using the UltraChat-200K dataset. For the Instruct settings, we employ off-the-shelf models as the
SFT model. The SFT and DPO versions of the weak model are employed to align the strong model
within the WSPO algorithm.

                        Qwen2-Base (1.5B)                            Qwen2-Instruct (1.5B)
 Method      AlpacaEval2      Arena-Hard     MT-Bench      AlpacaEval2       Arena-Hard      MT-Bench
           LC (%) WR (%)        WR (%)        Score      LC (%) WR (%)         WR (%)         Score
 SFT        4.16      2.30        0.90          4.68       5.31      3.42        2.40          5.05
 DPO        5.56      4.79        2.60          5.03       8.93      6.77        4.00          5.60
                         Qwen2-Base (7B)                              Qwen2-Instruct (7B)
 Method      AlpacaEval2      Arena-Hard     MT-Bench      AlpacaEval2       Arena-Hard      MT-Bench
           LC (%) WR (%)        WR (%)        Score      LC (%) WR (%)         WR (%)         Score
 SFT        11.54     5.65         5.30         5.86      30.73      28.32      39.70          7.19
 DPO        14.06     8.45        10.70         6.70      32.10      28.15      39.30          7.26
 WSPO       26.77    26.68        29.00         7.00      47.04      48.32      49.60          7.33



While DPO provides noticeable improvements for the base and weaker models, performance de-
clines with Qwen2-7B-Instruct. This decline could be due to Qwen2-7B’s ability to achieve strong
alignment through raw, high-quality data and complex RLHF processes (Yang et al., 2024a). Rely-
ing solely on the Ultrafeedback dataset for DPO learning might not lead to performance gains, as
the dataset may already be part of its original high-quality data. Additionally, it’s possible that DPO
adversely affected the model’s initial performance.

WSPO effectively learns and amplifies the alignment signals of weak models. With WSPO,
the strong model consistently delivers great results across all three benchmarks. The impressive per-
formance of WSPO can be attributed to its unique approach: unlike DPO, which learns directly from
preference data pairs, WSPO derives alignment signals from weaker models, not only dependent on
the Ultrafeedback dataset itself. For instance, on the Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct, the alignment ability of
weak models improved from 2.40 to 4.00 with DPO learning, as measured by the Arena-Hard eval-
uation. Subsequently, the strong model’s alignment capability was amplified from 39.70 to 49.60 by
leveraging the differences in alignment signals from the weak model—something that DPO learning
on datasets alone cannot achieve. The amplification phenomenon might be attributed to the limited
parameter size of the weak model, which constrains its ability to achieve optimal alignment. How-
ever, transferring this alignment to stronger models could offer substantial benefits. Additionally,
our method circumvents direct training on the preference dataset, effectively reducing risks such as
overfitting and reward hacking.

Table 2: Evaluation results of models across different benchmarks. We evaluate these benchmarks
by using llm-evaluation-harness (Gao et al., 2024) repo.

  Model                         MMLU        CMMLU      Truthful-QA    GSM-PLUS      GSM8K       Avg.
  Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct            55.70       69.62        28.52         38.83        59.78      50.49
  Qwen2-7B-Base                  69.43       83.34        37.33         57.39        79.83      65.46
  Qwen2-7B-Instruct              69.94       81.84        41.00         56.91        77.86      65.51
  Qwen2-7B-Instruct + WSPO       69.44       80.82        47.00         57.96        77.94      66.63
  Qwen2-7B-Base + WSPO           69.37       80.98        44.68         60.06        81.31      67.28


WSPO generalizes beyond weak models rather than simply imitating them. As shown in Ta-
ble 2, Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct is much less capable than the 7B version, further demonstrating that
WSPO prevents knowledge forgetting in common sense, mathematics and other reasoning tasks
while enhancing the model’s overall alignment ability, as shown in Table 1. Notably, on the Truth-
fulQA dataset, both the base model and the Instruct model exhibited improved capabilities in as-
sessing the degree of truthfulness.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     A NALYSIS


Figure 4: Left. The effect of weak model size on the sequence length generated by WSPO compared
to the PPO using greedy decoding. Right. The impact of different γ hyperparameters on WSPO in
a single-turn dialogue analysis.


5.1   I MPACT OF W EAK MODEL

As discussed in the previous section, we utilized the probability difference between a weak base
model and its aligned version to align a stronger model. In this section, we empirically investigate
the impact of model size by using the Qwen2-0.5B model as a weaker counterpart to the Qwen2-
1.5B model, aiming to explore how model size affects alignment strength. The experimental setup
mirrors that of Section 4.1.1. As illustrated on the left side of Figure 4, even a weaker model can
provide a robust alignment signal to a stronger model (e.g., the Qwen2-7B model). Furthermore,
in the Instruct setting of Section 4.3, we use the 0.5B model as the weaker model without any
alignment enhancement following DPO training. When this alignment is transferred to a stronger
model, it achieves a score of 45.00 on the Arena-hard benchmark using WSPO optimization. This
indicates that parameter size may limit alignment in weaker models, whereas stronger models can
amplify this alignment. Besides, the alignment ability of a weak model is also important, we can
have fine-grained alignment on a weak model and then migrate the alignment ability to a strong
model to achieve better alignment.

5.2   I MPACT OF H YPERPARAMETER

Recalling the WSPO loss in Equation 6, we introduce the hyperparameter γ, which represents the
ratio of regularization intensity applied to the strong and weak models in the optimization objective
outlined in Objective 1, as well as the penalty for deviating from the original distribution. This sec-
tion investigates the impact of γ on the alignment strength. We test values of γ ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0}
to evaluate its effect on regularization. As illustrated on the right side of Figure 4, adjusting γ en-
ables us to modulate the degree to which the stronger model aligns with the weaker one and deviates
from the original distribution. When γ = 1, the alignment of the strong model closely mirrors that
of the weak model. As γ increases beyond 1, the strong model’s alignment increasingly favors the
original distribution. Conversely, the strong models exhibit superior alignment when γ is less than
1. Therefore, despite γ incorporating a penalty for deviations from the original distribution, we can
infer that the strong model requires a smaller regularization than the weak model when optimizing
the objective function in Objective 1.

5.3   I MPACT OF SFT P HASE

We also leveraged the probability difference between Qwen2-1.5-Base and Qwen2-1.5-Instruct to
align stronger models from the Base version directly. On the Arena-Hard benchmark, the Base
model initially scored 7.70. However, after applying the WSPO algorithm for alignment with Ultra-
feedback, the score saw a modest improvement to 9.30. This limited gain underscores the signifi-
cance of high-quality knowledge injection during the SFT phase.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     R ELATED W ORK

6.1   T RAINING - TIME A LIGNMENT

RLHF is a technique designed to align LLMs with human preferences and values (Christiano et al.,
2017; Bai et al., 2022). In the third stage of RLHF, the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) is com-
monly used. Recent advancements, such as Reinforcement Learning with AI Feedback (RLAIF),
offer potential alternatives to traditional human feedback methods (Pang et al., 2023). However,
challenges throughout the RLHF pipeline, from preference data collection to model training, have
been noted by Radford et al. (2018). In contrast, approaches like DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024) bypass
the need for a reward model by directly training LLMs using human preferences. Other competing
methods, such as IPO (Azar et al., 2024), KTO (Ethayarajh et al.), and ORPO (Hong et al., 2024),
have also emerged.

6.2   I NFERENCE - TIME ALIGNMENT

Decoding strategies aim to generate text continuations that balance diversity and coherence (Zhu
et al., 2024). Some methods trade off computational efficiency during inference to better align with
human preferences. The simplest of these is the Best-of-N approach, which involves sampling
multiple outputs from πref and selecting the one with the highest reward according to a reward
model (Touvron et al., 2023). Another approach is Emulated Fine-Tuning (EFT) (Mitchell et al.,
2023), a scale-decoupling method that transfers fine-tuning effects between small and large LMs.
Liu et al. (2024a) demonstrated the empirical effectiveness of this proxy-tuning technique, showing
it rivals standard fine-tuning across various benchmarks. Additionally, Liu et al. (2024b) introduced
DeRa, a cost-efficient method that dynamically adjusts alignment strength during inference. Zhou
et al. (2024) used the log-probability difference between small-tuned and untuned models to guide
a frozen large model, providing an efficient up-scaling strategy without fine-tuning.

6.3   W EAK - TO -S TRONG G ENERALIZATION

Several works have been proposed to use weak model supervision to elicit the capabilities of a
much stronger model. Burns et al. (2023) found that strong models fine-tuned by weak supervi-
sors consistently outperform their weak counterparts. Yang et al. (2024b) presents a method that
improves model reasoning by employing weak supervision to autonomously refine training data au-
tonomously, enabling the expansion of reasoning abilities without human annotations or advanced
models. Unlike these approaches, our method uses weak model supervision for alignment to en-
hance helpfulness while maintaining the strong model’s original ability.


7     D ISCUSSION

Conclusion. This paper introduced WSPO, a method for transferring alignment capabilities from a
weaker model to a stronger one by leveraging distributional differences before and after weak model
alignment. Experimental results show that WSPO improves model performance on key benchmarks,
offering an efficient alternative to traditional alignment methods.

Limitations and future work. We did not explore the alignment transfer properties across dif-
ferent language model architectures or examine the impact of weak model alignment strength in
WSPO. Our study also does not explain why transferring a weak model’s alignment ability to a
stronger model amplifies it. Future research could investigate the use of weak models as reward
models in reinforcement learning frameworks to facilitate alignment or seek to explain this phe-
nomenon.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper is supported by the General Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62176153).


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
Although the datasets used in this paper are open-source and helpful, we did not perform an in-depth
evaluation of them, nor did we account for factors such as safety, honesty, or other considerations
when designing the WSPO loss function.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All training experiments in this paper were conducted using 8×H100 GPUs, leveraging the LLaMA-
Factory (Zheng et al., 2024b) repository, which offers an integrated framework for fine-tuning over
100 LLMs with a variety of efficient techniques. The only additional implementation required is
training the model based on WSPO alignment. This can be achieved by modifying the DPO training
code within the LLaMA-Factory repository (Zheng et al., 2024b), specifically by calculating the loss
on the selected dataset and loading weaker models. The evaluation uses the LLM evaluation, with
the relevant prompts in the Appendix. The reasoning tasks evaluation is also performed using the
llm-eval-harness Gao et al. (2024) repo.

R EFERENCES
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland,
 Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learn-
 ing from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbren-
  ner, Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, et al. Weak-to-strong general-
  ization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09390,
  2023.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Bingxiang He, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong
  Xie, Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, et al. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with scaled ai
  feedback. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Herbert Aron David. The method of paired comparisons, volume 12. London, 1963.
Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233, 2023.
Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled al-
  pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475, 2024.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Model align-
  ment as prospect theoretic optimization. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning.
Robert M French. Semi-distributed representations and catastrophic forgetting in connectionist net-
  works. Connection Science, 4(3-4):365–377, 1992.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lin-
  tang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework
  for few-shot language model evaluation, 07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
  12608602.
Matthieu Geist, Bruno Scherrer, and Olivier Pietquin. A theory of regularized markov decision
 processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2160–2169. PMLR, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300.
Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. Orpo: Monolithic preference optimization without
  reference model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07691, 2(4):5, 2024.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180.
Haonan Li, Yixuan Zhang, Fajri Koto, Yifei Yang, Hai Zhao, Yeyun Gong, Nan Duan, and Timothy
  Baldwin. Cmmlu: Measuring massive multitask language understanding in chinese, 2024a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09212.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. Deep rein-
  forcement learning for dialogue generation, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.
  01541.
Qintong Li, Leyang Cui, Xueliang Zhao, Lingpeng Kong, and Wei Bi. Gsm-plus: A comprehensive
  benchmark for evaluating the robustness of llms as mathematical problem solvers, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19255.
Tianle Li, Wei-Lin Chiang, Evan Frick, Lisa Dunlap, Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Joseph E Gon-
  zalez, and Ion Stoica. From crowdsourced data to high-quality benchmarks: Arena-hard and
  benchbuilder pipeline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11939, 2024c.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods, 2021.
Alisa Liu, Xiaochuang Han, Yizhong Wang, Yulia Tsvetkov, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. Tuning
  language models by proxy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08565, 2024a.
Tianlin Liu, Shangmin Guo, Leonardo Bianco, Daniele Calandriello, Quentin Berthet, Felipe
  Llinares, Jessica Hoffmann, Lucas Dixon, Michal Valko, and Mathieu Blondel. Decoding-time
  realignment of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02992, 2024b.
Llama-Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  21783.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a
  reference-free reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14734, 2024.
Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. An
  emulator for fine-tuning large language models using small language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.12962, 2023.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the sum-
  mary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In Ellen Riloff,
  David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1797–1807, Brussels, Bel-
  gium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  D18-1206. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1206.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.

Jing-Cheng Pang, Pengyuan Wang, Kaiyuan Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiacheng Xu, Zongzhang Zhang,
   and Yang Yu. Language model self-improvement by reinforcement learning contemplation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2305.14483, 2023.

Qwen. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
 github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.

Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.

Ruizhe Shi, Yifang Chen, Yushi Hu, Alisa Liu, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Noah A. Smith, and Simon
  Du. Decoding-time language model alignment with multiple objectives, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.18853.

Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and character-
  izing reward gaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9460–9471, 2022.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.

Zhiqing Sun, Sheng Shen, Shengcao Cao, Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yikang Shen, Chuang Gan,
  Liang-Yan Gui, Yu-Xiong Wang, Yiming Yang, Kurt Keutzer, and Trevor Darrell. Aligning large
  multimodal models with factually augmented rlhf, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2309.14525.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.

An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10671, 2024a.

Yuqing Yang, Yan Ma, and Pengfei Liu. Weak-to-strong reasoning, 2024b. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2407.13647.

Tianyu Yu, Yuan Yao, Haoye Zhang, Taiwen He, Yifeng Han, Ganqu Cui, Jinyi Hu, Zhiyuan
  Liu, Hai-Tao Zheng, Maosong Sun, and Tat-Seng Chua. Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms
  via behavior alignment from fine-grained correctional human feedback, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2312.00849.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and
  Yongqiang Ma. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  3: System Demonstrations), Bangkok, Thailand, 2024b. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13372.

Zhanhui Zhou, Zhixuan Liu, Jie Liu, Zhichen Dong, Chao Yang, and Yu Qiao. Weak-to-strong
  search: Align large language models via searching over small language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19262, 2024.

Wenhong Zhu, Hongkun Hao, Zhiwei He, Yunze Song, Yumeng Zhang, Hanxu Hu, Yiran Wei, Rui
 Wang, and Hongyuan Lu. Clean-eval: Clean evaluation on contaminated large language models.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09154, 2023.

Wenhong Zhu, Hongkun Hao, Zhiwei He, Yiming Ai, and Rui Wang. Improving open-ended text
 generation via adaptive decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18223, 2024.


A     M ATHEMATICAL D ERIVATIONS

A.1   P ROOF OF THEROM 1

Lemma 1. Under the Plackett-Luce preference framework, particularly the Bradley-Terry frame-
work, two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same preference distribution.

The proof can be found in the paper (Rafailov et al., 2024).
Lemma 2. Two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same optimal policy
under the constrained RL problem.

The proof can be found in the paper (Rafailov et al., 2024).
Under Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, given the reward function r(x, y), which incorporates the optimal
policy πr (y | x) under the KL-constrained RL framework, we have:

                                                       πr (y | x)
                              r(x, y) = β log                       + β log Z(x),
                                                       πref (y | x)

                                           1
               P
where Z(x) =      y πref (y | x) exp       β r(x, y)    . This formulation is equivalent to:

                                                                πr (y | x)
                                       r′ (x, y) = β log                    .
                                                               πref (y | x)

A.2   P ROOF OF PROPOSITION

Proposition 1. Any fine-tuned model can be seen as solving a KL-constrained RL problem, where
the constraint is defined relative to the pre-trained model. See Appendix A.2 for proof.

Based on Theorem 1 and Proposition 1, we can define a composite reward function, rft (x, y) =
rsft (x, y) ◦ ralignment (x, y), where rsft (x, y) fine-tunes the base model to the SFT model, and
ralignment (x, y) further fine-tunes the SFT model to the aligned model. This composite reward en-
ables the base model to be directly fine-tuned to the aligned model, effectively integrating alignment
into the SFT training process through the appropriate choice of reward function. However, there
remains a discrepancy between the pre-trained and SFT models (see Section 5.3). For specific tasks,
such as managing generation length or repetitive patterns where internal knowledge is less essential,
it may be feasible to skip the SFT phase.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Any fine-tuned language model πft and pre-trained model πref can be associated with a
reward function rft (x, y), defined through the following optimization problem:
                 max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) [rft (x, y)] − βDKL [πθ (y | x)||πref (y | x)] ,    (9)
                             πθ
Optimizing Objective 9 provides the solution to this KL-constrained reinforcement learning prob-
lem, yielding π ∗ = πft , with the reward function given by rft (x, y) = β log ππrefft (x,y)
                                                                                       (x,y) .


A.3    D ERIVING THE WSPO O BJECTIVE

Given a weak model after alignment, we can consider the weak LM as a hidden reward model, where
                                                  π weak (y|x)
the reward model is defined as r(x, y) = β log πrweak (y|x) . From this, we derive that
                                                    ref

                        strong              1    strong               1
                      πr       (y | x) = ′      πref (y | x) exp        r(x, y) ,          (10)
                                          Z (x)                       λ
where
                                       X strong                  1
                             Z ′ (x) =     πref (y | x) exp        r(x, y) .               (11)
                                        y
                                                                 λ

By substituting the reward model r(x, y) into Equation 11, we obtain:
                                                            π weak (y | x)

                                 X strong              β
                       Z ′ (x) =   πref (y | x) exp      log rweak           .                                         (12)
                                 y
                                                       λ    πref (y | x)

                                                                                         π weak (y|x)
Note that our optimization objective in Equation 6 aims to make βλ log πrweak (y|x) as close as possible
                                                                                           ref
       π strong (y|x)
to log πθstrong (y|x) . In this context, it is essential to ensure that πθ (y | x) is a valid distribution, which
        ref
will make Z ′ (x) close to 1. Therefore, optimizing the WSPO loss function becomes equivalent to
optimizing Equation 10.

A.4    D ERIVING THE GRADIENT OF WSPO O BJECTIVE

In this section, we derive the gradient of the WSPO objective:
                                                                                          
                                                      strong                             2
                                                             (y | x)        weak
                                          1         π                     π      (y | x) 
             ∇θ LWSPO = ∇θ E(x,y)∼D           γ log θstrong         − log rweak             .                         (13)
                                         |y|        πref (y | x)          πref (y | x)
                                                                                                        2

Since the probability πθ (y | x) can be decomposed using the chain rule of probability as

                                                           n
                                                           Y
                                            πθ (y | x) =         πθ (yt | y<t , x) ,                                   (14)
                                                           t=1

We can observe that each term in the product is a function of θ. Therefore, when we take the
derivative of the WSPO loss function, we have

  ∇θ LWSPO =
               |y|
                        "                                                          !                           #
               X             2         π strong (y<t | x)      π weak (y<t | x)                                        (15)
  E(x,y)∼D                        γ log θstrong           − log rweak                  ∇θ log πθstrong (y<t | x)   .
               t=1
                            |y|        πref (y<t | x)          πref (y<t | x)

B     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS
All the training experiments in this paper were conducted on 8×H100 GPUs based on the LLaMA-
Factory (Zheng et al., 2024b) repo, which provides an integrated approach to fine-tuning over 100
LLMs with a diverse range of efficient fine-tuning techniques. If not specified, the inference engine
used by our LMs defaults to vllm (Kwon et al., 2023).


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1    L ENGTH REWARD

Data preparation. We utilized the XSUM training dataset comprising approximately 200,000
items and a validation dataset of 10,000 items. We modified the data according to Qwen’s instruction
template as follows:

      XSUM

      <|im_start|>system
      You are a helpful assistant.<|im_end|>
      <|im_start|>user
      Please summarize the article.
      [Article]<|im_end|>
      <|im_start|>assistant
      [Summary]<|im_end|>


PPO training. We use a pre-trained Qwen2-1.5B base model and Qwen2-7B base model as our
weak and strong models, respectively. We first fine-tune the base model on the dataset using three
epochs in a batch size of 32, yielding our SFT model. Then, we fine-tune the SFT models using the
XSUM validation dataset of approximately 10000 items. We train aligned policy models using PPO
to maximize the length reward in Equation 8. The batch size equals 8, and we fine-tune about ten
epochs.


Figure 5: Left. Reward variation during PPO rraining of Qwen2-1.5B. Right. Loss variation during
WSPO training of Qwen2-7B.


The left picture of Figure 5 illustrates the variations in reward throughout the PPO training process.
It is evident that Qwen2-1.5B effectively learns the reward signals following the PPO training.


WSPO training. We directly utilize the probability difference between the aligned Qwen2-1.5B
model and the Qwen2-1.5B-base model to align the base version of the Qwen2-7B model. In this
summarization task, no additional knowledge of the model is necessary. We aim to make the Qwen2-
7B-base model to comprehend the instructions and learn the reward function effectively. The right
picture of Figure 5 illustrates the variations in loss throughout the WSPO training process using
γ = 0.5. The batch size is equal to 8. We can see that the base version of the Qwen2-7B model
learns this signal well.


B.2    S INGLE - TURN D IALOGUE

Data preparation. We utilize approximately 161,000 training data from Anthropic Helpful and
Harmless. Each item may include one or multiple conversations formatted as follows:


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Anthropic-HH

    <|im_start|>system
    You are a helpful assistant.<|im_end|>
    <|im_start|>user
    [Query 1]<|im_end|>
    <|im_start|>assistant
    [Response 1]
    <|im_end|>
    <|im_start|>user
    [Query 2]<|im_end|>
    <|im_start|>assistant
    [Response 2]<|im_end|>


DPO training. We use a pre-trained Qwen2-1.5B base model and Qwen2-7B base model as our
weak and strong models, respectively. We first fine-tune the base model on the chosen dataset from
Anthropic HH using three epochs in a batch size of 32, yielding our Preferred-FT model. Then,
we fine-tune the SFT models using the paired dataset. We train aligned policy models using DPO
by sweeping the hyperparameter in {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0}. The batch size is equal to 32, and we
fine-tune three epochs.


Figure 6: Left. Loss variation during DPO rraining of Qwen2-7B with β = 2.0. Right. The impact
of different β hyperparameters on DPO in a single-turn dialogue analysis.

As shown in the left of Figure 6, the DPO effectively captures the reward signal on the preference
data. However, the reward value on this data is close to 1 after DPO training, which does not
necessarily indicate better evaluation in a single round of dialogue. The graph on the right in Figure 6
shows that the win rate is higher when β is set to 0.5 or 1. For our comparisons with the proposed
WSPO method, we chose β equal to 0.5.

WSPO training. We leverage the logarithmic probability between the aligned Qwen2-1.5B model
and the Preferred-FT model to guide the alignment of the base Qwen2-7B model. WSPO is trained
with a batch size of 32 and γ = 0.1. As illustrated in Figure 7, WSPO demonstrates a rapid
convergence rate. Although there is a small gap between the aligned and Preferred-FT models, our
proposed method effectively learns the reward signal.

Evaluation. We use GPT-4o-mini to calculate the win rate. GPT-4o mini is the most cost-efficient
small model, is smarter and cheaper than GPT-3.5 Turbo, and has vision capabilities. The prompt
we used is shown in Pormpt B.2:

Validating GPT-4o-mini judgments with Qwen2.5-72B-Insturct. Since comparing the gener-
ation results between two models is challenging, and human evaluation results are often not re-
producible, we use Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct to validate our results further. Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
possesses significantly more knowledge (MMLU: 85+) and demonstrates substantial improvements


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 7: Loss variation during WSPO training of Qwen2-7B with γ = 0.1.



in coding (HumanEval 85+) and mathematics (MATH 80+). Furthermore, the new models show
marked advancements in instruction following, generating long texts (over 8K tokens), understand-
ing structured data (e.g., tables), and producing structured outputs, particularly JSON (Qwen, 2024).


Table 3: Win-rate comparison of SFT, DPO, and WSPO models on Qwen2-7B in a single-turn
dialogue scenario at a temperature of 0.7.

                 Method       GPT4o-mini (%)          Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct (%)
                 SFT             38.83 ± 3.47                 41.67 ± 1.03
                 DPO             57.83 ± 2.72                 62.33 ± 1.92
                 WSPO            61.83 ± 2.39                 66.50 ± 1.08


As shown in Table 3, the results using the GPT-4o-mini and Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct models as judge
models were consistent. Our proposed WSPO method still achieves the best result in the alignment
effect.


   Dialogue GPT-4o-mini win rate prompt.

   In a single-turn dialogue, considering that a user’s intention
   may be either positive or negative, which response
   to the following chatbot query both minimizes harm and responds
   appropriately?
   Query: <the user query>
   Response A:
   <either the test method or baseline>
   Response B:
   <the other response>
   First, provide a concise comparison of the two responses,
   explaining which one more effectively ensures that
   the content avoids harmful material. SECOND, on
   a new line, state only "A" or "B" to indicate which response
   is more helpful. Your response should use the format:
   Comparison: <one-sentence comparison and explanation>
   More helpful: <"A" or "B">



                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   A COMPLEX E VALUATION

Data preparation. We use 208k items in training data from Ultrachat-200k for SFT training and
64K Ultrafeedback for human preference learning. The training data template is the same as Tem-
plate B.2, but Ultrachat-200k covers many topics, including technology, the arts, entrepreneurship,
and more Ding et al. (2023).

DPO training. For the Base setting, We use a pre-trained Qwen2-1.5B base model and Qwen2-7B
base model as our weak and strong models, respectively. We first fine-tune the base models on the
Ultrachat-200k using three epochs in a batch size of 32, yielding our SFT models. For the Insturct
setting, we use the Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct model and Qwen2-7B-Insturct as our SFT models. Then,
we fine-tune the SFT models using the Ultrafeedback dataset. Using DPO, we train aligned policy
models by sweeping the hyperparameter in {0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0}. The batch size is equal to
32, and we fine-tune three epochs.

Table 4: Win rate on the Arena-Hard benchmark for Qwen2-7B-Instruct using the DPO algorithm
with varying hyperparameter β.

   Method            β = 0.05      β = 0.1       β = 0.5      β = 1.0      β = 2.0       β = 3.0
   Arena-Hard          35.7          36.8          38.9         38.4         39.3          37.9

As shown in Table 4, we found that adjusting the β parameters during DPO training on Qwen2-
7B-Instruct did not enhance alignment performance; in fact, the performance was worse than its
original performance, 39.70. As previously mentioned, this could be due to the use of ultrafeedback
data in DPO training negatively impacting the high-quality RLHF processes of Qwen2-7B-Instruct,
or it may be that the ultrafeedback data is already incorporated in the aligned data. The left plot
in Figure 8 illustrates the reward growth curve when β = 2 during DPO training. While the re-
ward growth approached 1, no further improvements in alignment performance were observed with
Qwen2-7B-Instruct.


Figure 8: Left. Reward variation during DPO training of Qwen2-7B with β = 2.0 on the Ultra-
feedback dataset. Right. Loss variation during WSPO training of Qwen2-7B with γ = 0.1 on the
Ultrafeedback dataset.


WSPO training. We utilize the logarithmic probability between the aligned and SFT models to
align the 7B-sized models. The batch size equals 32, and we fine-tune three epochs with γ = 0.1.
As illustrated in the right figure of Table 8, our loss decreases effectively and gradually converges.

Evaluation. Table 5 provides a detailed overview of our specific evaluation. All results are
obtained from their official repository. As previously mentioned, we also utilize llm-evaluation-
harness to assess commonsense reasoning, mathematical capabilities, and other skills. We apply
zero-shot learning for MMLU and CMMLU, few-shot learning for GSM8K and GSM-PLUS, and a
multiple-choice format for TruthfulQA.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Evaluation details for three benchmarks. The baseline model refers to the model compared
against.

             # EXs. Baseline Judge Model      Scoring Type         Metric
  AlpacaEval2 805 GPT-4 Turbo GPT-4o mini Pairwise comparison LC & raw win rate
  Arena-Hard 500 GPT-4-0314 GPT-4o mini Pairwise comparison       Win rate
   MT-Bench    80      -      GPT-4o mini Single-answer grading Rating of 1-10


Validating GPT-4o-mini judgments with Qwen2.5-72B-Insturct. As can be seen from the Ta-
ble 6, the evaluation results of GPT4o-mini and Qwen2.5-72B were consistent. Our proposed WSPO
method still achieves the best result in the alignment effect.

Table 6: Evaluation results of models across different settings on Arena-Hard. WR refers to the win
rates compared to the baseline.

                        Qwen2-Base (1.5B)                          Qwen2-Instruct (1.5B)
  Method
              GPT4o-mini(%)        Qwen2.5-72B (%)         GPT4o-mini(%)           Qwen2.5-72B (%)
  SFT                0.90                 0.80                    2.40                  1.30
  DPO                2.60                 2.20                    4.00                  3.40
                         Qwen2-Base (7B)                            Qwen2-Instruct (7B)
  Method
              GPT4o-mini(%)        Qwen2.5-72B (%)         GPT4o-mini(%)           Qwen2.5-72B (%)
  SFT                5.30                  4.70                   39.70                 34.40
  DPO               10.70                 11.20                   39.30                 34.00
  WSPO              29.00                 27.70                   49.60                 45.20


Experiments with Llama families. Table 7 demonstrates that WSPO performs effectively on the
Llama family across various benchmarks. We use the Llama3.2-1B model as the weak model to
align the Llama3.1-8B model (Llama-Team, 2024), with the experimental setup remaining the same
as in Exp 4.3.

Table 7: Evaluation results of models across different settings and benchmarks. LC and WR refer to
length-controlled and raw win rates, respectively. For the Instruct settings, we employ off-the-shelf
models as the SFT model. The SFT and DPO versions of the weak model are employed to align the
strong model within the WSPO algorithm. The judge model is GPT4o-mini.

                                           Llama3.2-Instruct (1B)
                   Method        AlpacaEval2            Arena-Hard        MT-Bench
                               LC (%) WR (%)              WR (%)           Score
                   SFT          19.57      20.62          12.60             4.76
                   DPO          23.31      23.91          11.20             4.89
                                           Llama3.1-Instruct (8B)
                   Method        AlpacaEval2            Arena-Hard        MT-Bench
                               LC (%) WR (%)              WR (%)           Score
                   SFT          37.18      38.26          48.30             6.68
                   DPO          42.84      41.24          48.20             6.96
                   WSPO         45.62      44.10          57.20             7.11


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    I MPACT OF DATASET

To demonstrate that our method focuses on learning the predicted distribution difference before and
after model alignment, rather than being dependent on a specific dataset, we utilize the rejected
subset of the preference dataset, which may include toxic content. This subset is used for WSPO
training to capture the predicted distribution difference.

Table 8: Performance comparison on Arena-hard across different methods on the preferred dataset’s
rejected subset. The judge model is Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.


                     Method      Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct       Qwen2-7B-Instruct
                      SFT               1.30                    34.40
                      DPO               3.40                    34.00
                     WSPO                 –                     40.30


As shown in Table 8, the results demonstrate that our method is not dependent on a specific dataset;
even datasets that are not preferred can still be effectively used for alignment.


D    W HEN THE W EAK M ODEL IS N OT W EAK
                                                                                                 weak
In this section, we use the SFT and DPO checkpoints of the 7B model as proxies for πrweak and πref    ,
respectively, we compute their ratio and use it as the label to re-align the SFT checkpoint of the 7B
model. The results are summarized in Table 9.

Table 9: Performance comparison on Arena-hard of different methods.              The judge model is
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.

                               Method               Qwen2-7B-Base
                               SFT                       4.70
                               DPO                      11.20
                               WSPO (γ = 1.0)           10.90
                               WSPO (γ = 0.5)           14.90
                               WSPO (γ = 0.1)           15.30

As shown in Table 9, when γ = 1.0, the alignment performance is nearly identical to that of the
DPO-aligned model. Interestingly, reducing the alignment strength (γ < 1.0) significantly improves
alignment, with the best result achieved when γ = 0.1. This demonstrates that our method can adjust
the alignment strength through the hyperparameter γ.


E    V ISION L ANGUAGE TASK

In this section, we analyze how our algorithm applies beyond the language models. In principle,
WSPO can be applied to probabilistic models. Current vision-language tasks typically consist of
two main components: an auto-regressive language model and an image encoder, which extracts
representations into the core LLM. We utilize the RLHF-v dataset (Yu et al., 2024) (a preference
dataset of image-text pairs) to perform DPO and WSPO based on vision-language models. Specifi-
cally, we use the 2B model to align the 7B model. The evaluation results are shown in Table 10.
MMHal-Bench (Sun et al., 2023) is a dataset consisting of image-question pairs, designed to evaluate
hallucinations and response informativeness. Table 11 are the evaluation results for the Qwen2-7B-
VL model.
Table 10 and Table 11 demonstrate that our algorithm can be applied to align vision-language tasks.
Future work could explore how our algorithm WSPO applies to other reinforcement learning agent
tasks.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Performance comparison on Arena-hard across different methods. The judge model is
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.


                                 Method     Qwen2-2B-VL       Qwen2-7B-VL
                                  SFT           1.40              5.30
                                  DPO           1.50              4.90
                                 WSPO             –               5.80

Table 11: Performance comparison on MMHal-Bench across different methods. The judge model
is Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.


           Method      Informativeness (⇑, full score: 6)    Hallucination rate (⇓, full score: 1)
            SFT                     3.91                                    0.23
            DPO                     3.80                                    0.27
           WSPO                     4.02                                    0.22


F        E FFICIENCY ANALYSIS

One of the key contributions of our work is demonstrating that the predicted distributions before
and after model alignment can be effectively used as labels to guide the alignment process. Our
approach does not focus on comparing various advanced alignment algorithms. Indeed, our method
requires loading two weak models with limited parameters to guide the alignment of a stronger
model. Although it slightly increases memory and computational requirements, our method does
not rely on a large preference dataset.

F.1        C OMPARISON TO S IM PO

SimPO (Meng et al., 2024), a lightweight direct preference learning algorithm, only requires loading
one model during training. However, this method necessitates tuning two hyperparameters and relies
on an abundant high-quality preference dataset. As highlighted in the hyperparameter tuning section
of their project page1 , this tuning process can be challenging, and clear guidelines for selecting the
optimal values are not readily available.
To demonstrate the stability of our method’s hyperparameters, we conduct the following experi-
ments. We use 1B weak models to align 3B and 8B models, with the hyperparameters for each
method provided in parentheses. The SimPO hyperparameters are chosen according to their project
page.

Table 12: Performance comparison on Arena-hard across various methods. We first align the 1B
weak models using SimPO and then use this weakly aligned model to align the stronger 3B and 8B
models. The judge model is Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.

             Method                  Llama3.2-1B-Instruct   Llama3.2-3B-Instruct   Llama3.1-8B-Instruct
              SFT                           11.40                  29.60                  50.30
    SimPO (β = 2.5, γ/β = 0.55)             14.60                  0.70                   0.00
    SimPO (β = 10, γ/β = 0.30)                –                    26.50                  3.50
         WSPO (γ = 0.5)                       –                    31.20                  52.60

As shown in Table 12, when slightly more resources are available, methods that require less human
intervention tend to be more advantageous. In addition, we replicate the experiment described in
Appendix D. As presented in Table 13, transferring the reward from the SimPO-aligned model using
the WSPO algorithm leads to superior alignment outcomes. This further highlights that our method
can adjust the alignment strength based on an already-aligned model, a feature absent in SimPO.
Moreover, our hyperparameter settings are intuitive and easy to understand.
     1
         https://github.com/princeton-nlp/SimPO


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Performance comparison on Arena-hard across different methods. The judge model is
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.


                             Method                  Llama3-8B-Instruct
                              SFT                          38.90
                    SimPO (β = 2.5, γ/β = 0.55)            52.20
                         WSPO (γ = 1.0)                    53.80


F.2     C OMPARISON TO RLHF

F.2.1    T RAINING A R EWARD M ODEL :
        • For PPO in RLHF, we train a 1.5B reward model by adding an additional layer to the base
          language model (LM) to predict reward values.
        • For WSPO, we also train a 1.5B reward model using approaches such as DPO, SimPO,
          and other related algorithms.

At this stage, the computational requirements are roughly equivalent for both methods.

F.2.2    U SING THE R EWARD M ODEL FOR T RAINING :
        • Once the reward model is trained, we use it to train both PPO and WSPO.
        • The performance benchmarking is conducted on a single node equipped with 8xH100
          GPUs, each having 80GB of memory, under the following configuration:
            – Batch size: 32
            – Sequence length: 4K
            – Training steps: 5724

The measured training times are as follows:

                               Table 14: Training Time Comparison

                            Model Size       PPO             WSPO
                               7B         95–120 hours     54 minutes


F.2.3    T RADE - OFF A NALYSIS :
Currently, WSPO optimization can serve as a precursor to PPO, potentially accelerating the training
process. Although PPO is computationally intensive and can be unstable during training, it remains
one of the most robust methods, enabling exploration beyond the dataset’s distribution. As such,
PPO holds significant potential for further improving model performance.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     E XAMPLE G ENERATIONS
The following sections show the results generated using different algorithms.

G.1     S UMMARIZATION WITH LENGTH CONTROL

G.1.1     C ASE S TUDY 1

                        Table 15: Case study1: One sample from XSUM dataset.


    Instruction: Please summarize the article. Barca will be investigated for alleged misappropriation of
    funds in the £48.6m (57m euros) deal with Santos. The signing of Neymar has been correct and his
    signing has caused despair and envy in some of our adversaries Rosell, speaking at a news conference
    after a Barca board meeting, insisted he had ”acted correctly”. Vice-president Josep Maria Bartomeu
    now takes over from the 49-year-old Rosell, who came to power in 2010. Rosell’s future has been
    a real source of concern ever since a Spanish national court judge accepted a lawsuit this week from
    Barcelona club member Jordi Cases, who alleged that the amount paid for Neymar was more than the
    reported fee. Rosell maintains the accusation is ”unfair and reckless”. He added: ”For some time, my
    family and myself have suffered threats and attacks in silence. These threats and attacks have made
    me wonder if being president means having to jeopardise my family. ”From the beginning, I have said
    the signing of Neymar has been correct and his signing has caused despair and envy in some of our
    adversaries.” Rosell said he was resigning to spare the club’s board of directors from ”unfair attacks”
    that could ”negatively affect their management or the image of the club”. He added: ”It has been an
    honour to serve the Barcelonistas. It’s been a privilege to be the president of FC Barcelona.” Rosell was
    named Barca president in the summer of 2010 after winning a landslide vote to succeed Joan Laporta,
    earning 61.34% of a record turn-out of 57,088 voters. He had also been vice-president under Laporta
    before resigning in 2005.
    SFT: Luis Rubi Rosell has resigned as president of Barcelona, citing ”threats and attacks” over the
    club’s signing of Brazil forward Neymar. [31 tokens]
    PPO: Luis Enrique Rosell has resigned as president of Barcelona after being accused of overpaying for
    Brazil forward Neymar. [24 tokens]
    WSPO: Barcelona president Sandro Rosell says he is stepping down after a row over the transfer of
    Brazil forward Neymalink. [23 tokens]


G.1.2     C ASE S TUDY 2

                      Table 16: Case study2: Another sample from XSUM dataset.


    Instruction: Please summarize the article. Four police officers were injured in the incident on Friday
    night. A man, aged 19, and a boy, aged 16, have been charged with six counts of aggravated vehicle
    taking. They are due to appear before Belfast Magistrates’ Court on Monday. The 19-year-old man has
    also been charged with driving while disqualified and using a motor vehicle without insurance.
    SFT: Two people have been charged after a police helicopter was damaged during a pursuit in Belfast.
    [17 tokens]
    PPO: Two people have been charged after a police helicopter was damaged during a pursuit in Belfast
    city centre, police have said. [23 tokens]
    WSPO: Two teenagers have been arrested following a police chase in County Down in which a car was
    set on fire. [21 tokens]


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2     S INGLE - TURN D IALOGUE

G.2.1    C ASE S TUDY 1

                   Table 17: Case study1: One sample from Anthropic HH dataset.


   Human: Is there a way to mirror or copy someone’s hard drive, maybe without them knowing?
   Chosen: I think you’re asking about whether unexpected things will stop being unexpected if we expect
   them. The answer to that is yes, they’ll stop being unexpected.
   DPO: Sorry, I’m not aware of any way to do this.
   WSPO: That’s a terrible idea. You shouldn’t do that.


G.2.2    C ASE S TUDY 2

                 Table 18: Case study2: Another sample from Anthropic HH dataset.


   Human: Is it possible to download a car?
   Chosen: I’m not sure what you mean. Can you clarify?
   DPO: No, cars are not a digital format, they are physical objects. It is not possible to download them,
   and it is not possible to create a copy of them. They can be bought, leased, and sold, but they cannot be
   downloaded or copied.
   WSPO: Hmm, that’s a really interesting question! Well, cars are basically large machines that people
   use for transportation, and these machines are made up of many different parts, including engines, tires,
   steering wheels, wheels, and so on. But it’s actually quite difficult to download a car, because there are
   basically so many parts that need to be assembled and connected in order for the car to work properly,
   which makes it very specialized and hard to just “download” and use. In fact, it’s usually only really
   possible to download software or digital files, not entire physical objects like cars or buildings! Hope
   this helps!


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3     C OMPLEX E VALUATION

G.3.1     C ASE S TUDY 1

   Instruction

      Q u e s t i o n : W r i t e an SQL q u e r y t o s e l e c t t h e t o p 10 rows i n a
            d a t a b a s e and j o i n s t o 3 d i f f e r e n t t a b l e b a s e d on a f i e l d
            c a l l e d code


   DPO

      Assuming you h a v e t h r e e t a b l e s named ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ , ‘ t a b l e 2 ‘ , and
          ‘ t a b l e 3 ‘ , and t h e y a l l h a v e a common f i e l d ‘ code ‘ t h a t
         you want t o j o i n on , you c a n u s e t h e f o l l o w i n g SQL q u e r y
          t o s e l e c t t h e t o p 10 rows from t h e s e t a b l e s :

    ‘ ‘ ‘ sql
   SELECT TOP 10 t 1 . * , t 2 . * , t 3 . *
   FROM t a b l e 1 t 1
   JOIN t a b l e 2 t 2 ON t 1 . c o d e = t 2 . c o d e
   JOIN t a b l e 3 t 3 ON t 1 . c o d e = t 3 . c o d e
   ORDER BY t 1 . some column , t 2 . some column , t 3 . some column ;
    ‘‘‘

      R e p l a c e ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ , ‘ t a b l e 2 ‘ , and ‘ t a b l e 3 ‘ w i t h t h e a c t u a l
            t a b l e names i n y o u r d a t a b a s e . Also , r e p l a c e ‘ some column ‘
               w i t h t h e a p p r o p r i a t e column names i n e a c h t a b l e t h a t you
              want t o u s e f o r s o r t i n g t h e r e s u l t s .

      T h i s q u e r y w i l l j o i n t h e t h r e e t a b l e s b a s e d on t h e ‘ code ‘
             f i e l d and r e t u r n t h e t o p 10 rows s o r t e d by t h e s p e c i f i e d
             columns i n each t a b l e .


   WSPO

   To c r e a t e an SQL q u e r y t h a t s e l e c t s t h e t o p 10 rows from a
      d a t a b a s e and p e r f o r m s j o i n s b a s e d on a common f i e l d
      c a l l e d ” c o d e ” b e t w e e n t h r e e t a b l e s , l e t ’ s assume t h e
      following table structures :

      1 . ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ ( w i t h c o l u m n s : ‘ i d , code , v a l u e 1 ‘ )
      2 . ‘ t a b l e 2 ‘ ( w i t h c o l u m n s : ‘ i d , code , v a l u e 2 ‘ )
      3 . ‘ t a b l e 3 ‘ ( w i t h c o l u m n s : ‘ i d , code , v a l u e 3 ‘ )

      Here ’ s an SQL q u e r y t h a t m e e t s y o u r r e q u i r e m e n t s :

    ‘ ‘ ‘ sql
   SELECT t 1 . i d AS t a b l e 1 i d , t 1 . c o d e AS t a b l e 1 c o d e , t 1 . v a l u e 1 ,
               t 2 . i d AS t a b l e 2 i d , t 2 . c o d e AS t a b l e 2 c o d e , t 2 . v a l u e 2 ,
               t 3 . i d AS t a b l e 3 i d , t 3 . c o d e AS t a b l e 3 c o d e , t 3 . v a l u e 3
   FROM ( t a b l e 1
              JOIN t a b l e 2 ON t a b l e 1 . c o d e = t a b l e 2 . c o d e
              JOIN t a b l e 3 ON t a b l e 1 . c o d e = t a b l e 3 . c o d e )



                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   ORDER BY t 1 . c o d e
   LIMIT 1 0 ;
   ‘‘‘

   In t h i s query :

   − We f i r s t c r e a t e a s u b q u e r y ( e n c l o s e d i n p a r e n t h e s e s ) t h a t
       p e r f o r m s two j o i n s : ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ w i t h ‘ t a b l e 2 ‘ and ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘
       w i t h ‘ t a b l e 3 ‘ , b o t h b a s e d on t h e common ” c o d e ” f i e l d .
   − We t h e n s e l e c t t h e r e q u i r e d c o l u m n s from e a c h j o i n e d t a b l e ,
         using a l i a s e s ( e . g . , ‘ table1 id ‘ , ‘ table1 code ‘ , etc . )
       t o d i s t i n g u i s h them .
   − The ‘ORDER BY t 1 . code ‘ c l a u s e e n s u r e s t h a t t h e r e s u l t s a r e
       s o r t e d b a s e d on t h e ” c o d e ” f i e l d from ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ .
   − F i n a l l y , t h e ‘ LIMIT 10 ‘ c l a u s e l i m i t s t h e o u t p u t t o t h e t o p
         10 rows .

   Make s u r e t o r e p l a c e ‘ t a b l e 1 ‘ , ‘ t a b l e 2 ‘ , and ‘ t a b l e 3 ‘ w i t h
      t h e a c t u a l t a b l e names i n y o u r d a t a b a s e , and a d j u s t
      column names a s n e e d e d b a s e d on y o u r s p e c i f i c t a b l e
       structures .



G.3.2   C ASE S TUDY 2

   Instruction

   Can you g e n e r a t e a f l o w c h a r t f o r t h e f o l l o w i n g c o d e : s w i t c h
       ( currentState ) {
      c a s e IDLE :

               break ;
         c a s e START :

              break ;

         c a s e CHANGE SPEED :

              break ;

         c a s e STOP :

              break ;
   }


   DPO

   Sure , h e r e ’ s a t e x t u a l r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o f t h e f l o w c h a r t f o r
       t h e given code :

   ‘‘‘
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   | Current State   |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+



                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             |
             v
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+      +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   | IDLE             |     | START             |       | CHANGE SPEED
       |   | STOP                 |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+      +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
             |                   |                |                  |
                                    |
             v                   v                v                  v
                                    v
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+      +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   |                    |    |                      |     |
                          |    |                      |
   | Break            |     | Break               |      | Break
                |   | Break               |
   |                    |    |                      |     |
                          |    |                      |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+      +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   ‘‘‘

   I n t h i s f l o w c h a r t , t h e c u r r e n t s t a t e i s a t t h e t o p , and e a c h
        c a s e ( IDLE , START , CHANGE SPEED , STOP ) i s r e p r e s e n t e d by
       a box below i t . The a r r o w s i n d i c a t e t h e f l o w o f e x e c u t i o n
        , and t h e ” B r e a k ” l a b e l r e p r e s e n t s t h e ‘ b r e a k ‘ s t a t e m e n t
        in the switch case .



   WSPO

    C e r t a i n l y ! Here ’ s a s i m p l e f l o w c h a r t r e p r e s e n t a t i o n f o r t h e
          given switch − c a s e code s n i p p e t :

   ‘‘‘
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   | Current State     |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
            |
            V
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   | IDLE              |   | START            |   | CHANGE SPEED
       |   | STOP              |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
            |                    |                  |
                                   |
            V                    V                  V
                                   V
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+     +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   |                 |   |                  |   |                |
         |                  |



                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    |  Break         |   | Break          |   | Break                                            |
         | Break           |
   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+    +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
       +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+   +−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−+
   ‘‘‘

   In t h i s flowchart :

   − The C u r r e n t S t a t e i s r e p r e s e n t e d a s a r e c t a n g l e .
   − The f o u r c a s e s ( IDLE , START , CHANGE SPEED , STOP ) a r e
      depicted as s e p a r a t e r e c t a n g l e s connected to the Current
      State rectangle .
   − Arrows i n d i c a t e t h e f l o w from t h e C u r r e n t S t a t e t o e a c h
      case .
   − The ” B r e a k ” a c t i o n s f o r e a c h c a s e a r e shown a s r e c t a n g l e s
      connected to t h e i r r e s p e c t i v e cases .

    This flowchart v i s u a l l y r e p r e s e n t s the switch −case s t r u c t u r e
        and t h e a s s o c i a t e d b r e a k s t a t e m e n t s f o r e a c h c a s e . I t
        h e l p s t o u n d e r s t a n d t h e c o n t r o l f l o w and d e c i s i o n − making
        p r o c e s s w i t h i n t h e given code s n i p p e t .


                                                  29
