Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E MBED LLM: L EARNING C OMPACT R EPRESENTA -
TIONS OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Richard Zhuang∗ Tianhao Wu∗ Zhaojin Wen                   Andrew Li
 Jiantao Jiao Kannan Ramchandran

    University of California, Berkeley



                                               A BSTRACT

              With hundreds of thousands of language models available on Huggingface to-
              day, efficiently evaluating and utilizing these models across various downstream
              tasks has become increasingly critical. Many existing methods repeatedly learn
              task-specific representations of Large Language Models (LLMs), which leads to
              inefficiencies in both time and computational resources. To address this, we pro-
              pose EmbedLLM, a framework designed to learn compact vector representations
              of LLMs that facilitate downstream applications involving many models, such as
              model routing. We introduce an encoder-decoder approach for learning such em-
              beddings, along with a systematic framework to evaluate their effectiveness. Em-
              pirical results show that EmbedLLM outperforms prior methods in model routing
              both in accuracy and latency. Additionally, we demonstrate that our method can
              forecast a model’s performance on multiple benchmarks, without incurring ad-
              ditional inference cost. Extensive probing experiments validate that the learned
              embeddings capture key model characteristics, e.g. whether the model is special-
              ized for coding tasks, even without being explicitly trained on them. We open
              source our dataset, code and embedder to facilitate further research and applica-
              tion: https://github.com/richardzhuang0412/EmbedLLM.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Recent breakthroughs in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Vaswani et al., 2023) have led to the
creation of a vast array of models, each tailored for different use cases. These models, ranging from
small, specialized models to large, general-purpose systems (Hao et al., 2022), differ significantly
in their architecture, size, training data, and performance characteristics. For example, while some
models excel as conversational agents, others may be more suitable for code generation or logical
reasoning tasks. However, with this explosion of diverse LLMs comes a major challenge:

               How to efficiently manage, compare, and utilize the growing number of LLMs?

Traditionally, benchmarking has served as the primary method for comparing LLMs, where each
model is evaluated on a fixed set of test cases, and a score is generated to represent its performance.
Meanwhile, model routing systems are developed to efficiently select models given queries of dif-
ferent types. An example workflow of these tasks can be seen in Figure 2 and Figure 3. While these
approaches are often robust indicators of a model’s strengths and weaknesses, the construction of
their workflows induces repeatedly learning representations of various LLMs to suit each individual
downstream tasks and is therefore time-consuming and compute-demanding.
In response to these challenges, we introduce EmbedLLM, a compute-friendly framework designed
to learn compact vector representations of large language models that facilitates different tasks. Em-
bedLLM map models into a latent vector space that captures important model characteristics. More
importantly, EmbedLLM produces a unified representation that can be simultaneously applied to
various downstream tasks such as correctness forecasting (Section 5.1), model routing (Section 5.2),
and benchmark accuracy evaluation (Section 5.3). The core idea is to enforce this representation
     ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learning through a reconstruction-based system that tries to predict the model’s answer (correct-
ness) from the learned embeddings, ensuring that each model’s embedding retains the most salient
features relevant to enhance performance across multiple scenarios.


Figure 1: An illustration of the EmbedLLM Pipeline. An embedder network is pretrained from sam-
ple question-answer pairs from a pool of LLMs to map them into vector embeddings. Downstream
applications like model routing are adapted by training an additional linear layer on top of these
embeddings.

In summary, our contributions are as follows:
     1. We propose a novel framework based on a reconstruction system for learning compact,
        low-dimensional representations of LLMs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
        work that explicitly introduces the concept of turning LLMs into embeddings.
     2. We introduce an evaluation setup that employs the model embeddings to simultaneously
        predict model answer correctness on unseen questions, perform model routing, and predict
        benchmark accuracy with the addition of only a linear classifier. Our system demonstrates
        the potential for significantly reducing the need for task-specific re-training.
     3. We perform probing experiments to validate that the learned embeddings capture meaning-
        ful information. We discover that models with similar characteristics remain close in the
        embedding space, and that the effect of incorporating each benchmark is reflected through
        the change in model embeddings.
EmbedLLM offers a scalable and unified approach to model evaluation and selection. By producing
embeddings that encapsulate important features across tasks, our framework provides a versatile
method to navigate the increasingly complex landscape of large language models.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Representation Learning There have been numerous attempts to learn representations of various
types of information. For natural languages, Mikolov et al. (2013a) and Pennington et al. (2014) rev-
olutionized the way models capture word semantics. In the field of computer vision, self-supervised
techniques (Noroozi & Favaro, 2017) (Vondrick et al., 2018) are designed to learn low-dimensional
representations that bolster downstream classification or segmentation performances. Inspired by
these work and realizing an increasing demand of various LLMs being trained, we propose a cre-
ative framework to learn embeddings of LLMs.
LLM Benchmarking Benchmarking has been a standard way to compare LLMs, where a collec-
tion of questions/prompts is input to the LLMs and the quality of the corresponding responses is
evaluated. However, with enormous inference cost incurred, current benchmarks typically aggre-
gate model answers to a single accuracy metric, losing valuable insights from the diverse model
responses; our work explores repurposing these inference results to gain a deeper understanding of
model capabilities.
LLM Routing Our work focuses on predictive routing, which is a technique aimed at proposing the
most suitable model given a task, without actually passing the query through each one of them. As


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


summarized in Hu et al. (2024), most routers adopt either a supervised technique (Ong et al., 2024;
Shnitzer et al., 2023) or a reward-based method (Lu et al., 2023). Trained by seeing responses from
different models to the same prompt, these systems are intrinsically building an understanding of
key model characteristics. Our work establishes yet another new interesting and efficient research
direction as we find model embeddings strengthen routing performances.

3     F ORMULATION
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETUP

Let M = {M1 , M2 · · · Mn } be a set of different LLMs, P denote the set of all possible prompts,
and A denote the corresponding set of possible answers. We can simply identify any LLM M with
an inference function mapping from a prompt space to an answer space fM : P → A, which outputs
an answer a ∈ A given a prompt p ∈ P.
Among downstream tasks, representations of different LLMs needed to be constructed in vari-
ous ways. A naive example is benchmarking: Where the crucial part is to select a test prompt
set PBench = {p1 , p2 · · · pm } as well as an scoring function geval : P × A → R, map-
ping model responses to a scalar score. Take MMLU as an example, each model is queried
by a set of multiple-choice questions with four choices. The model’s response is recorded
by comparing the output probabilities of the answer choices “A”, “B”, “C”, and “D”. Then
the responses are simply scored by matching with the ground truth answer key. Within this
process, every model M ’s behavior is essentially summarized by their output on a set of test
questions{(p1 , a(M,1) ), (p2 , a(M,2) ) · · · (pm , a(M,m) )}.


           Figure 2: An illustration of the traditional workflow of LLM benchmarking.

Another example is model routing: given a pool of n LLMs, a router function is defined in Ong et al.
(2024) as a n-way classifier that assigns models to different queries to maximize response quality
while minimize inference cost. Similarly, training such router also often involves in transforming
each model into a relatively low-dimensional representation by utilizing sample question-answer
pairs.
Identifying a common need for model characterization, we raise the question: what if we could
accomplish the above tasks by directly working with a unified, compact representation of LLMs?
In this work, we provide a framework to learn such a representation. We define an embedding
function ϕ : M → Rd , parametrized by a neural network or otherwise, that maps each model M
to a compact vector representation in a latent embedding space. We aim to learn model embeddings
that contain important features of LLMs that are useful to both quantifying differences between
various models and aiding across downstream tasks.

3.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

Evaluating the quality of model embeddings is crucial to ensure they effectively capture the under-
lying structure and semantics of the data which we care about for potential downstream tasks. The
core idea is to use the embeddings to predict model behavior on unseen tasks by training an infer-
ence function ψ : Rd × P → Q, that leverages a model embedding and new test prompts to predict
a model’s performances as quantified by a desired evaluation metric in the space Q. For instance, if


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: An illustration of the traditional workflow of model routing, using exemplar routing
methodologies from Ong et al. (2024)


our task is to predict whether a model can correctly answer an unseen question, the inference func-
tion would be a network that takes in model embeddings and the unseen question (usually present in
the form of its embedding as well) and output a binary label as the prediction of model correctness.
Note that model responses can be evaluated through many means such as determining correctness
(Hendrycks et al., 2021), judging by human (Chiang et al., 2024) or stronger LLMs (Zheng et al.,
2023), or measuring any other task-specific metric. Hence, each task constitute to its own unit of
measure and correspondingly determines an evaluation metric. In this work, we focus on evaluating
on the following downstream tasks:

       • Correctness Forecasting: We query the models on benchmarks equipped with ground
         truth answers, and produce binary correctness label for every model-question pair. For this
         task, a natural metric to use would be test prediction accuracy.
       • Model Routing: With the help of a embedding vector of each model, we’re able to develop
         a simple linear router that directly determine the model to be routed to using the probability
         of the answer correctness along with some learnable threshold. We measure the routing
         performance by reporting the average response quality1 , namely the proportion of times a
         router successfully route to an LLM that correctly answers the given query.
       • Benchmark Accuracy Prediction: We treat the embeddings as primary features to train a
         linear model in predicting accuracies on unseen benchmarks (measured from 0% to 100%
         as a percentage). The metric used for this task would be the classical mean-squared-error
         (MSE) for linear regression.

In addition, we could directly compare between embeddings in their raw vector form following
Mikolov et al. (2013b). For instance, models with similar traits should have embeddings that are
closer in L2 distance.

4     E MBED LLM

4.1   M ETHODOLOGY

In order to learn such embeddings, we draw inspirations from image reconstruction algorithms (He
et al., 2022; Ronneberger et al., 2015): we want to learn a “reconstruction” system, where the choice
of the reconstruction target is arbitrary and can be task-dependent. More concretely, let Q be a space
of model performance metric, and M be a set of possible LLMs, m be the number of models, n be
the number of questions/prompts. We want to learn a reconstruction network R : Qm×n → Qm×n
   1
     Note that this metric can be insufficient under a regular routing setting (Ong et al., 2024) as it does not
consider model cost, nevertheless it fits well to our goal of assessing whether our model embeddings effectively
captures the strengths and weaknesses under the context of correctness forecasting.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that optimizes to reconstruct a matrix X ∈ Qm×n , where Xij ∈ Q denotes the model performance
metric for model i on question j. The encoder-decoder architecture ensures the imposure of such
constraint and enforce the model embeddings to efficiently capture the key characteristics of each
model.
In this work, we decide to use the task of predicting model answer correctness as our auxiliary
target, i.e., Q = {0, 1}. Notice that our training objective is only a decoy - any downstream task that
requires understanding of model characteristics would qualify and our ultimate goal is to enforce
the reconstruction network to learn a compact yet information-rich representation of the models in
this process.

4.2      DATASET

We now describe the data collection process of correctness results of various LLMs’ responses to
questions from mainstream benchmarks.
We selected 112 open-sourced models2 of various sizes, with both general purpose LLMs (Zhu
et al., 2024) and specialized LLMs included to ensure comprehensive coverage. Then we aggregated
responses of every model to 36,054 questions from the test sets of MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021),
TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) , SocialQA (Sap et al., 2019), PIQA(Bisk et al., 2019), MedMCQA(Pal
et al., 2022), MathQA(Amini et al., 2019), LogiQA(Liu et al., 2020), GSM8K(Cobbe et al., 2021),
GPQA(Rein et al., 2023), and ASDiv(Miao et al., 2020). The responses to these questions were
acquired and evaluated through using the “lm-evaluation-harness” package (Gao et al., 2023) to give
a binary correctness label for each model-question pair. We performed a random 80%-10%-10%
train-validation-test split on the questions and used the sentence transformer “all-mpnet-base-v2”
(Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) to convert the questions into an initial embedding state of dimension
dimq = 768. Consequently, our question embedding tensor X has the shape (36054, 768) where the
i-th row Xi ∈ Rdimq is the embedding for model i , and our label tensor is essentially a correctness
matrix Y with shape (112, 36054), where the ij-th entry Yij represents the binary correctness of
model i answering question j.

4.3      A LGORITHM

We adopt an encoder-decoder architecture to learn model representations:
Encoder: The encoder consists of a model embedding network and a question embedding network.
Let dimembed be the desired dimension of the model embedding. The model embedding network
ϕm : M3 → Rdimembed maps each model into a latent representation. Similarly, the question
embedding network ϕq : P → Rdimembed maps each questions into a latent representation. In our
setting, the question embedding network is a two-step transformation ϕq = gst ◦ hproj where gst :
P → Rdimq denotes the pre-processing (performed in Section 4.2) that turns each question from text
to an initial embedding space by using sentence transformer, and hproj : Rdimq → Rdimembed is a
projection layer from this original embedding space to the same space as the model embeddings.
Decoder: The decoder is a binary classifier ψ : Rdimembed × Rdimembed → {0, 1} that takes in both
the encoded embeddings of the model and the question, and output whether the model answer the
                                                                          ′                 ′
question correctly. For this work, our decoder is represented as ψ(vm , vq ) = φ(vm ⊙ vq ) where
φ : Rdimembed → R2 is a linear classifier and u ⊙ v represents the Hadamard (element-wise)
product between two vectors. For each model-question pair, this decoder network outputs two logits
p(m,q)0 and p(m,q)1 , and the “correctness score” sm,q = σ(p(m,q)1 −p(m,q)0 ) represent the predicted
probability of the model m correctly answering question q, where σ(x) is the sigmoid function.
Suppose y is the correctness label of model m answering question q, we calculate the following
BCE loss function during training,
                    L(m, q, y) = − (y · log(sm,q ) + (1 − y) · log(1 − sm,q ))             (1)
In essence, this algorithm analogizes to a matrix factorization algorithm, where we learn a n × m
model embedding matrix and a m × p question embedding matrix such that their product recon-
   2
       See appendix for full list.
   3
       In the actual implementation, we give each model an index as an identification in M.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


structs the original n × p correctness matrix. In the following sections, we refer to this algorithm as
EmbedLLM.


5     E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

As described in Section 3.2, we conducted experiment in correctness forecasting, model routing,
and benchmark accuracy prediction to evaluate the quality of the learned embeddings.

5.1   C ORRECTNESS F ORECASTING

For correction prediction, we compare the effect of EmbedLLM to a K-Nearest-Neighbor classifier
(Fix, 1985). In the context of our formulation, although without an explicit embeddings for models,
a KNN-classifier can be seen as using the integration of all question-correctness tuples from a model
as its “embedding”, and making inference from this aggregation. Specifically, given a question and
a model, the classifier outputs the majority vote of whether the model correctly predicts the nearest
neighbor questions. For brevity, we refer to this approach as KNN in the subsequent text. As
mentioned in Section 3.2, we use correctness forecasting accuracy on the test set as the evaluation
metric.
We evaluate the performance of KNN and EmbedLLM across various sizes of training set. We
produce the smaller training sets from randomly subsetting from the full training set. For each
training set, we conduct hyperparameter tuning (number of neighbors for KNN, model embedding
dimension for EmbedLLM) on a fixed validation set and evaluate prediction accuracy using a fixed
test set. The result in Table 1 indicates a better scalability of our method.

                                                           Dataset Size
        Algorithm
                          1K         5K        10K           15K      20K      25K       Full (29K)
         KNN            0.6372     0.7078     0.7107        0.7128 0.7143     0.7146      0.7152
       EmbedLLM         0.6443     0.7331     0.7362        0.7378 0.7390     0.7394      0.7409

Table 1: Performance of predicting model correctness on a fixed unseen test set. The columns
indicate the number of questions in the training set. EmbedLLM constantly outperforms KNN on
training sets of all scale. We see a steady increase in the performance as the dataset size grows,
indicating further scalability of our method.


5.2   M ODEL ROUTING

Using the same correctness data, we can evaluate the quality of using EmbedLLM as router. For
this task, we evaluate the router’s accuracy by measuring the proportion of times it successfully
route to a model that could correctly answer the given query. For a test question qk , we pass it
through the router network along with all n possible model embeddings, producing n correctness
score sM1 ,qk , sM2 ,qk , · · · , sMn ,qk , and check if the model with the highest correctness score cor-
rectly answers the
                 Pmquestion. Aggregating through            all questions, we report the router accuracy as
accrouter = m  1
                     k=1   1  {X   i ∗ ,k = 1} where i
                                                      ∗
                                                        = arg max{sMi ,qk |i = 1 · · · n} is the routed model
and X is the correctness matrix described in Section 4.2.
We compare the performance of the EmbedLLM router with two baselines. The first one is the
single-best model router which always selects the model with the highest accuracy and thus gives a
constant accuracy. The second one is a random router that select each model the same number of
times as the EmbedLLM router, but instead randomly assign models to questions. For this router,
we can calculate its expected accuracy given the proportions of times each model is selected by the
EmbedLLM router. For instance, if our router selects M1 70% of the time, M2 20% of the time, and
M3 10% of the time, the expected accuracy of the random router will be calculated as a weighted
accuracy accweighted = 0.7 ∗ accM1 + 0.2 ∗ accM2 + 0.1 ∗ accM3 . Note that this weighted accuracy
will always be smaller than the single-best model accuracy - we propose this metric as an evaluation
of how well our router direct models to the questions they are good at given a fixed “budget” of
model calls. We report both the overall accuracy across the whole test set and accuracy per source
benchmark.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As seen in Figure 4, EmbedLLM router performs better than both the single-best router and the
random router overall. As the best performing model is re-determined on every benchmark, the
single-best model router performs better for each benchmark than in overall case. Here, EmbedLLM
router achieves near single-best model router accuracy while still managing to utilize the respective
strengths of different models which is shown by the significant difference between accuracies of
EmbedLLM router and weighted router.
Another advantage of EmbedLLM router we find is its high routing speed. On one NVIDIA A100
80GB GPU, it takes in average 3.80 seconds for EmbedLLM router to route 3,000 questions on 50
repeated trials which is basically free compare to the downstream model inference time. Specifically,
compared to the causal LLM router in Ong et al. (2024) that processes less than 50 requests per
second, our router delivers more than 750 model selections, which is 15x faster while selecting
from a much larger model pool (112 models against 2 models for causal LLM router). In addition,
it only takes less than 1GB of peak GPU memory when training a EmbedLLM router using our
dataset, which is 60x cheaper than fine-tuning Llama-3-8B as a router in terms of memory usage.
This illustrates the superiority of EmbedLLM router in both performance, latency, and training cost.


Figure 4: Performance accuracy of EmbedLLM router compared to baselines. EmbedLLM router
performs better across the whole test set and achieves accuracies close to the single-best model on
every benchmark.


5.3   B ENCHMARK ACCURACY P REDICTION

To predict model’s average accuracy on a benchmark B, we trained EmbedLLM using leave-one-out
correctness data, which includes correctness results of all models on all questions except the ones in
B. Then we take the model embeddings directly as features to train a linear regression of the form:
                                                 aE = y
where E is a model embedding matrix with the i-th row representing the model embedding for the
i-th model, and the j-th entry in the vector y corresponds to the j-th model’s average correctness
accuracy on the test benchmark, which is a number from 0 to 1.
For each test benchmark, we conducted 100 random train-test splits on the 112 models contained
in our dataset, trained a linear regression on the training set, and evaluated the correlation between
model embeddings and test benchmark performances on the test set through applying Kendall’s Tau
test4 . From Section 5.3, statistical significance is found in 7 out of the 10 benchmarks, indicating
  4
    The Kendall’s Tau test is a measure of correspondence between two rankings. We use this test to see if
model ability can be correctly ordered simply using a linear system with the embeddings as the only feature.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that model embedding contains information to distinguish between model performances on most
benchmarks.
          Benchmark       Significance
          MathQA                   100
          LogiQA                   100
          MedMCQA                  100
          PIQA                      98
          TruthfulQA                96
          MMLU                      94
          GSM8K                     93
          GPQA                      10
          ASDiv                      6
          SocialQA                   3



Figure 5: Left: Sorted Kendall’s Tau test result of accuracy prediction on the benchmarks. The
“Significance” column represents the number of times with significant correlation detected (at a
5% significance level) out of 100 random model splits. Right: An example comparing actual model
accuracies on MathQA against model accuracies on MathQA predicted from the embeddings trained
without MathQA data.

Notice that this prediction systems works even when we leave out large benchmarks like MMLU,
as our method predicts MMLU accuracy to a statistically significant extent. As number of models,
model sizes and number of benchmarks are still rising rapidly, enabling benchmark accuracy predic-
tion through model embeddings is vital to save both time and compute from repeatedly inferencing
models on every new benchmark with potentially overlapping questions from previous ones.

6     W HAT INFORMATION IS IN THE M ODEL EMBEDDINGS
In this section we describe the probing experiments designed to understand what information is
captured in the embedding.

6.1   S ANITY C HECK U SING S IMILARITY

We expect the model embeddings to satisfy some basic properties: If two models M, M ′ generate
the same answers for every prompt, then their embeddings are the same. Similarly, models with
similar characteristics, trained using similar data, or adopted similar training pipelines should have
similar embeddings, and vice versa. For instance, the model embedding of DeepSeekMath-7B (Shao
et al., 2024) should be more similar to the embedding of other math models like MetaMath-Llemma-
7B (Yu et al., 2023) than to the embedding of Medicine-LLM-13B (Cheng et al., 2024) which is
adapted for biomedical applications. This property is easily fulfilled by EmbedLLM as any two
identical/similar models of such would produce identical/similar correctness result against most
questions.
As a further sanity check, we assign binary labels to the 112 models we have evaluated according
to the following 6 keywords: [7B, 13B, 70B, Coding, Bio/Med, Physics], forming 6 characteristic
communities. For each community, we compare between the average intra-community and inter-
community L2 distance of the embeddings. As shown in Figure 6, for all above 6 communities, the
averaged intra-community L2 distances are smaller than the inter-community ones. This provides a
preliminary guarantee that our embeddings are “meaningful” with respect to distance metrics.

6.2   EMBEDDINGS C APTURE I NTRINSIC C HARACTERISTICS OF B ENCHMARKS

Next, as indicated from Section 5.3, as a set of model embeddings is produced from a fixed
training set, the embeddings seem to capture information of some benchmarks better and over-
look information in some benchmarks. Hence, we design a set of ablation experiments to fur-
ther understand the contribution of each benchmarks in the training data. Specifically, extend-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: The averaged intra-community L2 distance of the model embeddings is closer for all 6
communities selected, suggesting that basic model traits are captured in the latent embedding space.


ing the experiment setup from Section 5.3,we have a question embedding tensor X of shape
(num questions, embedding dimension) and a label tensor Y where Yij is the binary label of
whether model i correctly answers question j, with questions from a set of benchmarks S =
{B1 , B2 · · · Bn }, to measure the effect of incorporating/removing an “contributor” benchmark Bi
on predicting correctness of a “testee” benchmark Bj , we:

       1. Construct two sets of benchmarks Sadded = S \ Bj and Sremoved = S \ (Bi ∪ Bj )
          and produce two new sets of question embedding and label tensor, Xadded , Xremoved ,
          Yadded , and Yremoved , so that only questions containing in Sadded and Sremoved are kept
          respectively.
       2. Train a EmbedLLM embedder separately on (Xadded , Yadded ) and (Xremoved , Yremoved )
          to get two sets of model embeddings Eadded and Eremoved , and respectively perform zero-
          shot benchmark prediction on Bj with 100 random splits of models as in Section 5.3.
          Aggregate the total test mean squared error (MSE) eremoved and eadded .
       3. Take the difference between the two error to compute a contribution score Cij =
          eremoved − eadded which quantifies the improvement on predicting model accuracy on Bj
          when Bi is added in training.

Essentially, we hypothesize that the addition/removal of every training benchmark would be re-
flected through the change in model embeddings, which then induces a performance difference in
benchmark accuracy prediction. With this setup, we produce a n×n (n is the total number of bench-
marks) contribution matrix C where the where the ij-th entry can be extracted exactly as Cij from
the steps above5 . To aggregate the overall effect of one specific
                                                                Pbenchmark Bi as the contributor
benchmark, we compute a row sum of the contribution matrix j Cij . This can be interpreted as
the total improvements of adding benchmark BP   i on predicting model correctness of the rest of the
benchmarks. Correspondingly, the column sum i Cij represents the total amount of improvement
of predicting correctness of benchmark Bj when each of the rest of the benchmarks is added.
Some noticeable phenomenon emerged from this set of experiments6 :

       1. We find that incorporating MMLU into training the embeddings significantly help pre-
          dicting accuracies on other benchmarks. This result matches the comprehensive nature of
          MMLU as it contains questions covering various topics.
   5
     The diagonal entries of this matrix are set default to 0 as it is meaningless to train and test on the same
benchmark.
   6
     We omit results of SocialQA in probing experiments as most of our models perform similarly poorly,
resulting in all model accuracies crowding in the low accuracy region and becoming indistinguishable.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Left: Effect of removing benchmarks on testing all other benchmarks. Higher value sug-
gests that the addition of that benchmark into the training of model embedding enhances predicting
model correctness on the rest of the benchmarks. Right: Effect of removing each of the rest of the
all other benchmarks on the benchmark being tested. Higher value suggests that predicting models’
correctness from the tested benchmark becomes easier when other benchmarks are added into train-
ing.


      2. We find that incorporating other benchmarks into training set would harm the embedding’s
         predictive power on GPQA. This suggests that additional information that the embeddings
         capture from incorporating new benchmarks into training set is unrelated or negatively
         related to model performance on GPQA. In fact, GPQA is an extremely difficult benchmark
         for current LLMs, so this finding aligns with our expectation as model’s ability in answering
         simpler questions clearly do not transfer to answering harder ones.
      3. Additionally, we identify subsets of benchmarks that mutually improve each other’s accu-
         racies when incorporated into training. For instance, there is a total MSE improvement of
         0.271 when GSM8k is incorporated to predicting MathQA, 0.190 when MathQA is incor-
         porated to predict ASDiv, and 0.103 when ASDiv is incorporated to predict MathQA. As
         all three benchmarks are math-related, we can deduce that the level of math knowledge of
         our selected models are indeed learned and reflected in our model embeddings.

7   L IMITATION
Despite the promising results, our work has several limitations. First, our dataset, though effective
in demonstrating the potential of our embeddings with a limited number of samples, is relatively
small. With data from only 112 models, the embeddings we extract are moderately sparse which
limits deeper exploration of relationships between them. Second, EmbedLLM is a static system.
Despite the low cost7 , introducing new models still requires retraining. Lastly, our study is restricted
to correctness-based datasets, leaving other potentially valuable data types, such as text embeddings
of model outputs, unexplored. To address these limitations, we have open-sourced our datasets and
codebase for further research and experimentation.

8   C ONCLUSION
We showcase the possibility of learning an unified, compact representation of LLMs. Through exten-
sive empirical evaluation, our method displays solid performance on correctness forecasting, model
routing, and benchmark accuracy prediction, while significantly reducing the need of retraining and
avoiding repetitive evaluations. Furthermore, we conduct various probing experiment to understand
the information contained in the model embeddings. The results show that our embeddings capture
not only key characteristics of the models, but also properties of the data used to train the embedder.

   7
     Training EmbedLLM on a correctness matrix of around 20,000 questions on 112 models for 50 epochs
with batch size or 2,048 costs 107.71 TFlops, approximately equivalent to the querying a 7B model for 60
times using an input of length 128.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. MathQA: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based
  formalisms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
  Papers), pp. 2357–2367, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1245. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1245.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. Piqa: Reasoning about
  physical commonsense in natural language, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.
  11641.
Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, and Furu Wei. Adapting large language models via reading com-
  prehension. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=y886UXPEZ0.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
 Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
 ica. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04132.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Evelyn Fix. Discriminatory analysis: nonparametric discrimination, consistency properties, vol-
  ume 1. USAF school of Aviation Medicine, 1985.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lin-
  tang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework
  for few-shot language model evaluation, 12 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
  10256836.
Yaru Hao, Haoyu Song, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Zewen Chi, Wenhui Wang, Shuming Ma, and
  Furu Wei. Language models are general-purpose interfaces, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2206.06336.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16000–16009, June 2022.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Qitian Jason Hu, Jacob Bieker, Xiuyu Li, Nan Jiang, Benjamin Keigwin, Gaurav Ranganath, Kurt
  Keutzer, and Shriyash Kaustubh Upadhyay. Routerbench: A benchmark for multi-llm routing
  system, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12031.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.07958.
Jian Liu, Leyang Cui, Hanmeng Liu, Dandan Huang, Yile Wang, and Yue Zhang. Logiqa:
   A challenge dataset for machine reading comprehension with logical reasoning, 2020. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.08124.
Keming Lu, Hongyi Yuan, Runji Lin, Junyang Lin, Zheng Yuan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou.
  Routing to the expert: Efficient reward-guided ensemble of large language models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08692.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shen-yun Miao, Chao-Chun Liang, and Keh-Yih Su. A diverse corpus for evaluating and developing
  english math word problem solvers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 975–984, 2020.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space, 2013a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word
  representations. In Lucy Vanderwende, Hal Daumé III, and Katrin Kirchhoff (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 746–751, Atlanta, Georgia, June 2013b. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/N13-1090.
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
 puzzles, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09246.
Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tianhao Wu, Joseph E Gonzalez,
   M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica. Routellm: Learning to route llms with preference data. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2406.18665, 2024.
Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Medmcqa: A large-scale
  multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Gerardo Flores,
  George H Chen, Tom Pollard, Joyce C Ho, and Tristan Naumann (eds.), Proceedings of the Con-
  ference on Health, Inference, and Learning, volume 174 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 248–260. PMLR, 07–08 Apr 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v174/pal22a.html.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word
   representation. In Alessandro Moschitti, Bo Pang, and Walter Daelemans (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
   1532–1543, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
   3115/v1/D14-1162. URL https://aclanthology.org/D14-1162.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1908.10084.
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien
  Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a
  benchmark, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan LeBras, and Yejin Choi. Socialiqa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.
 09728.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
  Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathe-
  matical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  03300.
Tal Shnitzer, Anthony Ou, Mı́rian Silva, Kate Soule, Yuekai Sun, Justin Solomon, Neil Thompson,
  and Mikhail Yurochkin. Large language model routing with benchmark datasets, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15789.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1706.03762.
Carl Vondrick, Abhinav Shrivastava, Alireza Fathi, Sergio Guadarrama, and Kevin Murphy. Track-
  ing emerges by colorizing videos, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09594.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James T Kwok, Zhen-
  guo Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12284, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Evan Frick, Tianhao Wu, Hanlin Zhu, Karthik Ganesan, Wei-Lin Chiang, Jian Zhang,
  and Jiantao Jiao. Starling-7b: Improving helpfulness and harmlessness with rlaif. In First Con-
  ference on Language Modeling, 2024.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by NSF Grants IIS-1901252 and CCF-2211209. We sincerely
thank the funding agencies for their support. Additionally, we appreciate the valuable feedback
from the reviewers that helps improve this work.

A     A PPENDIX
A.1   M ODEL L IST

Here is an exhaustive list of models that we extract our dataset from:


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             meta-llama/LlamaGuard-7b                             meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf
                    01-ai/Yi-34B-Chat                             meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf
          WizardLM/WizardLM-70B-V1.0                                    allenai/tulu-2-dpo-70b
                 lmsys/vicuna-13b-v1.5                                  lmsys/vicuna-33b-v1.3
                 Qwen/Qwen-14B-Chat                             upstage/SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0
             openchat/openchat-3.5-0106                                 openchat/openchat-3.5
        berkeley-nest/Starling-LM-7B-alpha                         HuggingFaceH4/zephyr-7b-beta
               TheBloke/tulu-30B-fp16                             mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1
               tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct                            lmsys/vicuna-13b-v1.5-16k
       codellama/CodeLlama-34b-Instruct-hf                    TheBloke/WizardLM-13B-V1.2-GGUF
                  lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5                            NousResearch/Nous-Hermes-13b
              project-baize/baize-v2-13b                              lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5-16k
              mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct                            meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
               TheBloke/koala-13B-HF                                nomic-ai/gpt4all-13b-snoozy
  h2oai/h2ogpt-gm-oasst1-en-2048-open-llama-13b                         mosaicml/mpt-7b-chat
                databricks/dolly-v2-12b                          stabilityai/stablelm-tuned-alpha-7b
   OpenAssistant/oasst-sft-4-pythia-12b-epoch-3.5                deepseek-ai/deepseek-llm-67b-chat
       NousResearch/Nous-Hermes-2-Yi-34B                                  CausalLM/34b-beta
               SUSTech/SUS-Chat-34B                                    SUSTech/SUS-Chat-72B
                     Qwen/Qwen-72B                                     Intel/neural-chat-7b-v3-3
            ibivibiv/alpaca-dragon-72b-v1                           JaeyeonKang/CCK-Asura-v1
            ConvexAI/Luminex-34B-v0.2                               ConvexAI/Luminex-34B-v0.1
  CorticalStack/pastiche-crown-clown-7b-dare-dpo      eren23/ogno-monarch-jaskier-merge-7b-OH-PREF-DPO
              bardsai/jaskier-7b-dpo-v5.6                               FelixChao/Scorpio-7B
          dfurman/HermesBagel-34B-v0.1                               kevin009/llamaRAGdrama
                       sail/Sailor-7B                                AiMavenAi/Prometheus-1.3
                    Q-bert/Optimus-7B                         cognitivecomputations/yayi2-30b-llama
          zhengr/MixTAO-7Bx2-MoE-v8.1                          fblgit/UNA-SimpleSmaug-34b-v1beta
        mistralai/Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1                             microsoft/Orca-2-13b
                 EleutherAI/pythia-12b                           cloudyu/Mixtral-11Bx2-MoE-19B
                   rishiraj/CatPPT-base                                    Deci/DeciLM-7B
                      microsoft/phi-2                                     scb10x/typhoon-7b
                    01-ai/Yi-6B-200K                                          01-ai/Yi-6B
          TigerResearch/tigerbot-13b-base                             augmxnt/shisa-base-7b-v1
                     microsoft/phi-1.5                                    golaxy/gowizardlm
                  bigscience/bloom-7b1                              mlabonne/AlphaMonarch-7B
               CultriX/NeuralTrix-bf16                                shadowml/MBeagleX-7B
             yam-peleg/Experiment26-7B                         deepseek-ai/deepseek-math-7b-instruct
          meta-math/MetaMath-Mistral-7B                  kyujinpy/Sakura-SOLRCA-Math-Instruct-DPO-v1
           FelixChao/llama2-13b-math1.2                        Plaban81/Moe-4x7b-math-reason-code
     MaziyarPanahi/WizardLM-Math-70B-v0.1                            abhishek/zephyr-beta-math
          meta-math/MetaMath-Llemma-7B                                  EleutherAI/llemma-34b
                 EleutherAI/llemma-7b                               FelixChao/vicuna-7B-physics
            Harshvir/Llama-2-7B-physics                            FelixChao/vicuna-7B-chemical
               BioMistral/BioMistral-7B                           BioMistral/BioMistral-7B-DARE
           PharMolix/BioMedGPT-LM-7B                             Biomimicry-AI/ANIMA-Nectar-v2
             codellama/CodeLlama-7b-hf                         codellama/CodeLlama-13b-Instruct-hf
       deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-1.3b-base                  deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-6.7b-instruct
 OpenBuddy/openbuddy-codellama2-34b-v11.1-bf16               TheBloke/CodeLlama-70B-Instruct-AWQ
               AdaptLLM/medicine-chat                                AdaptLLM/medicine-LLM
           AdaptLLM/medicine-LLM-13B                                   Writer/palmyra-med-20b
      SciPhi/SciPhi-Self-RAG-Mistral-7B-32k                   Neko-Institute-of-Science/metharme-7b
      Neko-Institute-of-Science/pygmalion-7b                        SciPhi/SciPhi-Mistral-7B-32k
         shleeeee/mistral-ko-tech-science-v1                   codefuse-ai/CodeFuse-DeepSeek-33B
     WizardLM/WizardCoder-Python-34B-V1.0                                  bigcode/octocoder
            meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B                         meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
           meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-70B                        meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct
        meta-llama/Meta-Llama-Guard-2-8B                              Qwen/Qwen1.5-32B-Chat
               Qwen/Qwen1.5-4B-Chat                                  Qwen/Qwen1.5-0.5B-Chat
               Qwen/Qwen1.5-7B-Chat                               Nexusflow/Starling-LM-7B-beta
                   google/gemma-7b-it                                    google/gemma-2b-it

Table 2: The comprehensive list of the 112 models used to create the correctness dataset. This
dataset is created on May 2025 so models released after that time are not available.
                                               14
