Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONFORMAL P REDICTION S ETS C AN C AUSE
D ISPARATE I MPACT
 Jesse C. Cresswell           Bhargava Kumar ∗                                                      Yi Sui ∗                   Mouloud Belbahri
 Layer 6 AI                   TD Securities                                                         Layer 6 AI                 Layer 6 AI
 jesse@layer6.ai              bhargava.kumar@tdsecurities.com                                       amy@layer6.ai              mouloud@layer6.ai


                                                A BSTRACT
             Conformal prediction is a statistically rigorous method for quantifying uncertainty
             in models by having them output sets of predictions, with larger sets indicating
             more uncertainty. However, prediction sets are not inherently actionable; many
             applications require a single output to act on, not several. To overcome this lim-
             itation, prediction sets can be provided to a human who then makes an informed
             decision. In any such system it is crucial to ensure the fairness of outcomes across
             protected groups, and researchers have proposed that Equalized Coverage be used
             as the standard for fairness. By conducting experiments with human participants,
             we demonstrate that providing prediction sets can lead to disparate impact in de-
             cisions. Disquietingly, we find that providing sets that satisfy Equalized Coverage
             actually increases disparate impact compared to marginal coverage. Instead of
             equalizing coverage, we propose to equalize set sizes across groups which empir-
             ically leads to lower disparate impact.


1       I NTRODUCTION
                                                                                            Human Accuracy Disparate Impact with Prediction Sets
Conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005)                                                                 Treatment:       Avg-k     Marginal     Conditional
                                                                                             Dataset: FACET          Dataset: BiosBias          Dataset: RAVDESS
has emerged as one of the most promising
                                                       Accuracy Disparate Impact (pp)


                                                                                                               3.6                          5
                                                                                        6
methods for uncertainty quantification in ma-
                                                                                                               3.5                          4
chine learning because of its wide applicabil-                                          5

ity, and statistical guarantees based on very few                                       4
                                                                                                               3.4                          3

assumptions. The main use of CP is to trans-                                                                   3.3                          2

form heuristic notions of uncertainty into rigor-                                       3
                                                                                                               3.2
                                                                                                                                            1
ous ones through a calibration step. The output                                         2
                                                                                                               3.1
of a conformalized model is a prediction set –                                                                                              0

                                                                                               Treatment                   Treatment                Treatment
a set of likely outputs. To communicate uncer-
tainty, prediction sets are larger when the model      Figure 1: We measure the increase in accuracy
is more uncertain about the correct answer.            per-group from using prediction sets compared to
                                                       the control population without model assistance.
However, there is a clear drawback to a model          Disparate impact is the maximum difference of in-
that outputs prediction sets. Models are com-          creases between groups, and should be minimized
monly part of decision pipelines where input           for fairness (Equation 7). Prediction sets do not
data is converted into actions. For classifica-        benefit all groups equally, while sets with Equal-
tion, the possible actions are often mutually ex-      ized Coverage (Conditional) lead to the most un-
clusive, such that for a given observation we re-      fair outcomes. Statistical analyses and signifi-
quire a single action in response, not a set.          cance are presented in Section 6.
Still, there are many cases where decisions are not left to a model alone, but require a human in
the loop. For example, society does not yet use machine learning models to make most medical
diagnoses – we prefer human doctors for reasons of safety, accountability, and trust. Nevertheless,
there are ample opportunities for people like doctors to use machine learning tools to improve their
decisions. As uncertainty quantification is a crucial component for trust, it has been argued that CP
sets are a natural fit for such applications (Lu et al., 2022). Indeed, research has shown that providing
conformal sets to humans increases their accuracy on decision tasks (Straitouri & Gomez Rodriguez,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Cresswell et al., 2024; De Toni et al., 2024).
    ∗
        Equal Contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Some of the same research pointed towards a troublesome trend. Cresswell et al. (2024) observed
that when conformal sets were given to humans, their accuracy generally increased compared to a
control population, but not always by the same amount across groups in the dataset. For some groups
accuracy even decreased. This is a major fairness concern. Were a doctor to use prediction sets to
assist with diagnoses, it would be unacceptable for some protected groups to have worse outcomes
with prediction sets than without.
The fairness of CP has been considered previously by Romano et al. (2020a) who focused on the
coverage guarantee that error rates will be no higher than a user-specified tolerance. However, CP
controls the error rate only on average across the entire data distribution, and may fluctuate between
groups within the distribution. Hence, Romano et al. (2020a) proposed a new fairness standard –
that all groups should have Equalized Coverage. Since then, researchers broadly have accepted that
equalizing coverage across groups is fair (Lu et al., 2022; Berk et al., 2023b; Ding et al., 2024).
In this work, we focus on the fairness of prediction sets used for human-in-the-loop decision
pipelines. Our aim is to provide the first scientific evidence as to the fairness of using CP sets
in practical settings. Through pre-registered, randomized controlled trials with human participants,
we find that prediction sets can lead to disparate impact – the increases in accuracy compared to the
control population are not equal across groups (Figure 1). This alone would be cause for concern,
but, distressingly, we further find evidence that applying Equalized Coverage leads to even more
unfair outcomes than marginal conformal sets. Hence, we expose a major discrepancy between how
fairness has been treated in the literature on CP, and fairness outcomes in practice. We advocate that
practitioners move away from Equalized Coverage and instead aim for Equalized Set Size, which
correlates strongly with reduced disparate impact.

2     BACKGROUND
We begin with background on CP and other set-predictors, and review relevant fairness notions. For
the sake of brevity, we only consider the setting of classification in our review and experiments.

2.1   C ONFORMAL SET PREDICTORS
CP (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008) is one of the leading approaches to uncertainty quan-
tification in machine learning (Soize, 2017; Abdar et al., 2021), and is aligned with efforts to make
models more trustworthy. Other uncertainty quantification approaches often rely on strong assump-
tions which are unlikely to hold in practice (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017), or require modifications to the model architecture (Neal, 2012). In contrast, CP applies to
black-box models, has no dependence on training data, is distribution free, is valid in finite samples,
and assumes only that test data is drawn from the same distribution as calibration data (Vovk et al.,
1999; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021).
Let us consider inputs x ∈ X ⊂ RD associated with ground truth classes y ∈ Y = [m] where
[m] = {1, . . . , m}, drawn jointly from a distribution (x, y) ∼ P. Given an arbitrary classifier
f : X → [0, 1]m with softmax outputs, CP creates a set-predictor (Grycko, 1993), denoted as
C : X → 2[m] , with the hallmark property that the sets produced by C satisfy a coverage guarantee
                                        P[y ∈ C(x)] ≥ 1 − α,                                       (1)
for an error rate α ∈ [0, 1] which can be chosen a priori by the user (Vovk et al., 1999).
CP achieves coverage by allowing the set size |C(x)| to vary depending on the model’s heuristic
confidence, e.g., the softmax outputs of f . Larger sets indicate greater model uncertainty about x.
To move from f to C, CP carries out a calibration step on a held-out dataset Dcal of ncal datapoints
drawn independently from P. First, one defines a conformal score function s : X × Y → R with
larger scores indicating worse agreement between x and y according to the heuristic uncertainty
notion, and then computes s on all datapoints (x, y) ∈ Dcal . After sorting the scores, one computes
the ⌈(n+1)(1−α)⌉
          n        quantile which we will denote q̂. With the calibration step done, CP sets can be
generated for a test datapoint xtest ∼ P as
                               Cq̂ (xtest ) := {y ∈ Y | s(xtest , y) < q̂}.                        (2)
For any classifier f and any score function s, the CP sets Cq̂ will provide 1−α coverage (Equation 1).


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While valid for any s, the usefulness of CP greatly depends on how s is designed as well as properties
of the model f including its accuracy and calibration (Guo et al., 2017). The research community
has taken great interest in devising score functions that produce sets with the smallest average size.
As long as coverage is maintained, small sets are viewed as more useful for applications including
human decisioning (Cresswell et al., 2024). Some of the most efficient score functions include APS
(Romano et al., 2020b), RAPS (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), and SAPS (Huang et al., 2024).

2.2   C ONDITIONAL C OVERAGE & M ONDRIAN C ONFORMAL P REDICTION
The coverage guarantee in Equation 1 is not totally satisfactory since it holds marginally across the
entire distribution P. Some subgroups within the distribution may receive lower coverage than 1−α,
for example minority groups which are less well represented in the training set of f leading to lower
model accuracy or worse calibration. Ideally, the coverage guarantee would hold for every subgroup
of the distribution, down to individual datapoints – so-called conditional coverage (Foygel Barber
et al., 2020), but unfortunately this has been proved impossible without distributional assumptions
(Vovk, 2012; Lei & Wasserman, 2013). A less strict, and actually attainable goal is group-wise
conditional coverage for a pre-specified grouping g : X → G = [ng ], where each datapoint is
assigned to one of ng groups a ∈ G, and the coverage guarantee applies to each group separately as
                             P[y ∈ C(x) | g(x) = a] ≥ 1 − α,                ∀ a ∈ G.                               (3)
Group-wise conditional coverage can be achieved through Mondrian CP (Vovk et al., 2003; 2005),
which simply partitions Dcal by groups and performs CP as described in Subsection 2.1 on each
group independently. This method can suffer from high variance when ng is large, or individual
groups have scant representation in Dcal , as the effective size of each calibration set could become
too small (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). Methods to circumvent these issues have been explored
(Romano et al., 2020c; Gibbs et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2024).

2.3   N ON - CONFORMAL SET PREDICTORS
While CP is praised for its distribution-free coverage               Algorithm 1: Average-k set prediction
guarantee, it is not the only way to generate high-                  Input: Calibration dataset Dcal , classifier f ,
quality prediction sets (Chzhen et al., 2021). One other              average set size k, test datapoint xtest .
method, average-k set prediction (Algorithm 1), op-                  Y ←[]
timizes for the lowest error rate given the constraint               for (x, y) ∈ Dcal do
E|C| = k, where k ∈ R+ . Avg-k prediction relies on a                      Y .extend(f (x)) // softmax
                                                                     m ← numClasses(Dcal )
calibration step where a quantile qk of softmax scores is
                                                                     p ← 1 − k/m
chosen such that 1−k/m of the scores in the calibration              qk ← quantile(Y , p)
set are below qk . Then, prediction sets are formed as               ytest ← f (xtest ) // softmax
        Cqk (xtest ) := {y ∈ Y | f (xtest )y > qk }.           (4)   return ytest > qk

Optionally, labels y such that f (xtest )y = qk can be randomly added. The avg-k predictor has
optimal error rate under the average size constraint (Lorieul et al., 2021). Since k is allowed to
range over positive real values, a target coverage level 1 − α can be set by computing qk for different
k on a calibration set, and evaluating the empirical coverage on a validation set as
                                                   val n
                                               1 X
                                  1 − α̂k =            1[yi ∈ Cqk (xi )].                                          (5)
                                              nval i
While the avg-k predictor does not have all the features of conformal methods, it still quantifies the
uncertainty of f via variable size prediction sets where larger sets indicate greater uncertainty.

2.4   FAIRNESS OF SET PREDICTORS
In real-world applications of machine learning systems, ensuring fairness is of paramount impor-
tance, especially in highly regulated industries such as healthcare and financial services. The topic
of fairness is incredibly nuanced and cannot be distilled down into a simple set of rules or criteria
that should be followed in all cases. Still, it can be useful to delineate high-level approaches.
Two distinct concepts often guide regulatory frameworks: procedural and substantive fairness. Pro-
cedural fairness focuses on the integrity of the processes involved in developing models and ensures
that all subjects are treated in the same way (Grgić-Hlača et al., 2016). A simple example of proce-
dural fairness in machine learning is when group identifiers (and proxies thereof) are scrubbed from


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a dataset. Hence, any model trained on the remaining data cannot rely on group information at all –
so called fairness through unawareness (Zemel et al., 2013; Kusner et al., 2017).
In contrast, substantive fairness focuses on outcomes, aiming for equitable decisions even if groups
are not always treated the same (Dwork et al., 2012). Aligned notions include Equalized Odds and
Equalized Opportunity which explicitly use group identifiers to ensure that beneficial outcomes are
equally likely across groups (Hardt et al., 2016). Substantive fairness can be measured by computing
disparate impact for a given metric related to outcomes (Feldman et al., 2015; Esipova et al., 2023).
For our set predictors, the relevant metric is the accuracy of humans on a classification task, and
hence we consider the change in per-group accuracy when prediction sets are supplied to humans
compared to unassisted decisions,
                  δt,a := acct [x ∈ D | g(x) = a] − acccontrol [x ∈ D | g(x) = a],                  (6)
where t ∈ T denotes the treatment indicating which set prediction method was used. The disparate
impact of providing prediction sets can be written as
                                      ∆t := max (δt,a − δt,b ),                                     (7)
                                              a,b∈G

where the maximization is done over all pairs of groups. A treatment which has the same benefi-
cial effect on all groups achieves zero disparate impact and is substantively fair. When comparing
other quantities between groups, like coverage or set size, we use a similar ∆ notation although the
comparison is not with reference to a control treatment, e.g.
                ∆Cov := max (P[y ∈ C(x) | g(x) = a] − P[y ∈ C(x) | g(x) = b]) .                     (8)
                          a,b∈G

The main definition of fairness used in the context of CP is Equalized Coverage (Romano et al.,
2020a) which says that all protected groups in the dataset should receive the same level of coverage.
Equalized Coverage, expressed formally as ∆Cov ≈ 0, is simply group-wise conditional coverage
(Subsection 2.2) over protected groups. Researchers have widely adopted the notion that equalizing
coverage is sufficient for ensuring fairness, e.g. Ding et al. (2024) state that with Equalized Cover-
age “prediction sets ... are effectively ‘fair’ with respect to all classes, even the less common ones”.
In our context it is clear that Equalized Coverage aligns with the concept of procedural fairness.
Coverage is not an outcome – it is a byproduct of how CP quantifies uncertainty about some under-
lying task. As we shall demonstrate, equalizing coverage does not translate into fair outcomes on
the underlying tasks, in fact it exacerbates disparate impact.

3   R ELATED W ORK
Investigations of the fairness of CP methods began with Equalized Coverage which has remained
the standard framework. Romano et al. (2020a) presented a case study where Mondrian CP achieved
Equalized Coverage on a medical dataset at the cost of an increased discrepancy between per-group
set sizes. Recently, Wang et al. (2024) proposed Equalized Opportunity of Coverage, which takes
account of the class label when equalizing coverage between groups. Since its focus is on coverage
and not actual outcomes, it still falls under the notion of procedural fairness.
Several works have applied CP to sensitive datasets where fairness considerations are necessary
(Lu et al., 2022; Kuchibhotla & Berk, 2023; Berk et al., 2023a). For instance, Lu et al. (2022)
discussed how conformal sets could assist medical doctors and specified Equalized Coverage as
a desirable prerequisite, although no experiments with doctors were conducted. Straitouri et al.
(2024) considered how restricting humans to choose their answer only from a prediction set can
cause harm. Other researchers aspired to make CP more fair, such as Liu et al. (2022) who applied
demographic parity to conformalized quantile regression (Romano et al., 2019), or Deng et al. (2023)
who generalized multicalibration (Hebert-Johnson et al., 2018) to conformal methods, and Zhou &
Sesia (2024) who adaptively identified under-covered groups and increased their set sizes to achieve
Equalized Coverage.
Researchers have also considered the fairness of uncertainty quantification methods beyond set-
predictors. Calibration is an essential prerequisite for uncertainty quantification which stands in
tension with fairness requirements (Pleiss et al., 2017). Ali et al. (2021) advocate that fairness
approaches should focus on errors from epistemic uncertainty, Kuzucu et al. (2023) identify that
models may appear fair according to point predictions while providing biased uncertainty estimates,
and Mehta et al. (2024) explore the impact of applying fairness methods on uncertainty estimates.

                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Data         Model       Conformal Prediction      Test Data Samples        Human Accuracy
                                                                                            Control
    Group e - Easy                          Marginal
                                      Coverage Set Size

                                90%
                                                                                           Marginal

                                        e    h   e     h
                                                            90% in 90% in
                                        Conditional        { , }{ , , }
                     Accuracy         Coverage Set Size                                   Conditional

                                90%
    Group h - Hard                                          90% in   90% in
                      e   h             e    h   e     h     { } {   , , ,     }             e   h


Figure 2: Illustration of how unfairness can arise in CP. Given a data distribution P with groups of
differing difficulty, a model f may have inherent bias. Using marginal CP can translate to lower
coverage and larger sets for the harder group. To equalize coverage, conditional CP must increase
set sizes on the harder class, and reduce them on the easier class. Since human accuracy correlates
strongly with set size, not coverage, outcomes become more unfair with Equalized Coverage.



4      H YPOTHESES & M ETHOD

4.1     H YPOTHESES

Suppose f was trained on a dataset with some inherent bias, or that groups naturally vary in difficulty
such that f has different accuracy on two groups e and h (“easy” and “hard”). Marginal CP using
a sensible score function will tend to overcover examples from e and undercover examples from h.
To achieve group-wise conditional coverage instead of marginal, the coverage on e must decrease,
while the coverage on h increases. For a fixed model f and score function s, the only way to
increase coverage on h is to increase the number of classes added to prediction sets for h – in other
words, average set size must increase for h, and correspondingly decrease for e. If set sizes were
comparable across groups for marginal sets, then conditionally covered sets will tend to have more
unequal average set sizes across groups. Essentially, there is a tradeoff between equalizing coverage,
and equalizing set size.
On its own this tradeoff is not directly connected to the substantive fairness of using prediction
sets. However, it has been observed in previous studies that it is set size, not coverage, which
has the greatest influence on human accuracy, and therefore on outcomes (Cresswell et al., 2024).
Together, these facts imply that equalizing coverage will create more imbalanced set sizes which
will propagate into more biased human performance. The proposed mechanism by which equalizing
coverage with Mondrian (conditional) CP causes disparate impact is illustrated in Figure 2.
Based on the above discussion, we propose two hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1 Prediction sets supplied to human decision makers can cause disparate impact in the
human’s performance.

In particular, if a model has biased performance across groups, marginal CP will tend to produce
unequal set sizes which will in turn provide uneven utility to human decision makers.
Hypothesis 2 Prediction sets created with Mondrian CP to ensure Equalized Coverage will cause
greater disparate impact than marginal prediction sets.

The use of Mondrian CP or similar methods to equalize coverage will benefit groups that have higher
model accuracy more than groups with low accuracy, producing a Matthew effect where “the rich
get richer”, instead of a more equitable Robin Hood effect (Ganev et al., 2022).
The remainder of this paper investigates whether these hypotheses can be supported by data, along
with the claim that set size has greater influence on human accuracy than coverage.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2     M ETHOD
We conduct randomized controlled trials with human subjects to discern the impact of various set
prediction methods on per-group accuracies, and measure potential disparate impacts. Our hypothe-
ses, experiments, and analysis plans were pre-registered.1 In each experiment, paid human vol-
unteers are asked to complete a challenging task and are provided prediction sets from a trained
machine learning model (or for the control, no assistance is given). The sets are constructed either
with marginal coverage guarantees (Equation 1), group-wise conditional coverage through Mon-
drian CP on a specified grouping (Equation 3), or via the avg-k method (Equation 4). In all cases
the same model is used, aiming for the same coverage level over Dcal . We call these four options
treatments, and refer to them as control, marginal, conditional, and avg-k.
We conduct independent experiments on three distinct tasks. For each task, N unique participants
are recruited and are randomly but evenly partitioned into the four treatments. During the experi-
ments we conduct M sequential trials, each where the participant is shown a datapoint from Dtest ,
drawn i.i.d. from the same distribution as Dcal , along with a prediction set and a stated coverage
guarantee (except for the control). No other information from the model such as softmax scores is
given. The tasks are each designed as forced choices where participants must select one class y out
of all m available classes, and only one class is considered correct.
Given data collected in this way we can compute the accuracy improvements (Equation 6) and
disparate impact (Equation 7) for each treatment directly. However, this direct analysis would not
account for the design of the experimental method which could result in overconfident inferences
(Yarkoni, 2022). In particular, each participant provides multiple responses, participants may have
different inherent ability levels on their task, and samples drawn from Dtest can also have different
inherent difficulties. Hence, our formal statistical analysis models human performance on the tasks
using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEEs).2 GEEs can be seen as Generalized Linear Models
for clustered responses that take into account intra-participant response correlations (Liang & Zeger,
1986). Hence, GEEs are a suitable choice since each participant represents a cluster of responses.
Formally, we denote the response variable by correcti,j , indicating whether participant i selected
the correct label for trial j. Additionally, we consider the following covariates: (i) treati denoting
the treatment participant i is randomly assigned to; (ii) groupi,j which is the protected group for
trial j that participant i sees; and (iii) diff i,j , the marginal conformal set size of trial j shown to
participant i, which acts as a proxy for the inherent difficulty of that datapoint.
For each task, we fit GEEs to estimate a marginal model for the effect of treat on the participants
correct responses, controlling for group and diff covariates. The model can be expressed as
                           logit(E[correcti,j ]) ∼ treati × groupi,j + diff i,j ,                    (9)
                                                                  x
for i = 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , M , where logit(x) = log 1−x , and the notation A × B indicates
an interaction between covariates A and B.
Alongside empirical estimates of the standard errors, it is straightforward to derive odds ratios (ORs)
from the GEE model. ORs allow us to estimate how much more likely a participant in treatment t
is to give the correct answer than if they were in the control, which is another way of expressing
the expected accuracy improvement due to t (c.f. Equation 6). For the sake of clarity, we give the
formal description below. Let pt,a := P̂(correct = 1 | treat = t, group = a) be the probability of
a correct answer under the GEE model, conditional on treatment and group. For treatment t, and for
every protected group a, the OR of t versus control is given by
                                                  pt,a /(1 − pt,a )
                                 ORt,a :=                                  .                        (10)
                                             pcontrol,a /(1 − pcontrol,a )
The interpretation of ORt,a is simple. For example, ORt,a = 1.4 means that for trials representing
group a, the odds for participants assigned to treatment t to give the correct answer are 40% higher
compared with participants assigned to the control treatment.
To assess the disparate impact caused by any treatment for Hypothesis 1, we can compare ORs
between groups. We define the ratio of ORs (RORs) for treatment t and groups a and b as
   1
       The pre-registration is viewable at osf.io/75hm9.
   2
       We use the GEE implementation from the statsmodels python package.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RORt,a,b := ORt,a /ORt,b . When RORt,a,b ≈ 1, treatment t provides the same advantage
over the control for group a as it does for group b which is a fair outcome. Hence, a value of
RORt,a,b greater than 1 for some pair (a, b) indicates that t causes disparate impact, and so we
report the maximum ROR between pairs of groups as a descriptive statistic (c.f. Equation 7),
                                maxRORt := max RORt,a,b .                                    (11)
                                                       a,b∈G
Finally, to assess whether equalizing coverage increases unfairness for Hypothesis 2, we compare
maxRORMarg to maxRORCond . If the latter value exceeds the former, it indicates that equaliz-
ing coverage amplifies disparate impact relative to the marginal treatment.

5     E XPERIMENTS & E VALUATION
5.1   TASKS , DATASETS , AND M ODELS
Using open-access datasets from the machine learning fairness literature, we created three tasks
where human decision makers could potentially take advantage of model assistance.
Image Classification Image classification is performed by humans daily in impactful settings, for
example by radiologists who view X-ray images from patients of all ages. For a similar setting we
used the FACET dataset (Gustafson et al., 2023) of images of people, labeled by their occupation
with grouping by age. We used the 20 most common classes and split the dataset into Dcal , Dcalval ,
and Dtest stratified by class. The age annotations come in four pre-defined groups: Younger, Middle,
Older, and Unknown. We used CLIP ViT-L/14 (Radford et al., 2021) as a zero-shot classifier.
Text Classification Text classification is often used to organize large amounts of text data, for
instance in recruiting where gender bias can easily manifest. As a surrogate task, we employed the
BiosBias dataset (De-Arteaga et al., 2019) which contains personal biographies classified by occupa-
tion, and grouped by binary gender. We selected 10 of the most common occupations and then split
the dataset into Dtrain , Dval , Dcal , Dcalval , and Dtest , ensuring class balance. Dtrain and Dval were used
for classifier training, while the remaining splits were used for prediction set construction. For clas-
sification, we generated representations of the biographies using a pre-trained BERT model (Devlin
et al., 2019; Huggingface, 2024), then trained a linear classifier on these representations.
Audio Emotion Recognition Emotion recognition is performed naturally in human communica-
tion, but emotional expression can vary greatly between speakers of different genders. We utilized
audio recordings from the RAVDESS dataset (Livingstone & Russo, 2018) where female and male
actors convey 8 emotions using the same short phrases. We partitioned the dataset into Dcal , Dcalval ,
and Dtest ensuring stratification by class (emotion) and group (binary gender), and used a fine-tuned
wav2vec2 model (Baevski et al., 2020; Fadel, 2023) for emotion classification.
For all three tasks, we aimed to compare                     Table 1: Model metrics on Dtest
disparate impact between avg-k, marginal,            Task     Top-1 ∆Top-1 Method Cov. Size ∆Cov ∆Size
and conditional prediction sets with target                                Avg-k 90.2 2.52 5.8 1.10
90% coverage. For greater diversity in              FACET 70.0 22.2 Marg. 89.7 2.62 11.4 0.75
approaches to CP, FACET and RAVDESS                                        Cond. 90.0 2.76 2.6 3.16
used the RAPS score function (Angelopou-
los et al., 2021), while BiosBias used SAPS                                Avg-k 88.2 1.52 3.3 0.01
                                                   BiosBias 78.9 2.7 Marg. 89.8 1.69 2.7 0.03
(Huang et al., 2024). The hyperparame-                                     Cond. 89.1 1.70 0.0 0.43
ters of these score functions were tuned on
Dcalval with 50 iterations to minimize av-                                 Avg-k 91.4 1.97 2.8 0.12
erage set size using Optuna (Akiba et al., RAVDESS 71.1 7.8 Marg. 90.8 1.94 3.9 0.07
2019a). Then, each method used Dcal to                                     Cond. 91.4 2.01 0.6 0.71
calibrate its threshold(s) for set prediction. Table 1 displays metrics computed on Dtest for the mod-
els used in each task, including the top-1 accuracy, and for each set prediction method the empirical
coverage and average set sizes. We note that all methods achieve coverage close to 90%, while con-
ditional CP tends to have larger set sizes due to its more stringent requirements. Also shown are the
maximum per-group differences in model accuracy, coverage, and set size defined as in Equation 8.
We note that conditional CP is the only method that achieves Equalized Coverage (∆Cov ≈ 0), but
at the cost of a larger difference in set sizes between groups.
Additional details on tasks, datasets, models, and set prediction methods are given in Appendix A.
Our code is available at github.com/layer6ai-labs/conformal-prediction-fairness.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   E XPERIMENT D ESIGN
We created experiments and hosted them online
with participants recruited through Prolific (Prolific,
2024). To ensure high-quality data, participants
were trained on their specific task and given a fi-
nancial incentive to answer correctly. Each ex-
periment consisted of a task (FACET, BiosBias,
or RAVDESS), and a treatment (control, avg-k,
marginal, or conditional). We recruited 600 partic-
ipants (N = 200 per task, 50 per experiment), and
paid them on average 9.75 GBP per hour, totaling
1500 GBP for participant payment.
During each experiment, participants were first
shown a consent form detailing how their data would
be collected and used. Then, participants were intro- Figure 3: Main trial screen shown to partic-
duced to the task and trained on 20 practice trials ipants for FACET with marginal conformal
which were not used in our analysis. The testing set treatment. The correct answer is given
phase proceeded with M = 50 more trials, an ex- only after the participant responds.
ample of which is shown in Figure 3 for FACET, while detailed task descriptions can be found in
Appendix B. For each trial, participants were presented with a datapoint x along with all m class
labels and were asked to classify x. For the avg-k, marginal, and conditional treatments participants
were also shown a prediction set, accompanied by the expected coverage. There was no time limit
for responses, however for FACET the image x was only displayed for one second to increase task
difficulty. After the class was selected for each trial, the correct answer was revealed.

6     R ESULTS
6.1   D ISPARATE I MPACT M EASUREMENT I N H UMAN S UBJECT E XPERIMENTS
Figure 1 directly visualizes the data we collected, showing the disparate impact on accuracy ∆t
calculated as in Equation 7, treating each trial as an independent observation. We observe that
disparate impact is present for most tasks and treatments (∆t > 0), notably with the conditional
treatment consistently worse. As discussed in Subsection 4.2, each trial is not independent, so we
present Figure 1 only for intuition, and not as formal statistical analysis.
Instead, we applied the more rigorous statistical analysis with GEEs and present the results in Table 2
which shows the ORs of human accuracy for each task and treatment as compared to the control,
along with maximum RORs across groups. We interpret the findings in the context of our two
hypotheses from Subsection 4.1.
Hypothesis 1 supposes that biases from a model can propagate to humans using prediction sets as
an aid and result in disparate impact. Table 1 demonstrates that the models we used have some
biases across groups, with non-zero ∆Top-1 values, which translated to non-zero ∆Cov for the avg-k
and marginal sets. Conditional sets do equalize coverage (∆Cov ≈ 0), but at the cost of greater
discrepancies in set size, ∆Size . From Table 2 we see that in most cases prediction sets were useful
to participants versus the control (ORt,a > 1), supporting previous findings (e.g. Cresswell et al.
(2024)). However, it is clear that the beneficial effect is not experienced equally across groups. For
FACET, the Younger group had the highest model accuracy (Figure 5), and experienced the most
improvement across all treatments. The Older and Unknown groups having lower model accuracy
and minority representation (see Table 4 in Appendix A) saw less improvement, and even some harm
with conditional sets where human performance decreased (ORt,a < 1). Hence, all three treatments
caused disparate impact (maxRORt > 1). Similar results are seen for BiosBias. Even though the
model itself was much less biased (Table 1) and both Female and Male groups benefited when sets
were provided, the amount of benefit was not equally shared. Both FACET and BiosBias show
that providing prediction sets can cause disparate impact, in support of Hypothesis 1. RAVDESS
provides an example that disparate impact need not always occur. Again, both groups benefited from
each treatment, but for the avg-k and marginal treatments the increase actually was commensurate
across groups. For these two treatments the prediction sets did not have equal coverage, but did have
close to the same average set sizes across groups.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Summary statistics from the GEE models: ORt (Equation 10) where values greater than 1
indicate treatment t had a positive effect on human accuracy for group a, and the ⋆ and ⋄ superscripts
indicate significance at 5% and 10% levels respectively; maxRORt (Equation 11), where values
greater than 1 indicate disparate impact – treatment t benefited one group more than another.
Dataset  Group   ORAvg−k ORMarg ORCond maxRORAvg−k maxRORMarg maxRORCond
         Younger  1.19    1.34⋄  1.37⋆
         Middle   1.12    1.20⋆  1.19⋄
FACET                                      1.11       1.26       1.51
         Older    1.17    1.08   0.91
         Unknown  1.07    1.06   0.91
         Female   1.91⋆   1.46⋆  1.91⋆
BiosBias                                   1.34       1.12       1.33
         Male     1.42⋆   1.63⋆  1.44⋆
                       ⋆       ⋆     ⋆
         Female   1.32    1.34   1.43
RAVDESS                                    1.02       1.01       1.28
         Male     1.30⋆   1.36⋆  1.12

Hypothesis 2 proposes that equalizing coverage with the conditional treatment will cause more dis-
parate impact than the marginal treatment. Our data in Table 2 strongly supports this conclusion
where we find that the value of maxRORCond is consistently higher than maxRORMarg . Even
for RAVDESS where the marginal treatment did not show disparate impact, the conditional treat-
ment introduced noticeable bias.

6.2   I NSIGHTS
Key factors impacting the fairness of human performance We aim to identify the factors con-
tributing to ∆t , disparate impact in accuracy improvement, as visualized in Figure 1. ∆t measures
the difference in accuracy improvement over the control group between the most and least improved
groups. To investigate this, we plot in Figure 4 the differences between these groups across four
key factors: coverage, adoption, average set size, and singleton frequency. Adoption measures the
fraction of answers participants selected from the prediction set, while the singleton frequency refers
to how often a singleton set was provided, both of which were identified by Cresswell et al. (2024)
as factors contributing to how helpful prediction sets are to humans. We note that the differences for
these four quantities can be negative because we select the max and min groups based on accuracy
improvement – they are not necessarily the max and min groups respectively for the four quantities.
It is clear that the conditional treatment achieves coverage differences that are closest to zero (Equal-
ized Coverage). However, this does not translate to lower ∆t . Instead, experiments with relatively
large (in magnitude) coverage difference, showed the most fair outcomes (e.g. RAVDESS-Marginal
where the best and worst groups saw coverage levels differ by 4 percentage points, but still had the
same accuracy). Additionally, there is no apparent correlation between coverage difference and ∆t
which implies coverage differences do not drive human accuracy outcomes. One might suppose
that if the participants relied on sets more for some groups than others, disparate impact could arise.
However, like for coverage, we see no strong correlation between the adoption difference and ∆t .
The experiment with the single most fair outcomes also had the largest adoption difference.
By contrast, we see strong correlation between set size differences and ∆t . The most fair outcomes
occur when set sizes are similar across all groups, as for RAVDESS-Marginal, or FACET-Avg-K.
The conditional treatment which increases set size differences in its effort to equalize coverage also
increases disparate impact. Similar to set size, there is also clear correlation between singleton fre-
quency and ∆t . Cresswell et al. (2024) observed that human accuracy on tasks was highest when the
model expressed certainty through singleton sets. Hence, groups with more singletons could expect
higher accuracy, so it is plausible that equalizing how often singletons occur would encourage fair
outcomes, which is what we observe. Users should be aware that group-conditional modifications
such as equalizing singleton frequency are susceptible to Yule effects (Ruggieri et al., 2024).
In summary, our results show that simply equalizing coverage, as is the aim of the conditional
treatment, is not an effective way to promote fair outcomes. Instead, focusing on Equalized Set Size
or Equalized Singleton Frequency could be more useful standards of fairness for set predictors.
The role of group difficulty in disparate impact Figure 5 illustrates accuracy on the FACET
dataset across different age groups for both the model and humans (control), and when broken down
by treatment. We observe that both the model and humans are consistent in which groups they


                                                   9
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 FACET-Avg-K                 BiosBias-Avg-K                                     RAVDESS-Avg-K
                                                 FACET-Marginal              BiosBias-Marginal                                  RAVDESS-Marginal
                                                 FACET-Conditional           BiosBias-Conditional                               RAVDESS-Conditional
Accuracy Disparate Impact
                            6
                            4
                            2
                            0 4        0            5        5               0                   3               3                 0         1     15 0              60
                                    Coverage                         Adoption                                          Set Size                     Singleton Frequency
                                    Difference                       Difference                                       Difference                         Difference
   Figure 4: Accuracy disparate impact ∆t compared to the difference between the most and least
   improved groups across key factors for various datasets and treatments. From left to right: coverage,
   adoption, average set size, and singleton frequency.
                                                 FACET                                                          Human performance improvement for FACET
                            80


                                                                                  Performance improvement
                                                                                                            4
                            60                                                                                                             3.23                 Group

                                                                                         over control
          Accuracy


                                                                                                            2            1.77                                    Younger
                            40                                                                                                                          6.25     Middle
                                                                                                                                                                 Older
                            20                                                                              0                                                    Unknown
                                0    Control                Model                                                Avg-K          Marginal          Conditional

   Figure 5: Accuracy by group for FACET. Left: Human accuracy (Control) and model Top-1 Accu-
   racy across groups. Right: Human accuracy across groups and treatments.

   find more or less difficult, with the model showing greater variance between groups. Providing
   marginal or conditional prediction sets tends to improve human performance more for the group
   the model had highest accuracy on (Younger), while offering less benefit—and in some cases even
   worsening performance—for the lowest model accuracy group (Older). This analysis demonstrates
   how prediction sets may contribute to disparate impact by disproportionately helping easy groups
   and harming hard groups, widening the gap for outcomes.

   7                            C ONCLUSIONS & L IMITATIONS
   In this work we have presented the first experimental study on the fairness of conformal prediction
   sets as a human decisioning aid. Our data runs contrary to the prevailing wisdom in the research
   community – we find that equalizing coverage (Romano et al., 2020a) across groups actually in-
   creases unfairness of outcomes. Based on these results, we instead recommend that practitioners
   aim for Equalized Set Size or Equalized Singleton Frequency across protected groups, as both set
   size and singleton frequency correlate much more strongly with outcomes than coverage does.
   Still, any study, especially those involving humans, will have its limitations. While we recruited
   600 unique participants and collected 30,000 individual responses, some of the statistical measures
   in Table 2 did not achieve significance at the 5% level due to insufficient observations. This is a
   consequence of the inherent imbalance between groups in the datasets we used, which is expected
   to occur in real-world data, and is a crucial aspect for our discussions on fairness. In particular, the
   FACET dataset was divided into four groups compared to only two for BiosBias and RAVDESS,
   which means fewer examples from each FACET group were shown to participants, and hence our
   conclusions have less statistical significance on them. The low significance on individual groups
   is mitigated by the consistent results we see across three independent datasets, which when taken
   together provide clear evidence for our hypotheses.
   Additionally, our experiments only used classification tasks, whereas conformal prediction has also
   been applied to regression (Romano et al., 2019), time-series (Stankeviciute et al., 2021), and natural
   language tasks (Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024). Other instantiations of conformal prediction may be
   susceptible to the same unfairness mechanism we proposed in Figure 2, where difficult groups tend
   to be undercovered, requiring larger sets for Equalized Coverage which is a disadvantage, but this is
   out-of-scope for our study.


                                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethics Statement Throughout our research, we took steps to ensure that research ethics were up-
held. We acknowledge that ethical considerations are extremely important for any research involving
human subjects, and we have ensured that our research meets the Code of Ethics for ICLR 2025. We
also followed the ethical standards of our institution. Although it does not have an internal review
board (IRB) process, the steps we took to meet its standards included: understanding the protocols
and procedures for ethical research at our institution; curating datasets that only contained content
suitable for showing to participants; performing the experiments on ourselves as authors; providing
participants with a clear consent form that detailed the data that would be collected as well as how
it would be used and how long it would be retained; paying all recruits a fair wage; and ensuring we
were aware of potential biases in the data we collected by reviewing the demographic distribution
of recruits (Table 8).
Reproducibility Statement We have made two specific efforts to promote the reproducibil-
ity of our results. First, we have released our codebase and the data we collected at
github.com/layer6ai-labs/conformal-prediction-fairness, which will enable other re-
searchers to perform the same set prediction methods, generate the same dataset splits, and perform
the same statistical analysis. Second, we have extensively described our experimental setup in Ap-
pendix B including images of the screens that were shown to human participants throughout the
experiment. The description is complete enough for a third party to faithfully recreate and repro-
duce our experiment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Noël Vouitsis for comments on a draft of this manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Moloud Abdar, Farhad Pourpanah, Sadiq Hussain, Dana Rezazadegan, Li Liu, Mohammad
 Ghavamzadeh, Paul Fieguth, Xiaochun Cao, Abbas Khosravi, U. Rajendra Acharya, Vladimir
 Makarenkov, and Saeid Nahavandi. A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Tech-
 niques, applications and challenges. Information Fusion, 76:243–297, 2021. ISSN 1566-2535.
 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.008.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A
  next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In The 25th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
  tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019a.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’19. Associ-
  ation for Computing Machinery, 2019b. ISBN 9781450362016. doi: 10.1145/3292500.3330701.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330701.
Junaid Ali, Preethi Lahoti, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Accounting for model uncertainty in algo-
  rithmic discrimination. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
  Society, 2021. ISBN 9781450384735. doi: 10.1145/3461702.3462630.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Michael Jordan, and Jitendra Malik. Uncertainty
  sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
Richard A. Berk, Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla, and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen. Improving fairness in
  criminal justice algorithmic risk assessments using optimal transport and conformal prediction
  sets. Sociological Methods & Research, 2023a. doi: 10.1177/00491241231155883.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard A. Berk, Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla, and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen. Fair risk algorithms.
  Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application, 10:165–187, 2023b. ISSN 2326-831X. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-033021-120649.
Evgenii Chzhen, Christophe Denis, Mohamed Hebiri, and Titouan Lorieul.                 Set-valued
  classification–overview via a unified framework. arXiv:2102.12318, 2021.
Jesse C. Cresswell, Yi Sui, Bhargava Kumar, and Noël Vouitsis. Conformal prediction sets im-
  prove human decision making. In Proceedings of the 41th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024.
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wallach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
 Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Bias in bios:
 A case study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes setting. In Proceedings of the
 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19. ACM, January 2019. doi:
 10.1145/3287560.3287572. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287572.
Giovanni De Toni, Nastaran Okati, Suhas Thejaswi, Eleni Straitouri, and Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez.
  Towards Human-AI Complementarity with Predictions Sets. arXiv:2405.17544, 2024.
Zhun Deng, Cynthia Dwork, and Linjun Zhang. HappyMap : A Generalized Multicalibration
  Method. In 14th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, volume 251 of Leibniz
  International Proceedings in Informatics, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
Tiffany Ding, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Michael Jordan, and Ryan J Tibshirani.
  Class-conditional conformal prediction with many classes. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 36, 2024.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
  ference, 2012. ISBN 9781450311151. doi: 10.1145/2090236.2090255.
Maria S. Esipova, Atiyeh Ashari Ghomi, Yaqiao Luo, and Jesse C Cresswell. Disparate impact in
 differential privacy from gradient misalignment. In The Eleventh International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2023.
Wiam Fadel.      Fine-tuned XLSR-53 large model for speech emotion recog-
 nition on ravdess dataset,   2023.      URL https://huggingface.co/Wiam/
 wav2vec2-large-xlsr-53-english-finetuned-ravdess-v5. Accessed 2024-09-25.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD In-
 ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2015. ISBN 9781450336642.
 doi: 10.1145/2783258.2783311.
Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candès, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. The limits of
  distribution-free conditional predictive inference. Information and Inference: A Journal of the
  IMA, 10(2), 08 2020. ISSN 2049-8772. doi: 10.1093/imaiai/iaaa017.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.
Georgi Ganev, Bristena Oprisanu, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Robin Hood and Matthew Effects:
  Differential Privacy Has Disparate Impact on Synthetic Data. In Proceedings of the 39th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 6944–6959, 2022.
Isaac Gibbs, John J Cherian, and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal prediction with conditional guar-
   antees. arXiv:2305.12616, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nina Grgić-Hlača, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Krishna P Gummadi, and Adrian Weller. The case for
  process fairness in learning: Feature selection for fair decision making. In Symposium on Machine
  Learning and the Law at the 29th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Eugen Grycko. Classification with set-valued decision functions. In Information and Classification,
  pp. 218–224. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1993. ISBN 978-3-642-50974-2.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Laura Gustafson, Chloe Rolland, Nikhila Ravi, Quentin Duval, Aaron Adcock, Cheng-Yang Fu,
  Melissa Hall, and Candace Ross. Facet: Fairness in computer vision evaluation benchmark. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 20370–20382,
  2023.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29, 2016.
Ursula Hebert-Johnson, Michael Kim, Omer Reingold, and Guy Rothblum. Multicalibration: Cal-
  ibration for the (Computationally-identifiable) masses. In Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Jianguo Huang, Huajun Xi, Linjun Zhang, Huaxiu Yao, Yue Qiu, and Hongxin Wei. Conformal pre-
   diction for deep classifier via label ranking. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
   on Machine Learning, 2024.
Huggingface. Bert base model (uncased), 2024. URL https://huggingface.co/google-bert/
  bert-base-uncased. Accessed 2024-09-25.
Arun K Kuchibhotla and Richard A Berk. Nested conformal prediction sets for classification with
  applications to probation data. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 17(1):761–785, 2023.
Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Selim Kuzucu, Jiaee Cheong, Hatice Gunes, and Sinan Kalkan. Uncertainty-based fairness mea-
  sures. arXiv:2312.11299, 2023.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Jing Lei and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free Prediction Bands for Non-parametric Regression.
   Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 76(1):71–96, 07 2013.
   ISSN 1369-7412. doi: 10.1111/rssb.12021.
Kung-Yee Liang and Scott L Zeger. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models.
  Biometrika, 73(1):13–22, 1986.
Meichen Liu, Lei Ding, Dengdeng Yu, Wulong Liu, Linglong Kong, and Bei Jiang. Conformalized
 fairness via quantile regression. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and
 A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 11561–11572.
 Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Steven R. Livingstone and Frank A. Russo. The Ryerson Audio-Visual Database of Emo-
  tional Speech and Song (RAVDESS), April 2018. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  1188976.
Titouan Lorieul, Alexis Joly, and Dennis Shasha. Classification under ambiguity: When is average-k
   better than top-k? arXiv:2112.08851, 2021.
Charles Lu, Andréanne Lemay, Ken Chang, Katharina Höbel, and Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer. Fair
  conformal predictors for applications in medical imaging. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 12008–12016, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Raghav Mehta, Changjian Shui, and Tal Arbel. Evaluating the fairness of deep learning uncertainty
  estimates in medical image analysis. In Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2024.
Tanushree Mitra, C.J. Hutto, and Eric Gilbert. Comparing Person- and Process-Centric Strategies
  for Obtaining Quality Data on Amazon Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
  ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1345–1354, 2015. doi: 10.1145/
  2702123.2702553.
Christopher Mohri and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Language models with conformal factuality guaran-
  tees. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, volume 118. Springer Science & Busi-
  ness Media, 2012.
Pavlovia. https://www.pavlovia.org/, 2024. URL https://www.pavlovia.org/. Accessed 2024-
  01-24.
Jonathan Peirce, Jeremy R. Gray, Sol Simpson, Michael MacAskill, Richard Höchenberger, Hi-
  royuki Sogo, Erik Kastman, and Jonas Kristoffer Lindeløv. PsychoPy2: Experiments in be-
  havior made easy. Behavior Research Methods, 51(1):195–203, Feb 2019. doi: 10.3758/
  s13428-018-01193-y.
Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On fairness
  and calibration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Prolific. https://www.prolific.com/, 2024. URL https://www.prolific.com/. Accessed 2024-
  01-24.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceed-
  ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 8748–8763.
  PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Yaniv Romano, Rina Foygel Barber, Chiara Sabatti, and Emmanuel Candès. With Malice To-
  ward None: Assessing Uncertainty via Equalized Coverage. Harvard Data Science Review, 2
  (2), 2020a.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel Candes. Classification with valid and adaptive cover-
  age. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 3581–3591, 2020b.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel Candes. Classification with valid and adaptive cover-
  age. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020c.
Salvatore Ruggieri, Jose M. Alvarez, Andrea Pugnana, Laura State, and Franco Turini. Can We
  Trust Fair-AI? Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(13):15421–
  15430, Jul. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i13.26798.
Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 9(3), 2008.
Christian Soize. Uncertainty Quantification. Springer, 2017.
Kamile Stankeviciute, Ahmed M. Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Conformal time-series fore-
  casting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, 2021.
George Stein, Jesse C. Cresswell, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, Yi Sui, Brendan Leigh Ross, Valentin Vil-
  lecroze, Zhaoyan Liu, Anthony L. Caterini, Eric Taylor, and Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem. Exposing
  flaws of generative model evaluation metrics and their unfair treatment of diffusion models. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eleni Straitouri and Manuel Gomez Rodriguez. Designing decision support systems using counter-
  factual prediction sets. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 235, 2024.

Eleni Straitouri, Suhas Thejaswi, and Manuel Gomez Rodriguez. Controlling counterfactual harm
  in decision support systems based on prediction sets. arXiv:2406.06671, 2024.

Vladimir Vovk. Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors. In Proceedings of the Asian
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 25, 2012.

Vladimir Vovk, David Lindsay, Ilia Nouretdinov, and Alex Gammerman. Mondrian confidence
  machine. Technical Report, 2003.

Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random
  World. Springer, 2005.

Volodya Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Craig Saunders. Machine-learning applications of al-
  gorithmic randomness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 444–453, 1999.

Fangxin Wang, Lu Cheng, Ruocheng Guo, Kay Liu, and Philip S Yu. Equal opportunity of coverage
  in fair regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Tal Yarkoni. The generalizability crisis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 45:e1, 2022.

Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
  In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28, 2013.

Dongping Zhang, Angelos Chatzimparmpas, Negar Kamali, and Jessica Hullman. Evaluating the
  utility of conformal prediction sets for ai-advised image labeling. In Proceedings of the 2024
  CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2024. ISBN 9798400703300. doi:
  10.1145/3613904.3642446.

Yanfei Zhou and Matteo Sesia. Conformal classification with equalized coverage for adaptively
  selected groups, 2024.


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Our code for curating datasets and performing calibration and set prediction is available at
github.com/layer6ai-labs/conformal-prediction-fairness. In this section we detail the
steps that were taken.

A.1   DATASET P RE - PROCESSING

High-level information for the calibration-validation, calibration, and test datasets are shown in
Table 3. The following sections provide a detailed explanation of the pre-processing steps applied
to each dataset. Dataset pre-processing and set prediction does not require extensive computing
resources. We used an Intel Xeon Silver 4114 CPU and TITAN V GPU, which took in total less
than 1 hour to process all three datasets.


                                    Table 3: Dataset Information
        Dataset     |Dcalval | |Dcal | |Dtest | Total Classes Used Classes (m) Groups (ng )
        FACET          1400 4000      1400             52                 20             4
        BiosBias       5000 10000     2000             28                 10             2
        RAVDESS         240 840        360              8                  8             2


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 4: FACET Group Counts        Table 5: BiosBias Group Counts Table 6: RAVDESS Group Counts
 Group      Dcalval Dcal Dtest       Group Dcalval Dcal Dtest         Group Dcalval Dcal Dtest
 Younger       254 711 276            Female 2424 4887 969                Female      120 420 180
 Middle        772 2144 729           Male   2576 5113 1031               Male        120 420 180
 Older         103 299 91
 Unknown       271 846 304

FACET The FACET dataset (Gustafson et al., 2023) was created to investigate bias in image clas-
sification tasks, with images of people annotated by human labelers, and sensitive attributes includ-
ing perceived age, gender, and skin tone. We used the occupation annotations as class labels, and age
annotations for groups. Age groups are categorized as ‘Younger’ (perceived to be < 25 years old),
‘Middle’ (25 - 65), ‘Older’ (> 65), and ‘Unknown’. Preprocessing involved filtering for images con-
taining a single person and a single occupation label. Images were resized to 224 × 224 pixels and
center-cropped for consistency. We focused on the top m = 20 most common occupations which
were: [backpacker, boatman, computer user, craftsman, farmer, guard, guitarist, gymnast, hair-
dresser, horseman, laborer, lawman, motorcyclist, painter, repairman, seller, singer, skateboarder,
speaker, tennis player]. Since some of these labels are unintuitive, we clarified them for presentation
to participants by renaming them to: [Backpacker, Boatman, Computer User, Craftsman, Farmer,
Guard, Guitarist, Gymnast, Hairdresser, Horse Rider, Laborer, Officer, Motorcyclist, Painter, Re-
pairman, Salesperson, Singer, Skateboarder, Speaker, Tennis Player]. For conformal prediction,
the remaining dataset was split into 1400 calibration-validation samples, 4000 calibration samples,
and 1400 test samples, using stratified sampling to ensure balanced occupation representation across
subsets. Groups, however, were not stratified or balanced, and followed the natural distribution in
the dataset (see Table 4). The calibration-validation, calibration, and test sets were treated identi-
cally, making them i.i.d. for conformal prediction. FACET is released under a custom license that
allows it to be used “for the purposes of measuring or evaluating the robustness and algorithmic
fairness of AI and machine-learning vision models, and solely on a non-commercial and research
basis”.

BiosBias The BiosBias dataset (De-Arteaga et al., 2019) contains public biographies labeled by
occupation and annotated with binary gender groups. Biosbias created occupation labels automat-
ically by extracting information from the biographies. They also extracted likely binary gender
information from 3rd person pronoun use. We used occupations as class labels, with two groups,
“Female” and “Male”. To preprocess BiosBias data, we removed non-ASCII characters, URLs,
emails, phone numbers, and redundant punctuation, then truncated the biographies to 400 charac-
ters to limit variance due to vastly different text lengths. We generated text representations of each
biography using a pre-trained BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019), and trained a linear classifier to
predict occupations using a training set of 50,000 samples with a validation set of 5,000 samples
for manual hyperparameter selection and evaluation. From the original 28 occupations, we focused
on m = 10 of the most common: [Professor, Physician, Photographer, Journalist, Psychologist,
Teacher, Dentist, Surgeon, Painter, and Model]. These were not strictly the 10 most common occu-
pations since we found that the data quality of some occupations was noticably worse than others; for
example we excluded the textitNurse class because it contained hundreds of near-duplicate biogra-
phies. For conformal prediction, we used 5,000 calibration-validation samples, 10,000 calibration
samples, and 2,000 test samples, using stratified sampling to ensure balanced representation across
all occupations. Groups were not stratified, but were already roughly balanced in the dataset which
is reflected in our splits (Table 5). This method of splitting ensured the calibration and test sets could
be treated as i.i.d. for conformal prediction purposes. BiosBias is released under a MIT license.

RAVDESS For RAVDESS (Livingstone & Russo, 2018), a dataset of audio-visual recordings
where actors express emotions, we worked with 1,440 audio-only samples exhibiting m = 8 emo-
tions: [Happy, Angry, Calm, Fearful, Neutral, Disgust, Sad and Surprised]. The dataset contains
recordings from 24 actors, 12 female and 12 male, so we used emotion as the class label and gender
as the protected group. Each actor recorded 60 snippets of approximately 4 seconds in length each.
The 60 recordings are broken down as 2 re-recordings each of 2 intensities each of 2 statements
of 8 emotions. However, the “Neutral” emotion used only a single intensity. We split the dataset
into 240 for calibration-validation, 840 samples for calibration, and 360 for testing using stratified


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sampling over both emotion and gender. Given that each split was treated the same way they can
be considered i.i.d. for conformal prediction. To process the audio samples, we used a wav2Vec2
model Baevski et al. (2020) available on Huggingface (Fadel, 2023). We resampled each file to
16kHz as the base model was pre-trained on that frequency. For audio with multiple channels, we
changed it to mono by averaging channels. The model’s feature extractor then turned the raw audio
signals into feature vectors ready for the model to use, which were subsequently padded to ensure
consistent input length for batch processing by the model. RAVDESS is released under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International license.

A.2   C ONFORMAL P REDICTION M ETHODS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

When generating conformal prediction sets for our human experiments, we aimed to diversify the
settings by testing two different score functions. This helps demonstrate that our hypotheses and
conclusions are not a result of using one particular score function. We chose two highly-performant
methods for our tasks:
RAPS Regularized Adaptive Prediction Sets (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) builds off of APS (Ro-
mano et al., 2020b) by penalizing the score for sets with more elements than a threshold kreg . In
addition RAPS uses temperature scaling on the model’s logits before the softmax layer with value T ,
                                                                            PM
and a weight λ on the regularization term. First, RAPS defines ρx (y) = y′ =1 f (x)y′ 1[f (x)y′ >
f (x)y ] as the total probability mass of the labels which have higher softmax values than y for input
x, and ox (y) = |{y ′ ∈ Y | f (x)y′ ≥ f (x)y }| as the ordinal ranking of y among all labels, again
based on softmax values. RAPS constructs prediction sets as
                    Cq̂ (x) = {y | ρx (y) + u · f (x)y + λ(ox (y) − kreg )+ ≤ q̂}.               (12)
where u ∼ U [0, 1] is a uniform random variable. Here, the score function s(x, y) has three terms that
use the probability mass of classes more likely than y, the probability of y with a random weighting,
and a regularization term that penalizes adding more than kreg classes.
SAPS Sorted Adaptive Prediction Sets (Huang et al., 2024) is a more recent procedure that aims to
produce compact prediction sets with better conditional coverage compared to other methods. SAPS
has one primary hyperparameter, λ, which governs the weight given to the ranking information.
As with RAPS, a temperature hyperparameter T is optimized to scale logits before applying the
softmax. SAPS discards all probability values except the maximum softmax probability, while
preserving the ranking of the labels. The score function is defined as

                                 u · f (x)y ,                       if ox (y) = 1,
                    s(x, y) =                                                                (13)
                                 max f (x) + λ(ox (y) − 2 + u), otherwise,
where u ∼ U [0, 1] is again a uniform random variable. This score function minimizes the effect of
unreliable small softmax values while retaining enough ranking information to adjust the prediction
set size based on instance difficulty.
Hyperparameter Tuning For prediction set construction, we used three splits of the data:
calibration-validation Dcalval , calibration Dcal , and test Dtest . Dcalval was employed for hyperpa-
rameter tuning, Dcal was used to calculate conformal thresholds with the tuned hyperparameters,
and finally Dtest was used to generate the prediction sets used in our human experiments. Table 7
presents the final hyperparameters after automated tuning.
For hyperparameter optimization with CP methods we employed Bayesian optimization via the Op-
tuna library (Akiba et al., 2019b), utilizing the TPESampler for efficient search over 50 iterations
aiming to minimize average set size. Specifically, for each parameter setting, the conformal thresh-
old q̂ was determined using Dcal , then prediction sets were generated on Dcalval where their average
size was computed. For Mondrian CP, within every iteration of tuning the same hyperparameter
settings were used on each group.
Tuning for avg-k is necessarily different because the main hyperparameter k is the target average
set size. Hence, instead of tuning for minimal average set size which would be trivial, we tuned k to
achieve the desired 90% coverage rate, matching the CP methods. k was adjusted through a binary
search by computing the threshold qk on Dcal , then generating sets on Dcalval and evaluating their
empirical coverage. We refined the average set size k through binary search up to five decimal points
of precision to ensure that the coverage on Dcalval closely matched the predefined target coverage.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table 7: Hyperparameter Settings for Each Dataset After Tuning
                                                      Marginal            Conditional
                 Dataset     Score Function     T        λ       kreg    T      λ     kreg
                 FACET            RAPS         0.32      0.17     4     0.38   0.46     4
                 BiosBias         SAPS         0.53      0.21     -     0.53   0.26     -
                 RAVDESS          RAPS         0.26     10.49     3     0.20   0.43     3


B    H UMAN S UBJECT E XPERIMENTS
In this section we give complete details on our experiments involving humans which extends the
descriptions in Section 4 and Section 5.
Participant Recruitment We designed our human subject experiments using PsychoPy (Peirce
et al., 2019) and made them available on Pavlovia (Pavlovia, 2024). Participant recruitment was
conducted through Prolific (Prolific, 2024). We required participants volunteering for the study
to be fluent in English, the language we used throughout the experiments, and to use a desktop
or laptop computer, but otherwise did not filter candidates on any criteria. In total, 600 unique
participants were recruited, and each was randomly assigned to a single (task, treatment) pair, of
which there were 12 in total for 50 participants each. Hence, each experiment involved a disjoint
set of participants. Participants were paid according to the platform guidelines enforced by Prolific
– participants were given a flat rate for completing their assigned experiment calculated based on
the median completion time of their cohort. We also offered participants bonus pay in the amount
of 0.01 GBP for every correct answer they gave on the 50 test trials, which incentivizes high quality
answers. On average, participants received pay at a rate of 9.75 GBP/hour which totaled 1500 GBP
in participant renumeration across all tests.
Across the experiments, 599 participants gave consent for their demographic data to be collected
and shared in aggregate, while one participant withdrew their consent. As shown in Table 8, the
study population is fairly balanced in terms of gender. Participants in the study represented various
age groups and ethnicities, with more being in their 20s and identifying as White respectively.


                             Table 8: Demographics of Participants
                                        Group       # Participants
                                        < 20               31
                                        20-29             324
                                        30-39             144
                            Age group
                                        40-49              64
                                        50-59              26
                                        ≥ 60               10
                                        Unknown             1
                                        Female            287
                             Gender     Male              311
                                        Unknown             2
                                        White             346
                                        Black             179
                                        Mixed              34
                            Ethnicity
                                        Asian              23
                                        Other              15
                                        Unknown             3

Experiment Details Our experimental design follows that of Cresswell et al. (2024). An overview
of the screens that were presented to participants is shown in Figure 7 using the BiosBias task with
marginal treatment as an example. We will now walk through the progression of these screens,
describing the test. For each experiment, participants were first shown a consent form detailing what
data we were collecting, how we intended to use it, and how long we would retain it. Participants
who did not consent could remove themselves from the study rather than proceeding. To limit


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


risks to participants, we did not collect any personally identifiable information like name, birth date,
or address. As noted above, some demographic information had been provided by participants to
the Prolific platform, and nearly all participants consented to us obtaining this information. We
determined that there were no risks to participants taking the study that needed to be disclosed.
We proceeded to present participants with instructions about how to take the test and about the
classification task they would be performing. We provided one labeled example datapoint from each
class for participants to familiarize themselves with, and then conducted 20 practice trials that used
the same format as the real test trials. For example, the main trial screen for BiosBias is shown in
Figure 7, while Figure 3 shows FACET, and Figure 6 shows the RAVDESS task. The practice phase
was for training participants to ensure they would achieve high accuracy on the real test trials, so we
did not use data collected on the practice trials. Example and practice datapoints were sourced from
Dtest , and were not reused for the real test trials. After the practice trials, 50 test trials were given,
and the data collected here comprises what we used for analysis. For each task we randomly sampled
sets of 50 datapoints from Dtest without replacement using one of 10 fixed seeds. Each participant
was shown one of these random sets. The use of only 10 seeds was intentional so that multiple
participants across treatments would see the same datapoints. Since datapoints can have different
inherent difficulty, using the same examples across treatments reduces variance from random data
selection. Overlap between the examples shown to different participants also allows us to better
model their inherent skill using our GEE analysis.
The main trial screens all show a participant one datapoint x, and all classes Y as options. Partic-
ipants had unlimited time to select one class, after which the correct answer was shown following
previous studies in machine learning (Stein et al., 2023). Providing answers after each trial has been
shown to increase the quality of collected data (Mitra et al., 2015) and allows the participant to con-
tinually optimize their decision strategy. This is desirable, as we want participants to give the most
accurate answers possible, even if their strategy evolves over the course of the test.


Figure 6: Main trial screen shown to participants for RAVDESS with marginal conformal set treat-
ment. When the screen was first displayed, the audio recording was played, with the model sug-
gestions appearing and ability to enter a response activated after the recording completed (roughly
4 seconds). Participants were able to replay the recording as many times as needed. The correct
answer was shown after the participant responded.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Screens displayed to participants during our experiment using marginal conformal sets
on BiosBias, with a similar template for other experiments. The seventh panel (left to right, top
to bottom) shows an example of how the practice and test trials appear, with the correct answer
displayed after the participant entered their response. The fourth panel was not shown to Control
group as they were not given suggestions from the model during the trials.


                                               20
