Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPROVING THE S PARSE S TRUCTURE L EARNING OF
S PIKING N EURAL N ETWORKS FROM THE V IEW OF
C OMPRESSION E FFICIENCY

                   Jiangrong Shen †‡§ß       Qi Xu ¶∗ Gang Pan §        Badong Chen ‡ß

         †Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
           ‡Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
              §State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
                 ¶School of Computer Science, Dalian University of Technology
ßNational Key Lab of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University



                                               A BSTRACT

             The human brain utilizes spikes for information transmission and dynamically
             reorganizes its network structure to boost energy efficiency and cognitive capabil-
             ities throughout its lifespan. Drawing inspiration from this spike-based computa-
             tion, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have been developed to construct event-
             driven models that emulate this efficiency. Despite these advances, deep SNNs
             continue to suffer from over-parameterization during training and inference, a
             stark contrast to the brain’s ability to self-organize. Furthermore, existing sparse
             SNNs are challenged by maintaining optimal pruning levels due to a static pruning
             ratio, resulting in either under or over-pruning. In this paper, we propose a novel
             two-stage dynamic structure learning approach for deep SNNs, aimed at main-
             taining effective sparse training from scratch while optimizing compression effi-
             ciency. The first stage evaluates the compressibility of existing sparse subnetworks
             within SNNs using the PQ index, which facilitates an adaptive determination of
             the rewiring ratio for synaptic connections based on data compression insights.
             In the second stage, this rewiring ratio critically informs the dynamic synaptic
             connection rewiring process, including both pruning and regrowth. This approach
             significantly improves the exploration of sparse structures training in deep SNNs,
             adapting sparsity dynamically from the point view of compression efficiency. Our
             experiments demonstrate that this sparse training approach not only aligns with
             the performance of current deep SNNs models but also significantly improves the
             efficiency of compressing sparse SNNs. Crucially, it preserves the advantages of
             initiating training with sparse models and offers a promising solution for imple-
             menting edge AI on neuromorphic hardware.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have garnered increasing attention due to their event-driven prop-
erties, high spatiotemporal dynamics, and structural and learning plasticity that mimic biological
neural processing (Maass, 1997; Subbulakshmi Radhakrishnan et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2023; Hu
et al., 2023). Unlike traditional artificial neural networks that rely on continuous signal computa-
tion, SNNs process information using discrete events, aligning more closely with the energy-efficient
mechanisms observed in human neural activity. The post-synaptic neurons in SNNs receive spike
trains from pre-synaptic neurons and emit output spikes upon crossing a firing threshold (Stanojevic
et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2021). Consequently, bio-inspired SNNs offer signifi-
cant advantages in energy efficiency, making them especially suitable for neuromorphic computing
in Edge AI such as event-based vision (Liu et al., 2024b;c; 2025), where energy constraints are
    ∗
        Accepted by ICLR 2025. The corresponding author: xuqi@dlut.edu.cn.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


paramount (Imam & Cleland, 2020; Pei et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021a). Despite these inherent ad-
vantages, the deployment of increasingly deep SNNs introduces substantial challenges, particularly
over-parameterization during training and inference, leading to excessive computational overhead
and memory usage. This misalignment with the resource-efficient requirements of edge devices
calls for innovative solutions.
Current research on the sparse structure learning of deep SNNs aims to address the over-
parameterization issue. These methodologies are predominantly categorized by their computational
cost throughout the whole training process. The first one is the gradually structural sparsification ap-
proach with the non-sparse network as the initial status. For instance, the gradient reparameterization
(Chen et al., 2021; 2022) approach implements the gradually efficient sparsification for deep SNNs
with learnable pruning speed by redefining the weight parameters and threshold growing function.
Alternatively, the second category called fully sparsification methods initiate with sparse SNNs to
maintain connection sparsity throughout training, exemplified by sparse evolutionary rewiring (Shen
et al., 2023) and the lottery-ticket hypothesis (Kim et al., 2022). We advocate for the latter due to
its compatibility with hardware constraints like on-chip training. Considering the intrinsic connec-
tion between network sparsity and compressibility, the PQ index has been proven to satisfy the six
properties of an ideal sparsity measure (Hurley & Rickard, 2009), and employed as the indicator
of vector sparsity in the traditional artificial neural networks in (Diao et al., 2023). However, that
sparsity measure analysis ignores the unique spatial and temporal dynamics in SNNs. Therfore,
most existing fully sparse training methods for SNNs employ static pruning ratios or predetermined
sparsity levels, ignoring the analysis of spatiotemporal dynamics of SNNs and lacking the necessary
flexibility like self-reorganizing in human brain and often leading to under or over-pruning.
Observing the brain’s flexible organization of large-scale functional networks, which adapt through
environmental interactions, offers a clue towards solving deep SNNs’ over-parameterization. Dur-
ing brain development, synaptic connections undergo structural plasticity, forming new synapses
and eliminating existing ones (De Vivo et al., 2017; Barnes & Finnerty, 2010; Bennett et al., 2018).
This rewiring process forms flexible network structure and promotes synaptic sparsity contributing
to the brain’s low power consumption. Therefore, emulating the brain’s structural synaptic plastic-
ity through a dynamic structure learning approach could be key to developing more flexible deep
SNN models. Meanwhile, the density of synaptic connections in the brain optimizes throughout
development, although precise control mechanisms remain unclear. Thus, we explore optimizing
the pruning ratio from a neural network compression perspective as explored in machine learning,
where data compression theory helps quantify the compressibility of a sub-network during each
connection updating iteration, thereby avoiding under or over-pruning (Neill, 2020). By combining
with the biologically plausible rewiring mechanism in human brain and neural network compres-
sion theory in machine learning, we attempt to give a solution about the sparse training method from
scratch for deep SNNs with adaptive and suitable pruning ratio setting.
In light of these above insights, this paper proposes a novel two-stage sparse structure learning
method from scratch for SNNs, utilizing the PQ index to measure appropriate compressibility. This
method not only maintains sparse training throughout the learning process but also mitigates the
issues of under-pruning and over-pruning in sparse SNNs. Our contributions are as follows:

       • We introduce a pioneering two-stage dynamic structure learning framework for deep SNNs
         that utilizes the PQ index to gauge and dynamically adjust structure of sparse subnetworks
         according to compressibility. This novel approach tailors the rewiring ratio throughout the
         training process, providing a fine-tuned, adaptive mechanism that enhances the founda-
         tional training dynamics of deep sparse SNNs.
       • Our methodology extends traditional sparse training approaches for SNNs by implement-
         ing a continuous, iterative learning process across two stages. In the first stage, the PQ
         index informs the adjustment of synaptic connection rewiring ratios. In the second stage,
         these ratios guide a dynamic rewiring strategy that includes both the pruning and regrowth
         of connections. Thus the methodology optimizes the SNNs’ structural efficiency and oper-
         ational effectiveness far beyond conventional static pruning techniques.
       • Through extensive empirical testing, our method not only achieves competitive perfor-
         mance relative to existing state-of-the-art models but also significantly enhances the ef-
         ficiency of sparse training from scratch implementations for deep SNNs. This rigorous
         validation demonstrates our approach’s ability to maintain essential SNNs’ network func-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           The Initial Sparse                                                                                   The Training Sparse
                                                Stage I                                  Stage II                                                        The Training Sparse
            SNNs Structure                                                                                        SNNs Structure
                                          Generate rewiring ratio                 rewiring connections by ci                                               SNNs Structure



                             H𝑖                                                           Pruning
                                             Updating Wi                                                                               H𝑖                                      H𝑖
                                          Updating Wi = Mi Wi                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                               ...                                 ...
                              H𝑖 +1
                                                                                                                                           H𝑖 +1                               H𝑖 +1
                                                                                         Growing



    Erdős–Rényi Random Initialization   Compute PQ index IWi
                                                                                                                       [ Regularization]                      [ Compression]
          Remaining sparse training     Compute lower bound ri
                                                                                                                     Performance improving                 Performance reducing
                                        Compute rewiring ratio ci                    update mask Mi                   Density decreasing                    Density decreasing
                                                                    Iteration i


Figure 1: The flowchart of the proposed two-stage sparse structure learning method for SNNs.
Stage I involves the typical training process and attempts to identify an appropriate rewiring ratio
according to PQ index. Stage II conducts the dynamic sparse structure learning method based on the
rewiring ratio in stage I. The iterative learning of the above two stages is employed during the whole
training process, thereby implementing the sparse training from scratch for SNNs and enhancing
generalization ability of the sparse model.


                  tionality while reducing computational redundancy, thus achieving superior compression
                  of SNN architectures.

2        R ELATED WORKS
SNNs have seen considerable advancements in learning algorithms that have expanded their pa-
rameter capacity and diversified their topological structures. These networks often incorporate es-
tablished ANNs architectures, including VGG11, ResNets19, and Transformers, adapting them to
the spike-based processing paradigm (Yao et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024). Training methodologies
range from direct training with surrogate gradients to conversion techniques that transform pre-
trained ANNs into SNNs. While these static-topology SNNs have demonstrated significant efficacy
in various applications, such as object detection and natural language understanding, they primarily
emphasize synaptic weight optimization (Gast et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Ren et al., 2024).
This focus tends to overlook the critical aspect of synaptic connectivity learning, frequently lead-
ing to parameter inefficiencies and constrained network evolution. In contrast, SNNs designed with
dynamic structures learning are engineered to concurrently optimize both synaptic connections and
weights. This dual optimization affords enhanced flexibility and facilitates the development of more
efficient and adaptive network topologies (Xu et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024). We
categorize the current sparse structure learning methods for SNNs into two distinct groups.
Gradual Sparsification of Connection Structures for SNNs. This kind of methods typically ini-
tializes the network with a non-sparse connected structure, which is iteratively optimized through-
out training, resulting in a gradually sparser connection structure. 1) Weight parameter optimization
methods. For instance, the gradient rewiring (Grad R) method is introduced in (Chen et al., 2021)
which implements sparse structure learning through redefining network connection parameters. This
method ensures that the gradient of these parameters forms an angle of less than 90° with the ac-
curate gradient. During model training, synaptic pruning and regeneration are iteratively applied,
achieving joint learning of synaptic connections and weights. Building on this, the nonlinear gradi-
ent reparameterization function that controls pruning speed through a threshold growth function is
introduced in (Chen et al., 2022), further optimizing the SNNs structure. (Shi et al., 2023) combines
unstructured weight pruning with unstructured neuron pruning to maximize the utilization of the
sparsity of neuromorphic computing, thereby enhancing energy efficiency. 2) Regularization-based
methods. (Deng et al., 2021a) incorporated gradient regularization into the loss function, achieving
synaptic connection pruning and weight quantization based on the Alternating Direction Method of
Multipliers (ADMM). Similarly, Yin et al. combined sparse spike encoding with sparse network
connections, using sparse regularization to establish models for spike data transmission and network
sparsification (Yin et al., 2021). There are also some studies to explore the connection pruning for
spiking-based Transformer structure (Liu et al., 2024a). 3) Connection-relationship-determination-


                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


based methods. The synaptic sampling method based on Bayesian learning is proposed in (Kappel
et al., 2015), modeling dendritic spine movement characteristics to achieve synaptic connection re-
construction and weight optimization. Combining unsupervised STDP rules with supervised Tem-
potron training, SNNs with connection gates are developed in (Qi et al., 2018). It improves the
performance while reducing connections via sparse SNNs. There are also other studies to introduce
the plasticity-based pruning methods for deep SNNs (Han et al., 2024b).
Fully Sparsification of Connection Structures for SNNs. A different strategy involves initializing
the network with a sparse connection structure from the start and continually optimizing this sparse
structure throughout training. This fully sparse training approach is particularly advantageous for
hardware implementation in resource-constrained environments, such as on-chip training in hard-
ware chips. 1) Synaptic connection-rewiring-based methods. These evolutionary structure learning
methods are proposed for deep SNNs by drawing inspiration of rewiring mechainism in human brain
(Han et al., 2024a; Shen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024b). This method employs synaptic growth and
pruning rules to adaptively adjust the connection structure based on gradients, momentum, or am-
plitude during training, maintaining a certain level of sparsity in synaptic connections and achieving
effective sparse training of SNNs. 2) Lottery-ticket-hypothesis-based methods. The architecture
search could also generate sparse SNNs, such as the lottery ticket hypothesis. The Early-Time lot-
tery ticket hypothesis method proposed in (Kim et al., 2022) demonstrates that winning sparse sub-
networks exist in deep SNNs, similar to traditional deep ANNs. Further, the utilization-aware LTH
method, which incorporates intra-layer connection regeneration and pruning during training, ad-
dresses hardware load imbalance issues caused by unstructured pruning methods (Yin et al., 2024).
Despite these advancements, a gap remains in the deployment of fully adaptive and efficient SNNs
architectures, particularly in resource-constrained environments such as edge computing devices.
This underscores the necessity for novel methods that not only refine the sparsity and efficiency of
these networks but also maintain adaptive learning capabilities throughout their lifecycle during the
whole training process. The need for dynamic, flexible SNN models that mirror the human brain’s
ability to reorganize and optimize its neural pathways in real-time is clear.
Our research addresses this gap by proposing a two-stage dynamic sparse structure learning ap-
proach for SNNs from scratch, leveraging the latest advances in neural network compression and
synaptic plasticity. This method promises to significantly enhance the adaptability and efficiency
of deep SNNs, positioning them as a viable solution for next-generation neuromorphic computing
Ma et al. (2024), particularly as future highly efficient perceptron applications (Chen et al., 2025;
Guan & Zhao, 2022; Guan et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024) increasingly demand more computational
resources for higher performance. We believe that by integrating adaptive synaptic pruning and
growth mechanisms, our approach will set a new standard for sparse structure learning in SNNs,
aligning closely with the natural efficiencies observed in biological neural processes.

3     M ETHODS
The main goal of our study is to implement the fully sparse training from scratch for SNNs with
the dynamic compressibility during the training process. In detail, we first introduce the proposed
two-stage sparse learning framework for SNNs. After that, the first and second stage computations
for obtaining the right rewiring ratio and rewiring sparse networks are described, respectively.

3.1   T HE FRAMEWORK OF THE TWO - STAGE SPARSE LEARNING METHOD

As illustrated in Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1, we design the two-stage sparse training method for SNNs
with an appropriate rewiring ratio for each iteration during the training process. The sparse weight
connections are initialized according to the Erdös–Rényi (ER) Random Graph. The ER graph could
guarantee that the synaptic connection for each neuron has the same connection probability. As-
suming there are nk and nk−1 neurons in the neighboring two layers, then the probability of weight
connection mask Mk,k−1 = 1 between two neurons in these two layers satisfies
                                                       ϵ(nk + nk−1 )
                                  p(Mk,k−1 = 1) =                     .                              (1)
                                                         nk ∗ nk−1
where ϵ is a constant (or scaling factor) that influences the edge probability and accounts for sparsity
or connectivity scaling. Then the corresponding weight value W can be initialized by the commonly


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 The two-stage sparse training process of SNNs.
Input Data: xi , i = 1, 2, ..., N .
Labels of Input Data:yi , i = 1, 2, ..., N .
Parameters: The weight mask is M . The weight matrix: W .                    The updating iterations:
Epochf requency .

 1: for each assigned sparse layer of the SNNs do
 2:    Initialize the sparse weight mask of the connected layer as the Erdös–Rényi topology;
 3: end for
 4: Initialize trained weight parameters;
 5: for each training iterations i do
 6:    ♢ Stage I
 7:    Perform standard training procedure with Wi = Mi ⊙ Wi ;
 8:    Perform weights updates for Wi ;
 9:    Compute the total number of model parameters di = | Mi |;
10:    Compute PQ Index IWi and the lower bound of the amount of remaining parameters ri ;
11:    Compute the rewiring ratio ci ;
12:    ♢ Stage II
13:    if current training epoch % Epochf requency == 0: then
14:       for each assigned sparse layer of SNNs do
15:          Remove the fraction ci of synaptic connections according to the pruning rule;
16:          Regrow the fraction ci of synaptic connections according to the growing rule;
17:       end for
18:    end if
19: end for
20: return The sparse SNNs with W .



used initialization method, such as Xavier Initialization and random normal distribution Initializa-
tion. Since then, we have been able to obtain the initialized sparse SNNs. After that, the initialized
SNNs would be trained over multiple iterations, through the iterative training of the first stage and
second stage in each iteration. It is worth noting that the SNNs would remain sparse and dynamically
search for the suitable rewiring ratio in the following training process.
In detail, the first stage involves the typical training process and attempts to identify an appropriate
rewiring ratio based on temporarily trained weights. The rewiring ratio is calculated according to
the PQ index, an efficient measure of the compressibility of neural network models (Diao et al.,
2023). The PQ index helps quantify the redundancy in the network, thereby informing the following
rewiring strategy. In the second stage, the dynamic sparse structure learning method based on the
rewiring method is adopted to implement sparse training from scratch. The connections are itera-
tively pruned and regrown according to the specified rewiring ratio. This iterative training approach
ensures that the network continuously adapts and optimizes its structure, thereby improving perfor-
mance. The rewiring method allows for dynamic adjustment, promoting the activation and growth
of previously dormant connections, which contributes to SNNs’ capability enhancement.
By integrating these two stages, our method achieves efficient and effective sparse training for SNNs,
leveraging the compressibility insights gained in the first stage to guide dynamic structural adjust-
ments in the second stage. This approach not only maintains the sparsity and efficiency of the model
but also enhances its generalization ability.

3.2   C OMPRESS THE SPARSE SNN S BASED ON PQ INDEX

After the sparse initialization based on ER graph, the synaptic connections between neurons would
become sparse randomly. Then in the following training process, the SNNs model would be trained
according to the two stages sparse training method.
In the first stage, we train the sparse SNNs and compute the appropriate rewiring ratio according to
PQ index Ip,q (W ) (we simplified it as I(W ) in the detailed derivation in the supplementary materi-
                                                                       1   1   ∥W ∥
als). Here is the derivation of the sparsity measure Ip,q (W ) = 1 − d q − p · ∥W ∥pq for spiking neural


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


networks (SNNs), incorporating the formula update and focusing on scaling invariance, sensitivity
to sparsity reduction, and cloning invariance, combined with spatiotemporal dynamics and sparsity
in SNNs. In detail, the scaling invariance in SNNs corresponds to: (1) Independence of weight scal-
ing: If the weight matrix W is scaled (e.g., multiplied by a constant), its sparsity structure remains
unchanged, and so should Ip,q (W ). (2) Independence of temporal scaling: Changes in spike magni-
tudes (the activation value) should not affect the sparsity measure, ensuring the measure accurately
reflects temporal dynamics. We give detailed derivation in SNNs, it ensures that Ip,q (W ) remains
unaffected when all weights are scaled proportionally (e.g., multiplying W by a constant α > 0).
The scaling weight magnitudes or activation value intensity does not change the network sparsity.
Meanwhile, we analyze that Ip,q (W ) keeps sensitivity to spatial and temporal sparsity in SNNs, that
is, the distribution of weights or spike activations (firing rates). When it changes weight distribution
with more nonzero weights, leading to a reduction in Ip,q (W ) corresponds to sparsity decreasing.
When temporal sparsity decreases (more neurons firing at the same time), the distribution becomes
denser, which directly affects the ratio ∥W ∥p /∥W ∥q , leading to a decrease in Ip,q (W ). In addition,
we demonstrate that the sparsity measure Ip,q (W ) should remain invariant when the weight matrix
is cloned in spatial and temporal dimensions. This ensures that cloning or repeating the matrix does
not affect the sparsity measure.
In detail, the PQ index for the non-zero vector Wi ∈ Rd with any 0 < p < q is computed by:
                                               1   1
                          Ip,q (Wi ) = 1 − d q − p (∥ Wi ∥p − ∥ Wi ∥q ),                    (2)
                         Pd           p 1/p
where ∥ Wi ∥p equals to ( j=1 | wj | ) , in which wj , j = 1...d is the non-zero element in Wi .
Then the lower bound of the retaining number of model parameter Wi can be obtained by:
                         ri = di (1 + αr )−q/(q−p) [1 − Ip,q (Wi )]pq/(q−p) ,                    (3)
where di = |Mi |. Then the pruned ratio with better compressibility is computed by:
                                                      ri
                               ci = ⌊di · min(γ(1 − ), β)⌋/NWi ,                                 (4)
                                                      di
in which the γ and β are the scaling factor and maximum rewiring ratio, respectively. In detail,
the hyperparameter of γ is used to scale the rewiring ratio according to PQ index. The bigger γ
would obtain the higher rewiring ratio. We follow the settings in (Diao et al., 2023) to set γ = 1
and β = 0.9 to prevent the model are over-pruned seriously. NWi is the total number of parameters
in Wi . Assume r is the indices
                              P set of Wpi with the  Plargest weight     magnitude. Then αr denotes
                                                                    p
the smallest value satisfying j ∈M/ ir |w j | ≤ α r    j∈Mi r |wj |   . The big αr implies the model
parameters are redundant and would result in a higher rewiring ratio. Thus we set the αr to be
0.001 in the experiments to slow down the pruning speed and improve the stability of sparse model
training. We give an example in Fig. 2 (a).
Since then, the right rewiring ratio for weight parameters in sparse SNNs has been figured out to
improve compressibility and prevent sparse SNNs from either over-pruning or under-pruning (Li
et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2024).
During the training process in each iteration, before the above spasity measurement process, we
need to update the weight matrix according to the learning algorithm in our model. In this paper, we
adopt the iterative Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model in SNNs to enhance information
integration and temporal representation (Wu et al., 2019). The membrane potential u(t) of postsy-
naptic neuron is updated based on the membrane potential at t − 1 and the integrated presynaptic
neuron input:
                                 u(t) = τ u(t − 1) + (Mi ⊙ Wi )x(t),                                (5)
where τ is the leaky factor set to 0.5, and x(t) represents the spike inputs. When u(t) exceeds the
firing threshold of Vth , the neuron fires a spike, and u(t) is set to be 0. Consequently, the neuron
output and the membrane updating are given by:
                                    a(t + 1) = Θ(u(t + 1) − Vth ),                                  (6)
                                  u(t + 1) = u(t + 1)(1 − a(t + 1)),                                (7)
To ensure that the output signal at each time step approximates the target distribution, we utilize the
temporal efficient training loss function as in (Deng et al., 2021b):
                                                   T
                                              1X
                                   LT ET =          LCE [O(t), y],                                  (8)
                                              T t=1


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where T denotes the time steps and LCE is the cross-entropy loss function. Then the masked weights
are updated according to the gradient descent rule with surrogate gradient function.

3.3   T HE CONNECTION REWIRING OF DYNAMIC SPARSE STRUCTURE LEARNING

After the above stage obtains the appropriate rewiring ratio, the connection rewiring method is fol-
lowed to improve the stability and generalization ability of the sparse SNNs, instead of pruning the
weights with the smallest magnitudes directly. The connection rewiring method is motivated by the
synaptic rewiring mechanism in the human brain. The synaptic rewiring in the brain, covering the
processes of synaptic pruning (elimination) and synaptic growth (formation), plays a vital role in
neural development, learning, memory, and overall cognitive function. This dynamic remodeling
of synaptic connections promotes the brain’s adaptability and efficiency in processing information.
Meanwhile, the effectiveness of the rewiring operation has been demonstrated in earlier works for
the structure learning of SNNs. Therefore, we employ the dynamic connection rewiring process
to implement the sparse training of SNNs models from scratch, thus improving the stability and
generalization ability of the sparse SNNs.
The connection rewiring method could implement the effective and fast training by the iterative
training of pruning and regrowing connections, avoiding the introduction of additional parameters
that could increase memory usage. The pruning rule ensures the elimination of less significant
connections in SNNs, reducing computational complexity while preserving the core structure of the
network. We rank the weights magnitude according to their absolute values in sparse SNNs trained
at the first stage, and prune the weight connections with the rewiring ratio of ci in the above section.
However, the only operation of pruning may destroy the stable convergence of sparse SNNs and
restrict the network’s expressive capacity. To fully leverage the information processing capacity of
the original large SNNs without any pruning, it is crucial that all connections are activated during
training. Consequently, the growth rule is employed to promote the regeneration of connections
that have not been activated for a significant period of time. Different pruning and regrow rules
adapt to the proposed two-stage sparse structure learning framework. For simplify, we adopt the
momentum-based growing rule, to prioritize the regeneration of synaptic connections according
to the momentum of the parameters. This approach ensures that connections showing significant
momentum, and thus potential importance, are prioritized for regrowth.
In detail, after obtained the suitable rewiring ratio in the first stage, we could then use this ratio ci to
guide the training in the second stage. Assuming the standard training procedure for sparse SNNs
is followed by freezing the masked weights as Wi = Mi ⊙ Wi , where the mask Mi is obtained
according to the pruning and regrowing principle as mentioned above. After obtaining the updated
Wi , we begin to compute the rewiring ratio again as described in the first stage. Therefore, through
the iterative process between the first and second stage, our model can improve the efficiency of
sparse training SNNs from scratch with the adaptive rewiring ratio.


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed two-stage sparse structure learning
method for SNNs. We conduct experiments on the CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and DVS-CIFAR10
datasets, including both ablation studies and comparative experiments. The experiments environ-
ments are NVIDIA-4090 GPU computation devices based on PYTORCH framework.

4.1   A NALYSIS ON THE DYNAMIC SPARSE TRAINING DURING TRAINING PROCESS

The performances of the proposed two-stage dynamic sparse training of SNNs are validated on two
different rewiring scopes, including neuron-wise rewiring and layer-wise rewiring. The neuron-wise
rewiring would adopt the connection rewiring each neuron of model parameters, which would prune
and regrow d · p connected weight parameters for each neuron, and the rewiring ratio of each neuron
is computed by the PQ index respectively. While the layer-wise one conducts weight parameter
rewiring for each layer separately.
Effectiveness in the layer-wise rewiring scope. The accuracy and connection density of the pro-
posed two-stage sparse training method for SNNs are illustrated in Fig. 3. The initial connection


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Sparsity measurement by the I (Wj)                                                 92.6                  92.48                                          0.60                                70.2    70.09                                                    0.60
                                              with the rewiring ratio cj                                                  92.4                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                            0.50                92.2                           0.50
                                                                                                                          92.2                                                        92.1                                                                 69.74                                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   69.8
                                                                                Iteration j                                92                            0.41                                  0.40                                69.6             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         69.41                      0.40


                                                                                                           Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Accuracy (%)
                      An example:                                                                                         91.8                                                                                                     69.4             0.40


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                                                                                                                               0.33


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Density
                      rewiring ratio                                                                                      91.6                                                               0.30                                  69.2                                                    68.94 0.30
                      cj<ck                                         compressed                                                                                                           0.27                                                                        0.33
                                                                                                                          91.4     91.3                                                                                             69
                                       Sparsity measurement by the I (Wk)                                                                                                                      0.20                                                                              0.26
                                                                                                                          91.2                                                                                                                                                                      0.20
                                              with the rewiring ratio ck                                                                                                                                                           68.8
                                                                                                                           91                                                                                                      68.6
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.10                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                                 Iteration k                              90.8                                                                                                     68.4
                                                                                                                          90.6                                                                 0.00                                68.2                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                        1            2              3               4                                                           1              2             3             4   Iteration
                                                                                                                                                                                        Iteration
                                                                                                                                                                                Density                                                                                          Density
                                                             (a)                                                                                         (b)                                                                                                       (c)


Figure 2: An example for training process of our method (a). The performance of the proposed
two-stage sparse training method for SNNs, on CIFAR10 (b) and CIFAR100 (c) datasets, in the
neuron-wise pruning scope. The bar chart represents the accuracy achieved by the proposed two-
stage sparse training method. The solid line reflects the density of synaptic connections in the SNNs
model.

               92.6                                                                                                                     0.60                                   71                                                                                                                                    0.60
                                                    92.38                                                                                                                                      70.16                               70.3
               92.4    92.27 92.27
                                                                                                                                                                               70       0.50                                              69.76
                           0.50                                                                                                         0.50                                                              69.61                                       69.54                                                          0.50
               92.2                      92.06                                                                                                                                        69.23
                                                                                 91.99
                92                     0.42                                                                                                                                    69                     0.42
                                                                                                                                        0.40                                                                                                                         68.43 68.48                                     0.40
Accuracy (%)


               91.8                               0.35             91.68                                                                                        Accuracy (%)                                           0.35                                                                 67.77
                                                                                                                                                                               68
                                                                                                                                               Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Density
               91.6                                          0.30                                                          91.49        0.30                                                                                            0.29                                                                         0.30
                                                                          91.34                                                                                                67                                                                   0.25
               91.4                                                                        91.26 91.25                                                                                                                                                                                               66.38
                                                                     0.25     0.21                                                                                                                                                                             0.21
                                                                                                                                        0.20                                                                                                                                                                         0.20
               91.2                                                                      0.18                                                                                  66                                                                                            0.18
                                                                                                    0.15                                                                                                                                                                                0.15
                91                                                                                                   0.13                                                                                                                                                                          0.13
                                                                                                                                        0.10                                                                                                                                                                    0.10
                                                                                                                                 0.11                                          65
               90.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.11

               90.6                                                                                                                     0.00                                   64                                                                                                                                    0.00
                          1      2            3          4           5     6         7          8          9                 10                                                         1        2              3                   4          5           6             7          8          9       10
                                                                    Iteration                                                                                                                                                                  Iteration

                               Accuracy                       Density                Trend                                                                                                      Accuracy                                  Density                        Trend

                                                                    (a)                                                                                                                                                                   (b)


Figure 3: The performance of the proposed two-stage sparse training method for SNNs, on CIFAR10
(a) and CIFAR100 (b) datasets, in the layer-wise pruning scope. The bar chart represents the accu-
racy achieved by the proposed method. The solid line reflects the density of synaptic connections in
the SNNs model. The dashed line is the trend analysis of accuracy using a two-period moving av-
erage. This diagram depicts the correlation between the density of the model and the enhancements
in performance achieved using our two-stage sparse structure learning technique.


density is set to be 0.5, which means that there are only half of the connections to be activated when
initialization. Meanwhile, the connections in our model remain sparse, ranging from 0.5 to 0.11 dur-
ing the whole training process. In addition, as the number of iterations in the sparse training process
increases, the proposed two-stage sparse training method generates a relatively suitable rewiring ra-
tio in the first stage, gradually reducing the synaptic connection density in SNNs. It is notable that
the proposed model achieves its peak accuracy of 92.38% and 70.3% during the fourth iteration with
a connection density of 30% on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets, respectively. The peak ac-
curacy is even higher than that (about 92.2% on the CIFAR10 dataset) of densely connected SNNs.
This improvement can be attributed to the connection rewiring, which introduces a more activated
parameter space and enhances the performance of sparse training by exploring extensive parameters
throughout the sparse training process.
Simultaneously, the overall accuracy of the sparse SNNs exhibits a fluctuating trend. In the initial
iterations, our model’s stage I produces appropriate levels of sparsity, which decreases the density
of synaptic connections in the sparse SNNs while improving accuracy. However, as the iterations
continue and the model becomes more compressed, the performance starts to decline moderately due
to increased sparsity. At a crucial point, when the model achieves its highest level of accuracy during
the fourth iteration with a connection density of 30% for CIFAR10, additional pruning results in a
collapse when important parameters are eliminated, leading to considerable performance decrease.


                                                                                                                                                          8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Effectiveness in the neuron-wise rewiring scope. We also verify the performance of our proposed
  two-stage sparse straining method in the neuron-wise scope. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we analyze the
  accuracy and the corresponding density within four iterations, for these four iterations have shown
  the main trend change as in the situation of layer-wise scope. As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed
  model exhibits similar accuracy oscillation phenomena in the CIFAR10 dataset when using layer-
  wise sparse structure training, akin to the neuron-wise approach. The proposed model achieves an
  accuracy of 92.48% at the second iteration with a connection density of only 41%. However, in the
  neuron-based scenario on the CIFAR100 dataset, no similar oscillation phenomena are observed.
  This could be due to the initial high sparsity, which may have led to the pruning of some critical
  synaptic connections. Thus, the remaining connections could not be insufficiently trained, resulting
  in decreased performance as the connection densities reduce.
                93                                                                                                               1.20
                        92.27     92.27                92.38                                                                            1.00
               92.5
                                             92.06                                                                               1.00
                                          91.93                                     91.99
                92                                                91.68 91.67                                                                  0.84
                                                     91.73
                                91.45                          91.56                      91.48               91.49
                                                                            91.3491.39                                           0.80                   0.71
Accuracy (%)


               91.5                                                                         91.26     91.25
                                                                                                            91.06                                               0.60


                                                                                                                       Density
                                                                                                    90.95
                91                                                                                                               0.60   0.50                           0.50
                      90.44                                                                                                                    0.42                               0.43
               90.5                                                                                                                                     0.35                               0.36
                                                                                                                                 0.40                           0.30                              0.30
                                                                                                                                                                       0.25                              0.26
                90                                                                                                                                                                0.21                          0.22
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.18   0.15
                                                                                                                                 0.20                                                                    0.13
               89.5                                                                                                                                                                                             0.11

                89                                                                                                               0.00
                         1         2         3          4          5       6        7       8         9       10                         1      2        3       4      5          6        7       8     9     10
                                                                   iteration                                                                                            iteration

                         GraduallySparse                               RemainingSparse                                                              GraduallySparse                    RemainingSparse
                                                 (a)                                                                                                                        (b)


  Figure 4: The ablation experiments of our proposed two-stage sparse training method for SNNs. (a)
  The accuracy comparison between the gradually sparse training and sparse training from scratch.
  (b) The connection density comparison between the gradually sparse training and sparse training
  from scratch.

  The above phenomena are consistent with the proposed model’s behavior. The pruning process ini-
  tially removes redundant parameters. This results in a decrease in the sparsity of model parameters,
  leading to an improvement in performance due to regularization effects. As the model is compressed
  more, some critical parameters are pruned when the model reaches convergence, resulting in an in-
  crease in sparsity and a slight decrease in performance. Eventually, as the model begins to collapse,
  all weakened parameters are removed, leaving only the essential parameters needed to sustain per-
  formance. Consequently, the level of sparsity decreases dramatically, leading to a noticeable decline
  in performance.
  Ablation study on the sparse training from scratch. To evaluate the effectiveness of sparse train-
  ing for the proposed two-stage sparse structure learning method, we conduct the ablation study by
  comparing the performance with gradually sparse training and sparse training from scratch. As illus-
  trated in Fig. 4, the performance of the sparse training from scratch (Remaining Sparse) outperforms
  that of the gradually sparse training from the initial fully non-sparse connections. The reason lies
  in that the manner of the sparse training from scratch explores a similar thorough parameter space
  to the non-sparse model and masks some noises caused by the redundancy parameters. Besides, the
  proposed model for sparse training from scratch demonstrates superior network connection sparsity
  than the gradually sparse training model at the same number of iterations. This allows the sparse
  training from scratch model to more quickly identify the optimal rewiring rate and achieve better per-
  formance. Additionally, the sparse training from scratch model is more hardware-friendly than the
  gradually sparse training model, making it more suitable for sparse training in hardware-constrained
  environments especially on-chip learning.

  4.2                   P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON TO OTHER METHODS

  We compare the performance of the proposed two-stage sparse structure learning method for SNNs
  with other current state-of-the-art SNNs: ADMM (Deng et al., 2021a), Grad R (Chen et al., 2021),
  ESLSNN (Shen et al., 2023) and STDS (Chen et al., 2022), UPR (Shi et al., 2023).
  As shown in Tab. 1, the proposed two-stage sparse structure training method achieves competi-
  tive performance among the various methods while retaining the advantage of sparse training from


                                                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance comparison of the proposed two-stage sparse structure learning approach for
SNNs with other models.
               Pruning                             Top-1       Acc.      Conn.    Param.    SOPS
     Dataset                Architecture     T
               Method                             Acc.(%)     Loss(%)     (%)       (M)     (M)
               ADMM         7 Conv, 2 FC      8    90.19       -0.13     25.03     15.54    -
                Grad R      6 Conv, 2 FC      8    92.54       -0.30     36.72     10.43    -
               ESLSNN         ResNet19        2    91.09        -1.7       50        6.3    180.56
    CIFAR10     STDS        6 Conv, 2 FC      8    92.49       -0.35     11.33     1.71     147.22
                 UPR        6 Conv, 2 FC      8    92.05       -0.79      1.16     9.56     16.47
                             ResNet19              92.48       +1.18     40.58     5.12     158.35
                 This                         2
                            Neuron-wise             92.1       +0.8      26.63     3.36     121.49
                 work
                             ResNet19              92.38       +0.11     29.72       3.7    133.26
                                              2
                             Layer-wise            91.99       -0.28     17.91     2.26     110.65
               ESLSNN         ResNet19        2    73.48       -0.99       50       6.32    186.25
    CIFAR100                                       70.45       -3.71      3.60              9.60
                  UPR      SEW ResNet18       4                                      -
                                                   69.41       -4.75      2.48              6.79
                 This        ResNet19
                                              2        70.3    +1.07     29.48      3.73    140.27
                 work        Layer-wise
     DVS-
               ESLSNN         VGGSNN         10        78.3    -0.28       10       0.92    129.64
    CIFAR10
                 STDS         VGGSNN         10        79.8     -2.6      4.67      0.24    38.85
                                                       78.3     -0.5      0.77      1.81    6.75
                  UPR         VGGSNN         10
                                                       81.0     -1.4      4.46       2.5    31.86
                 This        VGGSNN
                                             10        78.4    +0.08       30       2.76    189.02
                 work        Layer-wise



scratch. Notably, compared to fully non-sparse models, our sparse training model can even improve
performance while maintaining a certain level of sparsity through dynamic iteration and searching
for an appropriate rewiring ratio. For example, on the CIFAR10 dataset, the model trained using our
proposed method under the neuron-wise scope improves performance by approximately 1% com-
pared to the fully non-sparse model while maintaining a sparsity of 30% to 40%. On the CIFAR100
dataset, the performance of SNNs model with our two-stage sparse training method is also improved
1.07% compared to the non-sparse model with only 29.48% connection. It is worth noting that the
proposed two-stage training method proceeds sparse training from scratch and maintains sparse
training during the whole training process. These results demonstrate that our proposed model helps
the original non-sparse model mask redundant parameters and enhance the generalization capability
of the sparse model during iterative training by continuously finding the appropriate rewiring ratio.



5    C ONCLUSION

To summarize, this study has introduced a novel two-stage dynamic structure learning method tai-
lored for SNNs that effectively addresses the challenges of fixed pruning ratios and the limitations
of static sparse training methods prevalent in current models. In the first stage of our strategy, we
employ the PQ index to evaluate the compressibility of sparse subnetworks. This enables us to
make informed adjustments to the rewiring ratios of synaptic connections. This adaptive technique
enables the model to circumvent the drawbacks of insufficient pruning or excessive pruning. In the
second stage, the predetermined rewiring ratios guide the dynamic synaptic connection rewiring,
incorporating both pruning and regrowth strategies. This approach not only improves the compres-
sion efficiency of sparse SNNs but also boosts their performance. The iterative learning process
implemented across both stages ensures continuous improvement and adaptation of the sparse net-
work structure throughout the training phase. The experimental results validate that the proposed
dynamic structure learning greatly improves the compression efficiency of SNNs. Additionally, it
either matches or exceeds the performance benchmarks set by current models in certain circum-
stances. Crucially, this strategy maintains the benefits of sparse training from the scratch, which is
particularly advantageous in settings with restricted hardware resources, like neuromorphic hard-
ware on Edge AI.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (No.
62306274, 62088102, 62476035, 62206037, 61925603), Open Research Program of the National
Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University (No. BMI2400012).

R EFERENCES
Samuel J Barnes and Gerald T Finnerty. Sensory Experience and Cortical Rewiring. The Neurosci-
  entist, 16(2):186–198, 2010.
Sophie H Bennett, Alastair J Kirby, and Gerald T Finnerty. Rewiring the Connectome: Evidence
  and Effects. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 88:51–62, 2018.
Kang Chen, Yajing Zheng, Tiejun Huang, and Zhaofei Yu. Rethinking high-speed image recon-
  struction framework with spike camera. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04477, 2025.
Yanqi Chen, Zhaofei Yu, Wei Fang, Tiejun Huang, and Yonghong Tian. Pruning of deep spiking
  neural networks through gradient rewiring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04916, 2021.
Yanqi Chen, Zhaofei Yu, Wei Fang, Zhengyu Ma, Tiejun Huang, and Yonghong Tian. State tran-
  sition of dendritic spines improves learning of sparse spiking neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3701–3715. PMLR, 2022.
Luisa De Vivo, Michele Bellesi, William Marshall, Eric A Bushong, Mark H Ellisman, Giulio
  Tononi, and Chiara Cirelli. Ultrastructural Evidence for Synaptic Scaling Across the Wake/sleep
  Cycle. Science, 355(6324):507–510, 2017.
Lei Deng, Yujie Wu, Yifan Hu, Ling Liang, Guoqi Li, Xing Hu, Yufei Ding, Peng Li, and Yuan Xie.
  Comprehensive snn compression using admm optimization and activity regularization. IEEE
  transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 2021a.
Shikuang Deng, Yuhang Li, Shanghang Zhang, and Shi Gu. Temporal efficient training of spiking
  neural network via gradient re-weighting. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021b.
Enmao Diao, Ganghua Wang, Jiawei Zhan, Yuhong Yang, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Pruning
  deep neural networks from a sparsity perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05601, 2023.
Wei Fang, Yanqi Chen, Jianhao Ding, Zhaofei Yu, Timothée Masquelier, Ding Chen, Liwei Huang,
 Huihui Zhou, Guoqi Li, and Yonghong Tian. Spikingjelly: An open-source machine learning
 infrastructure platform for spike-based intelligence. Science Advances, 9(40):eadi1480, 2023.
 doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adi1480. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/
 sciadv.adi1480.
Richard Gast, Sara A Solla, and Ann Kennedy. Neural heterogeneity controls computations in
  spiking neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(3):e2311885121,
  2024.
Banglei Guan and Ji Zhao. Relative pose estimation for multi-camera systems from point correspon-
  dences with scale ratio. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
  pp. 5036–5044, 2022.
Banglei Guan, Ji Zhao, and Laurent Kneip. Six-point method for multi-camera systems with reduced
  solution space. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 109–126. Springer, 2024.
Bing Han, Feifei Zhao, Wenxuan Pan, and Yi Zeng. Adaptive sparse structure development with
  pruning and regeneration for spiking neural networks. Information Sciences, pp. 121481, 2024a.
Bing Han, Feifei Zhao, Yi Zeng, and Guobin Shen. Developmental plasticity-inspired adaptive
  pruning for deep spiking and artificial neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 2024b.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yangfan Hu, Huajin Tang, and Gang Pan. Spiking deep residual networks. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 34(8):5200–5205, 2021.

Yangfan Hu, Qian Zheng, Xudong Jiang, and Gang Pan. Fast-snn: Fast spiking neural network by
  converting quantized ann. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45
  (12):14546–14562, 2023.

Yifan Hu, Lei Deng, Yujie Wu, Man Yao, and Guoqi Li. Advancing spiking neural networks toward
  deep residual learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2024.

Niall Hurley and Scott Rickard. Comparing measures of sparsity. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 55(10):4723–4741, 2009.

Nabil Imam and Thomas A Cleland. Rapid online learning and robust recall in a neuromorphic
  olfactory circuit. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(3):181–191, 2020.

Tingting Jiang, Qi Xu, Xuming Ran, Jiangrong Shen, Pan Lv, Qiang Zhang, and Gang Pan. Adaptive
  deep spiking neural network with global-local learning via balanced excitatory and inhibitory
  mechanism. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

David Kappel, Stefan Habenschuss, Robert Legenstein, and Wolfgang Maass. Network plasticity as
  bayesian inference. PLoS computational biology, 11(11):e1004485, 2015.

Youngeun Kim, Yuhang Li, Hyoungseob Park, Yeshwanth Venkatesha, Ruokai Yin, and
  Priyadarshini Panda. Exploring lottery ticket hypothesis in spiking neural networks. In Euro-
  pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 102–120. Springer, 2022.

Yaxin Li, Xuanye Fang, Yuyuan Gao, Dongdong Zhou, Jiangrong Shen, Jian K Liu, Gang Pan, and
  Qi Xu. Efficient structure slimming for spiking neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2024a.

Yaxin Li, Qi Xu, Jiangrong Shen, Hongming Xu, Long Chen, and Gang Pan. Towards efficient
  deep spiking neural networks construction with spiking activity based pruning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.01072, 2024b.

Shunkun Liang, Banglei Guan, Zhenbao Yu, Pengju Sun, and Yang Shang. Camera calibration using
  a collimator system. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 374–390. Springer, 2024.

Yue Liu, Shanlin Xiao, Bo Li, and Zhiyi Yu. Sparsespikformer: A co-design framework for token
  and weight pruning in spiking transformer. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6410–6414. IEEE, 2024a.

Zibin Liu, Banglei Guan, Yang Shang, Shunkun Liang, Zhenbao Yu, and Qifeng Yu. Optical flow-
  guided 6dof object pose tracking with an event camera. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Inter-
  national Conference on Multimedia, pp. 6501–6509, 2024b.

Zibin Liu, Banglei Guan, Yang Shang, Qifeng Yu, and Laurent Kneip. Line-based 6-dof object pose
  estimation and tracking with an event camera. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2024c.

Zibin Liu, Banglei Guan, Yang Shang, Yifei Bian, Pengju Sun, and Qifeng Yu. Stereo event-based,
  6-dof pose tracking for uncooperative spacecraft. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
  Sensing, 2025.

De Ma, Xiaofei Jin, Shichun Sun, Yitao Li, Xundong Wu, Youneng Hu, Fangchao Yang, Huajin
  Tang, Xiaolei Zhu, Peng Lin, et al. Darwin3: a large-scale neuromorphic chip with a novel isa
  and on-chip learning. National Science Review, 11(5):nwae102, 2024.

Wolfgang Maass. Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models.
 Neural networks, 10(9):1659–1671, 1997.

James O’ Neill. An overview of neural network compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03669,
  2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jing Pei, Lei Deng, Sen Song, Mingguo Zhao, Youhui Zhang, Shuang Wu, Guanrui Wang, Zhe
   Zou, Zhenzhi Wu, Wei He, et al. Towards artificial general intelligence with hybrid tianjic chip
   architecture. Nature, 572(7767):106–111, 2019.
Yu Qi, Jiangrong Shen, Yueming Wang, Huajin Tang, Hang Yu, Zhaohui Wu, Gang Pan, et al.
  Jointly learning network connections and link weights in spiking neural networks. In IJCAI, pp.
  1597–1603, 2018.
Dayong Ren, Zhe Ma, Yuanpei Chen, Weihang Peng, Xiaode Liu, Yuhan Zhang, and Yufei Guo.
  Spiking pointnet: Spiking neural networks for point clouds. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jiangrong Shen, Qi Xu, Jian K Liu, Yueming Wang, Gang Pan, and Huajin Tang. Esl-snns: An
   evolutionary structure learning strategy for spiking neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 86–93, 2023.
Jiangrong Shen, Wenyao Ni, Qi Xu, and Huajin Tang. Efficient spiking neural networks with sparse
   selective activation for continual learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 611–619, 2024.
Xinyu Shi, Jianhao Ding, Zecheng Hao, and Zhaofei Yu. Towards energy efficient spiking neu-
  ral networks: An unstructured pruning framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Ana Stanojevic, Stanisław Woźniak, Guillaume Bellec, Giovanni Cherubini, Angeliki Pantazi, and
  Wulfram Gerstner. High-performance deep spiking neural networks with 0.3 spikes per neuron.
  Nature Communications, 15(1):6793, 2024.
Shiva Subbulakshmi Radhakrishnan, Amritanand Sebastian, Aaryan Oberoi, Sarbashis Das, and
  Saptarshi Das. A biomimetic neural encoder for spiking neural network. Nature communications,
  12(1):2143, 2021.
Yujie Wu, Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Jun Zhu, Yuan Xie, and Luping Shi. Direct Training for Spiking
  Neural Networks: Faster, Larger, Better. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1311–1318, 2019.
Qi Xu, Yaxin Li, Xuanye Fang, Jiangrong Shen, Qiang Zhang, and Gang Pan. Reversing structural
  pattern learning with biologically inspired knowledge distillation for spiking neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 3431–3439, 2024.
Man Yao, Jiakui Hu, Tianxiang Hu, Yifan Xu, Zhaokun Zhou, Yonghong Tian, Bo Xu, and Guoqi
 Li. Spike-driven transformer v2: Meta spiking neural network architecture inspiring the design
 of next-generation neuromorphic chips. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03663, 2024.
Hang Yin, John Boaz Lee, Xiangnan Kong, Thomas Hartvigsen, and Sihong Xie. Energy-efficient
  models for high-dimensional spike train classification using sparse spiking neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp.
  2017–2025, 2021.
Ruokai Yin, Youngeun Kim, Yuhang Li, Abhishek Moitra, Nitin Satpute, Anna Hambitzer, and
  Priyadarshini Panda. Workload-balanced pruning for sparse spiking neural networks. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2024.
Hanle Zheng, Zhong Zheng, Rui Hu, Bo Xiao, Yujie Wu, Fangwen Yu, Xue Liu, Guoqi Li, and Lei
  Deng. Temporal dendritic heterogeneity incorporated with spiking neural networks for learning
  multi-timescale dynamics. Nature Communications, 15(1):277, 2024.
Yue Zhou, Jiawei Fu, Zirui Chen, Fuwei Zhuge, Yasai Wang, Jianmin Yan, Sijie Ma, Lin Xu, Huan-
  mei Yuan, Mansun Chan, et al. Computational event-driven vision sensors for in-sensor spiking
  neural networks. Nature Electronics, 6(11):870–878, 2023.


                                                13
