Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B UILD -A-S CENE : I NTERACTIVE 3D L AYOUT C ON -
TROL FOR D IFFUSION -BASED I MAGE G ENERATION

 Abdelrahman Eldesokey & Peter Wonka
 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
 Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
 {first.last}@kaust.edu.sa


      0


      cozy room                        white sofa                     white sofa


                                                                        books
                                                                      wood table
      floor lamp
                                       floor lamp                       cushion
                                        plant pot


Figure 1: Build-A-Scene is an interactive diffusion-based approach for image generation based on
a user-provided 3D layout. At each generation stage, the user can control object type, location, and
orientation (in-plane rotation) in 3D. Build-A-Scene ensures that objects are seamlessly integrated
into the scene (see shadows and reflections) and preserve their identity under layout changes.


                                               A BSTRACT

          We propose a diffusion-based approach for Text-to-Image (T2I) generation with
          interactive 3D layout control. Layout control has been widely studied to alleviate
          the shortcomings of T2I diffusion models in understanding objectsвҖҷ placement and
          relationships from text descriptions. Nevertheless, existing approaches for layout
          control are limited to 2D layouts, require the user to provide a static layout be-
          forehand, and fail to preserve generated images under layout changes. This makes
          these approaches unsuitable for applications that require 3D object-wise control
          and iterative refinements, e.g., interior design and complex scene generation. To
          this end, we leverage the recent advancements in depth-conditioned T2I models
          and propose a novel approach for interactive 3D layout control. We replace the
          traditional 2D boxes used in layout control with 3D boxes. Furthermore, we re-
          vamp the T2I task as a multi-stage generation process, where at each stage, the
          user can insert, change, and move an object in 3D while preserving objects from
          earlier stages. We achieve this through a novel Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA)
          module and a consistent 3D object translation strategy. To evaluate our approach,
          we establish a benchmark and an evaluation protocol for interactive 3D layout
          control. Experiments show that our approach can generate complicated scenes
          based on 3D layouts, outperforming the standard depth-conditioned T2I meth-
          ods by two-folds on object generation success rate. Moreover, it outperforms all
          methods in comparison on preserving objects under layout changes. Project Page:
          https://abdo-eldesokey.github.io/build-a-scene/



                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     2D Layout Guidance
                               white sofa                     white sofa                           white sofa


                                                                                                        floor lamp
                                               3D Boxes                            Interactive                          Layout control

                          вҖңA cozy room with               вҖңA cozy room with                       вҖңA cozy room with
                          windows and beige               windows and beige                      windows and beige
     LooseControl


                          curtains and white              curtains and white                     curtains, white sofa
                                       sofaвҖқ                           sofaвҖқ                       and a floor lampвҖқ


                                               3D Boxes                            Interactive                          Layout control

                                                                                                       floor lamp
     Build-A-Scene


                              white sofa                      white sofa                               white sofa
         (Ours)


                                               3D Boxes                            Interactive                          Layout control


Figure 2: Existing 2D layout control approaches, i.e., Layout Guidance Chen et al. (2024) accept
static 2D layouts with no mechanism for 3D control or interactively changing the layout while
preserving the image. LooseControl Bhat et al. (2024) can generate images conditioned on 3D
boxes but cannot interactively move objects or handle a layout with diverse objects. Build-A-Scene
is the first approach to support 3D layouts and allows users to manipulate them interactively.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Podell et al., 2024) have profoundly revolutionized image generation, making it a pivotal task
in various creative domains, including design, art, and media production. Image diffusion models
excel at generating high-quality images that adhere to a given textual prompt, effectively describing
the image contents. This enhances the capability and efficiency of creators by enabling them to
generate concepts and designs solely by describing their thoughts in text. However, multiple studies
(Chen et al., 2024; Lian et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023) have shown that diffusion models struggle
to follow textual prompts accurately. More specifically, they encounter difficulties following object
count, comprehending object placement, and understanding the relationship between objects.
Several approaches (Chen et al., 2024; Lian et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2023;
Xie et al., 2023; Gani et al., 2024) attempted to alleviate these shortcomings by investigating 2D
layout control. These approaches require the user to provide a layout describing each objectвҖҷs size,
shape, and location in the image alongside their respective textual description. Nonetheless, existing
approaches for layout control adopt 2D inputs such as points, bounding boxes, or segmentation maps
with no mechanism to position objects in 3D. This limits the creatorsвҖҷ controllability in applications
that require 3D control over the location and orientation (in-plane rotations) of objects, such as
interior design and complex scene generation. Moreover, existing approaches for layout control
require the user to provide a static layout beforehand and would fail to preserve the generated image
under any layout changes, e.g., moving or scaling an object. Figure 2 shows an example of this
scenario for the 2D layout approach, Layout-Guidance Chen et al. (2024), where moving the box
that contains the sofa leads to changes in the sofa itself and the rest of the scene (the door).
To control the position of objects in 3D, several depth-conditioned diffusion models (Zhang et al.,
2023; Mou et al., 2023) have been proposed to generate images for given depth maps. Furthermore,
LooseControl (LC) (Bhat et al., 2024) introduced the use of rendered 3D boxes and planes as a
conditioning signal for T2I models, enabling control over the location and orientation of objects in
3D. However, LooseControl was not designed to follow a layout with a diverse set of objects and
relies solely on textual prompts to describe the imageвҖҷs contents. It is often observed that when
dealing with multiple types of objects, some objects are either omitted or placed in an incorrect
location, as demonstrated in Figure 2. In addition, any changes to the 3D boxes used as guidance
alter the generated objects and might cause artifacts. This limits the usability of LC in generating
complex scenes with diverse objects.


                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We introduce Build-A-Scene, an interactive training-free approach for T2I with 3D layout control.
Our approach formulates the image generation process as a multi-stage building process where the
user starts with an empty scene and populates it using an interactive 3D layout. We achieve this by
leveraging the existing depth conditioning model LC to replace the 2D bounding boxes in layout
control with 3D boxes. Furthermore, we propose a Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA) module that
allows seamlessly adding objects to a scene while preserving the existing contents. Additionally, we
introduce a strategy for consistent 3D translation that preserves the identity of objects under layout
changes. To evaluate our approach, we establish a benchmark and an evaluation protocol for the
task of interactive 3D layout control. Experiments show that our approach can generate complicated
images and outperforms LC by a factor of 2 on object generation success rate and even on adherence
to the user-provided 3D boxes. It even outperforms the 2D Layout-Guidance by вҲј 15% on object
generation success rate despite being training and guidance-free. Moreover, it outperforms Layout-
Guidance and LC in preserving objects under layout changes on all metrics.


2     R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we give a brief overview of existing approaches for 2D layout control. Since we
introduce a new strategy for preserving object identity under layout change, we describe existing
approaches for the task of consistent object generation in diffusion-based Text-to-Image (T2I).

2.1   L AYOUT C ONTROL IN T2I D IFFUSION M ODELS

The objective of layout control is to allow the user to explicitly specify where each element of the
generated image should be placed. Existing approaches employ 2D layouts with various types of
annotations, including points, scribbles, bounding boxes, and segmentation masks. These layouts
are incorporated into the image generation process either by fine-tuning the pre-trained diffusing
models to incorporate them as additional conditions or in a training-free manner. (Yang et al.,
2023b; Zheng et al., 2023) trained additional modules to incorporate the layout as coordinates into
a pre-trained diffusion model. (Li et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Nie et al., 2024; Avrahami et al.,
2023b) train different modules to condition the image generation process on bounding boxes, dense
blobs, and other types of grounding data. SceneComposer (Zeng et al., 2023) introduced different
levels of semantic layouts ranging from text to fine segmentation maps by fine-tuning a pre-trained
diffusion model on a richly annotated dataset. This category of approaches requires fine-tuning of
pre-trained diffusion models, which comes at a computational and data annotation cost.
The training-free approaches attempted to solve the problem in a zero-shot manner to avoid com-
plexities associated with fine-tuning diffusion models. (Xie et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2024) employed guidance strategies over the cross-attention responses to steer the denoising
process in a direction that fulfills the layout specification. For a finer level of layout control, Zest
(Couairon et al., 2023) employed layout segmentation maps and utilized a segmentation model to
guide the diffusion process to align with the segmentation maps. None of these aforementioned
approaches are capable of controlling object location and orientation in a 3D scene, i.e., 3D layout
control. Moreover, they expect the user to provide a static layout beforehand and do not offer any
mechanisms to change layout elements while preserving the rest of the image. We attempt to tackle
these shortcomings by introducing the first interactive 3D layout control approach for T2I.

2.2   C ONSISTENT O BJECT G ENERATION IN T2I

Several approaches have studied the problem of consistent object generation, i.e., personalized gen-
eration, in diffusion models to generate consistent variations of a specific object. (Ruiz et al., 2023;
Hu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023) fine-tunes a pre-trained diffusion model on a set of images of a
specific subject, which allows for generating consistent images of the subject as specified by the text
prompt. (Ye et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Song et al., 2023) followed a different
approach and trained adapters to condition pre-trained diffusion models on a single image of the
subject. (Yuan et al., 2023) finetuned a diffusion model to be conditioned on a rigid transformation
matrix describing the pose of the object. These aforementioned approaches are focused on person-
alized generation given user-provided images and textual prompts. In contrast, our approach aims


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    A cozy living room                                                                                             STAGE                                рқҗ·2                       рқҗј2

                                                                     BAS
                         RENDER                                                                                                     RENDER
                                              рқҗ·0
                                                    Latents    рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ү0 , рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҮвҲ’1
                                                                      0
                                                                          , вҖҰ , рқ‘Ҙ00                    рқҗј0
                       Self-Attention   рқҗҫрқ‘Ү0 , рқҗҫрқ‘ҮвҲ’1
                                               0
                                                   , вҖҰ , рқҗҫ00   рқ‘„рқ‘Ү0 , рқ‘„рқ‘ҮвҲ’1
                                                                      0
                                                                          , вҖҰ , рқ‘„00   рқ‘үрқ‘Ү0 , рқ‘үрқ‘ҮвҲ’1
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                 , вҖҰ , рқ‘ү00
 STAGE 0

      Point-wise multiplication    Concatenate          Matrix multiplication SM Softmax             Summation                Cartesian Coordinates                   BAS

                Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA)                     Latent Blending                                     Warp
       1
      рқ‘Җрқҗ№рқҗә       рқҗҫрқ‘Ў0              SM                                рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў0                                       рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў1     Object
                                                                                                                                                           рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ө                        рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў0
                                                                                                                                      рқҗјрқ‘Ө
                                                      рқҗҙ1рқ‘Ў

                            рқ‘„рқ‘Ў1         рқ‘үрқ‘Ў1
                                                                                      рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў1                                            DDIM
                 рқҗҫрқ‘Ў1                                                 1
                                                                    рқ‘Җрқҗөрқҗә                                  1
                                                                                                        рқ‘Җрқҗ№рқҗә
                                                                                                                                    Inversion                         рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў2

 STAGE                                                                                                                           рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Үрқ‘Ө , рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҮвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                        рқ‘Ө
                                                                                                                                            , вҖҰ , рқ‘Ҙ0рқ‘Ө
                                                                                                                                                                 рқ‘Ҷ2
                                                                                                                    Segment                                                  Consistent
                                                                     BAS                                                                            Warp
                                                                                                                     Object                                                 3D Translation
                         RENDER
                                              рқҗ·1


                                                                                                                                                        вҖҰ
    A white sofa
                                                                                                       рқҗј1                                      To the next STAGE


Figure 3: An overview of Build-A-Scene (BAS). We formulate the Text-to-Image (T2I) task as a
multi-stage generation process. We illustrate a 3-stage scene. At STAGE 0, the user defines an empty
scene with full control over scene size and camera parameters. At STAGE 1, the user adds an object
(a white sofa) by defining a box and its corresponding prompt. Our proposed Dynamic Self-Attention
(DSA) module, coupled with latent blending, ensures that the object is seamlessly integrated into the
scene while preserving the existing contents from STAGE 0. At STAGE 2, we illustrate our Consistent
3D Translation strategy that allows moving the object in 3D while preserving its identity. Note:
DDIM inversion is the reverse sampling process of the diffusion model Song et al. (2021), and the
Object Warping operation is explained in Appendix D.


to generate an image based on a 3D layout and textual prompts. However, we aim to allow users to
change the layout while preserving the generated image, similar to personalized generation.
Another category of training-free approaches for consistent object generation manipulates self-
attention to preserve image consistency (Cao et al., 2023; Khachatryan et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023).
The image style can be preserved by injecting the keys and values from a reference image into the
self-attention layers of the generated image. However, these approaches are designed to preserve
the overall style, but the details of every individual object are not fully preserved (see Figure 4). We
propose a novel self-attention module that allows seamlessly inserting objects in an existing scene
without altering the existing image contents.

3        M ETHOD
In Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models, the objective is to generate an image I given a user-
provided textual prompt P . In our work, a layout is specified by the user in the form of 3D bounding
boxes B = {B 1 , B 2 , . . . , B n } and their corresponding prompts P = {P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P n }. Under this
setting, the goal is to generate an image where the content enclosed within each bounding box ad-
heres to its respective prompt. More specifically, we have two objectives: 1) Establish an interactive
3D layout pipeline. 2) Ensure object consistency under layout changes.

3.1         F ROM 2D TO 3D L AYOUT C ONTROL

The first step to establishing 3D layout control is finding an appropriate form of 3D annotations that
the user can easily create. We leverage LooseControl (Bhat et al., 2024) (LC) for this purpose as it
accepts rendered 3D boxes and planes as a conditioning signal in addition to a text prompt P . We
define the 3D layout as an empty 3D cuboid where the user can add planes to define the boundaries
and 3D boxes to define the elements of the scene. We refer to the set of 3D boxes as B and their
corresponding prompts as P as explained above. Unlike existing 2D layout approaches that require
the user to provide the entire layout beforehand, we propose a novel paradigm for layout control
by revamping image generation as a sequential process. The user starts with an empty scene and


                                                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Reference Image                    Standard Attention       Cross-Frame Attention   Extended Attention   DSA (Ours)


Reference Depth                       Target Depth


Figure 4: A comparison between existing self-attention mechanisms and our proposed Dynamic
Self-Attention (DSA).


interactively adds objects to it through multiple generation stages i вҲҲ [0, n]. At each stage, the user
has control over a single object and can change its type, size, 3D location, and orientation. This
greatly enhances user controllability and customizability over the standard layout control. Figure 3
illustrates our pipeline.
At the first stage, i.e., STAGE 0, the background is generated based on an initial prompt that we denote
P 0 and a rendered depth map of the layout D0 with only planes to define the boundaries. At this
stage, the user has full control over the camera model, intrinsic parameters, and viewpoint, providing
enhanced 3D control over the generated scene, unlike the existing 2D layout control approaches that
lack any control of the camera. At the following generation stages, STAGE i > 0, the user adds a 3D
box B i and specifies its corresponding prompt P i . The 3D scene is rendered to obtain a depth map
Di , a background and foreground masks for the box being generated at this stage, which we denote
      i
as MBG    and MFi G . During the diffusion process at STAGE i, an initial latent code xiT is drawn from
a random Gaussian noise distribution. DDIM (Song et al., 2021) is used to iteratively denoise the
latent code through multiple denoising steps t : T вҶ’ 0:
                             вҲҡ
                                              q
                     xitвҲ’1 = ОұtвҲ’1 xМӮi,t 0 +     1 вҲ’ ОұtвҲ’1 вҲ’ Пғt2 ПөtОё (xit , P i , Di ) + Пғt Пөt ,       (1)
                                                вҲҡ
                                          xit вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Оұt ПөtОё (xit , P i , Di )
                                  xМӮi,t
                                    0   =             вҲҡ                        .                     (2)
                                                        Оұt
where Оұt , Пғt are the parameters of a noise scheduler, ПөtОё is the noise prediction from the diffusion
model, and Пөt is random Gaussian noise.

3.2       I NTERACTIVE 3D L AYOUT C ONTROL

At STAGE i > 0, we aim to generate a new object based on the 3D box B i and the textual prompt P i .
At the same time, the object is desired to be seamlessly integrated into the scene while preserving
the existing contents from previous stages. This can typically be done through inpainting or blended
diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2023a). However, they require the user to provide a free-form inpainting
mask per object, which is laborious, and they are not directly compatible with the depth-conditioned
LC. We propose a novel technique for this purpose that is based on manipulating the self-attention
maps and the latent codes.
In standard image diffusion models with a UNet backbone, i.e., Stable Diffusion 1.5 (Rombach
et al., 2022), each residual block has self-attention modules, which were found to encode the style
and the structure of the generated image (Tumanyan et al., 2023). Self-attention for a given block
and timestep t at STAGE i is computed as:
                                                   пЈ«          пЈ¶
                                                       i   iвҠӨ
                                                      Qt K t пЈё
                                   Ait = Softmax пЈӯ q            Vti ,
                                                         dk i                                   (3)
                                                                                       t


                                    Qit = fti WQ ,             Kti =fti WK ,                  V i = fti WV .
where fti are the intermediate UNet features, and W are trainable projection matrices.
A widely used approach to transfer the style of a reference image to a target image is cross-frame
attention (Cao et al., 2023; Khachatryan et al., 2023), which replaces K i and V i in Equation (3) with
those of the reference image, i.e., K iвҲ’1 and V iвҲ’1 . This suggests that the target image will query


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the reference image for style, resulting in a consistent style between the two images. This approach
was adopted in LC, but it was found to be incapable of generating new objects with a different style,
as shown in Figure 4. This is intuitive as we limit the target image to copy the style exclusively
from the source image. An alternative approach is the extended attention adopted in Qi et al. (2023)
for performing consistent video edits, where the target image queries style from multiple images.
Figure 4 shows that this strategy can generate objects with a new style but deviates from the overall
style of the reference image as different styles are mixed in an uncontrolled manner.
We propose a Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA) technique, which is able to freely generate an object
with a new style while preserving the existing elements of the image. We achieve this by augmenting
the attention keys to include the keys of STAGE i вҲ’ 1 and a masked window of the keys of STAGE i:
                                               вҠӨ        вҠӨ
                                 KМӮti = [KtiвҲ’1 вҠҳ [Kti вҠҷ MFi G ] ] ,
                                              вҠӨ        вҠӨ
                                 VМӮti = [VtiвҲ’1 вҠҳ [Vti вҠҷ MFi G ] ] ,
                                               пЈ«            пЈ¶                                        (4)
                                                    i     i
                                                  Q KМӮ
                                 Ait = Softmax пЈӯ qt t пЈё VМӮti ,
                                                      dkti
where вҠҳ is the concatenation operator, and вҠҷ is point-wise product. This enforces the diffusion
model to copy the overall style of the previous stage and allows it to generate a new style within the
box of the current stage. It is noteworthy that our approach is plug-and-play into the pre-trained dif-
fusion model and does not require any finetuning. Moreover, it does not rely on guidance similar to
(Chen et al., 2024), which requires backpropagating through the diffusion model at some iterations,
adding a computation overhead.
To enhance the preservation of the background of the previous stage (especially when the latent
distribution changes between stages), we blend the latent codes as follows:
                                     xit = MBGi
                                                 xtiвҲ’1 + MFi G xit ,                                (5)
Similarly, the features can be blended for more preservation. Finally, to harmonize the colors of the
scene, we follow (Yang et al., 2023a), and we optionally perform AdaIN (Huang & Belongie, 2017)
between xiвҲ’1
           t   and xit . We obtain the final image I i for STAGE i at the end of the denoising process.

3.3   C ONSISTENT 3D T RANSLATION

A major limitation of existing layout control approaches is their inability to preserve objects under
layout changes, i.e., scaling and translation. LC also suffers from the same problem as demonstrated
in Figure 2. This was attributed to the distributional shift of the latents that are aligned with the
object before and after the layout change (Eldesokey & Wonka, 2024). Therefore, we propose a
strategy for preserving objects under layout changes, i.e., 3D translation.
To translate an object at STAGE i, we start by segmenting the object out of the generated image in the
previous stage I iвҲ’1 . To achieve this without any user intervention, we first obtain a coarse segmen-
tation by accumulating the cross-attention maps that correspond to the object token in P iвҲ’1 similar
to (Cao et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2022). Then, we fit a bounding box to this coarse segmentation
and use it as an input to SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to obtain a fine segmentation map S iвҲ’1 After
segmenting the object, we construct a warped image I w of the object after layout change by pasting
the segmented object on the generated image from STAGE i вҲ’ 2. To simulate the 3D translation
accurately in the image plane, we use the 3D Cartesian coordinates map of the object box before
and after the translation to warp the object. More specifically, we compute correspondences for the
4 corners of the objects between the two Cartesian maps and use them to warp the object in the im-
age plane. We also use the same technique to warp the segmentation map S iвҲ’1 to the new location
producing S i . A detailed illustration is provided in the Appendix.
By inverting the warped image through DDIM inversion, we obtain an approximate trajectory
xw    w               w
 T , xT вҲ’1 , . . . , x0 of the latents corresponding to the object after changing the layout. Finally, we
                                         iвҲ’2
blend the latents between xw     t and xt    as follows:
                                                          iвҲ’2
                                 xit = S i xw         i
                                            t + (1 вҲ’ S ) xt   .                               (6)
This blending allows the diffusion model to regenerate the object of interest at the new location
while preserving the background. We perform this blending for a number of timesteps T <= T .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          3D Layout Control                            Object Consistency
                                                                                                                RT
                   CLIPT2I вҶ‘    OA вҶ‘       mIOU вҶ‘   CLIPI2I вҶ‘   SSIM вҶ‘      PSNR вҶ‘        3D-Dir вҶ‘   3D-Rot вҶ“
 Layout-Guidance    0.323        48.2       0.425    0.838       0.189        28.35         0.48       29в—Ұ      12 s
 LooseControl       0.302        24.3       0.633    0.924       0.367        29.12         0.65       27в—Ұ       2s
 Ours               0.321        53.5       0.772    0.924       0.463         29.3         0.88       22в—Ұ       6s


Table 1: A quantitative comparison between our proposed approach, the 2D layout control method
Layout-Guidance Chen et al. (2024), and LooseControl Bhat et al. (2024). RT refers to runtime.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of our proposed approach. For
clearer insights, we split the evaluation into two sub-tasks: (1) 3D layout control and (2) object
consistency under layout change.

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Comparison We compare against the baseline LooseControl (LC) Bhat et al. (2024) that we employ
for depth conditioning in our pipeline. To show where our approach stands with respect to 2D layout
approaches, we also compare against Layout-Guidance Chen et al. (2024) that accepts 2D bounding
boxes. To map the 3D boxes to 2D, we fit a bounding box to box masks MFi G .
Implementation Details LC is based on ControlNet with Stable Diffusion v1.5 Rombach et al.
(2022) that is fine-tuned through LoRA adaptation Hu et al. (2021). We keep all the original settings
of LC except for the sampler that we changed to a DDIM sampler with a linear schedule as we
noticed that it is more stable. We perform T = 20 denoising steps in the quantitative comparison for
efficiency and T = 40 for the qualitative results for better quality. For Layout-Guidance, we use the
official implementation with the default parameters. The source code and the evaluation protocol
are publicly available. 1

4.2      3D L AYOUT C ONTROL E VALUATION

In this task, given a set of 3D bounding boxes and their corresponding prompts, the goal is to
generate an image that conforms to these inputs.
Evaluation Strategy Since there exist no criteria for evaluating 3D layout control, we define a new
evaluation protocol for 3D layout control inspired by its 2D counterpart (Chen et al., 2024; Xie
et al., 2023). We define a set of 16 objects from the MS COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) and their
corresponding aspect ratios. In addition, we define 10 different prompts for diverse scenes such
as desert, snow, and room to use for the initial prompt P 0 . We start by sampling a random scene,
object, and create a 3D box that matches the objectвҖҷs aspect ratio at a random z-coordinate. Then, we
sample another object, and we randomly select one of the three placements [вҖқleftвҖқ, вҖқrightвҖқ, вҖқabove]
relative to the first object. We place the second object into the scene similarly, ensuring that it does
not occlude the first object or go out of bounds.
We sampled 100 random layouts and ran each layout with 5 different seeds for fairness. Since the
baseline LC does not accept layouts, we automatically create a textual description P вҲ— of the scene
in the form:
        P вҲ— : вҖң[P 0 ] with [P 1 ] on the left/right and [P 2 ]on the right/leftвҖқ
Similarly, we create the textual description for the relation вҖқaboveвҖқ as well.
Evaluation Metrics We are interested in evaluating three aspects: how the generated image con-
fronts to the textual description of the scene, whether all specified objects in the layout have been
generated, and how well each object fits within its box.
CLIPT 2I : We compute the CLIP score (Radford et al., 2021) between the final generated image and
the textual description of the image P вҲ— .
    1
        https://github.com/abdo-eldesokey/build-a-scene


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Layout               Depth     Ours (Stage 0)   Ours (Stage n)   Layout-Guidance    LooseControl


        Graffiti
        Wood Tires
        Mustang Car
        Street


        Plates
        Bowl       Glass
        Cake       Candle
        Table


       Gravestone
       Bench       Bear
       Snowy road


        Pot      B Bag
        Table
       Sofa      Lamp
       French room


       Lamp
       Buoy
       Boat
       Lake


                            Figure 5: A qualitative comparison on the task 3D layout control.


Object Accuracy (OA): We use a general object detector, YOLOv8 (Reis et al., 2023), to check if
objects specified by the layout are detected in the image.
Mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU): We compute the intersection between the bounding box pre-
dicted by YOLOv8 and a bounding box fitted to the 3D box in the image plane. This tells how well
the object is enclosed within the layout box.
Quantitative Results Table 1 summarizes the quantitative comparison. Our approach scores two
times higher than LC and 15% higher than Layout-Guidance on Object Accuracy (OA), demonstrat-
ing its effectiveness in executing the layout. Our approach also outperforms LC and is on par with
Layout-Guidance on CLIPT2I , demonstrating that the generated image conforms better to the textual
description. For the mIOU metric, our approach outperforms Layout-Guidance by a huge margin
despite not incorporating any guidance-based techniques. Surprisingly, it also outperforms LC, de-
spite the fact that we have not tuned it. We believe this improvement is caused by our dynamic
self-attention that forces the generated objects to lie within their respective boxes.
Qualitative Results We provide a qualitative comparison in Figure 5. The figure shows that our
approach is more faithful to the layout compared to Layout-Guidance, while LC struggles to gen-
erate all objects. We show both STAGE 0 and STAGE n of our approach to highlight how objects
are seamlessly integrated into the scene between stages (notice reflections and shadows). We also
provide some examples with advanced 3D control of camera and objects in Figure 6.

4.3   O BJECT C ONSISTENCY UNDER L AYOUT C HANGE E VALUATION

This task aims to move or scale an object in the provided layout while preserving its identity.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Low-Camera, Zoom-in                  High-Camera, Zoom-in               Low-Camera, Zoom-out              High-Camera, Zoom-out



Figure 6: Examples of the advanced 3D control over camera and object provided by our approach.

                      Ours            LooseControl      Layout Guidance                        Ours            LooseControl    Layout Guidance


         ZOOM                                                                   MOVE
           IN                                                                   LEFT


         ZOOM                                                                   MOVE
          OUT                                                                   RIGHT


          Figure 7: A qualitative comparison for object consistency under layout change.


Evaluation Criteria We randomly sampled one of the 16 MS COCO objects and placed it in a
layout. Then we randomly selected one of the actions [вҖқmove leftвҖқ, вҖқmove rightвҖқ, вҖқ zoom-inвҖқ,
вҖқzoom-outвҖқ]. We ensure that applying the action does not cause the object to be out of bounds.
Finally, we compare the objectвҖҷs visual appearance before and after applying the action.
Evaluation Metrics Our goal is to evaluate how similar the object is before and after applying some
layout action. We crop the object from the images and resize the cropped images to ensure they
match. We compute the CLIP score CLIPI2I , Structural Similarity (SSIM), and Peak-Signal-to-
Noise-Ration Similarity (PSNR) between a cropped image of the object before and after the action.
We also propose 3D Adherence metrics that evaluate if the generated image adheres to the 3D layout
change (see Appendix C for details).
Quantitative Results Table 1 summarizes the results averaged over 5 seeds. Our method outper-
forms other methods on all metrics, demonstrating better preservation of objects and 3D adherence
to the layout changes.
Qualitative Results We show some qualitative examples for layout changes in Figure 7. For the
scaling layout changes, i.e., zoom-in and zoom-out, our approach applies them successfully and
seamlessly inserts the object at the new location. LC either distorts the object or does not apply
the layout change, while Layout-Guidance changes the object completely. When moving the main
object to the left or the right, our approach successfully applies the changes and preserves the object.
On the other hand, LC distorts the object, while Layout-Guidance changes the object pose.
4.4   A BLATION A NALYSIS

Figure 8 provides an ablation analysis for the impact of different components of our pipeline. When
the Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA) is disabled, the model is not capable of inserting a new object
into the reference image. Skipping the latent blending in Equation (5) causes some details of the
background to change (the paintings on the wall). Using AdaIN (Huang & Belongie, 2017) con-
tributes to harmonizing the colors of the generated object with the background.


                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Reference Image      w/o DSA                 w/o Latent Blending   w/o AdaIN          Ours


        3D Layout Control

                                Reference Image     Warped Image               up to 0.4рқ‘Ү          up to 0.8рқ‘Ү        up to рқ‘Ү
           Object Consistency


                                         Figure 8: Ablation analysis for different parts of our pipeline.


        Prompt: вҖңA                                                 Prompt:                               Prompt:
        lamp postвҖқ                                                 вҖңThe                                  вҖңA Camaro
                                                                   JokerвҖқ                                carвҖқ



                                                    Figure 9: Limitations of our approach.


We also experiment with varying T in Section 3.3 for blending the latents. The warped image
lacks realism, and the sofa appears to be floating. By applying Equation (6) for T = 0.4T , the
sofa is seamlessly integrated into the scene, but some of the details (the cushions) are not perfectly
constructed. When T = 0.8T , the sofa is seamlessly blended into the scene, and the fine details are
well constructed. With T = T , some artifacts start to appear at the boundaries.
5   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Figure 9 shows some of the limitations of our approach. First, our approach is sensitive to the aspect
ratio of the box. If provided with a box wider than the actual width of the object, it can generate two
instances of the object (left figure). When the aspect ratio of the box is not suitable for the specified
prompt, it can generate a distorted object or a photo of the object (middle figure) We believe that
this is a natural behavior of our approach as it tries to fulfill the layout and the prompt requirements
concurrently. Secondly, if a large object is placed in a small space, i.e. a box intersecting with the
boundaries, such as a car in a room, the out-of-boundary parts of the car are distorted (right figure).
In general, the definition of boxes needs to be reasonable to obtain the desired results.
For the Consistent 3D Translation strategy, if the object segmentation part fails, it becomes infeasi-
ble to preserve the objects. Finally, one might argue that the multi-stage generation pipeline adds a
computational overhead to the generation process. However, this is a fair price in return for the en-
hanced control over scene elements that helps the user reach the desired output faster and eventually
save time. Moreover, our approach takes 2 seconds per stage and can generate a layout of 5 objects
in the same time as Layout-Guidance (see Table 1).
Future Work We would like to investigate automated layout generation through a large-language
model (LLM) as in (Feng et al., 2023; Gani et al., 2024). Another direction is supporting in-plane
rotations while preserving object identity, similar to (Yuan et al., 2023).
6 C ONCLUSION
We presented a first approach for interactive 3D layout control based on a pre-trained T2I diffusion
model. Our approach reformulated image generation as a multi-stage process, providing users with
enhanced control over individual objects in 3D. Moreover, we provided the first strategy to preserve
objects under layout changes. Experiments show that our approach outperformed both LooseControl
and the recent 2D layout control, both quantitatively and qualitatively. We hope that our approach
will establish a new research direction for 3D layout control and consistency in layout control.


                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The work is supported by funding from KAUST - Center of Excellence for Generative AI, under
award number 5940, and the NTGC-AI program.


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM transactions on
 graphics (TOG), 42(4):1вҖ“11, 2023a.

Omri Avrahami, Thomas Hayes, Oran Gafni, Sonal Gupta, Yaniv Taigman, Devi Parikh, Dani
 Lischinski, Ohad Fried, and Xi Yin. Spatext: Spatio-textual representation for controllable im-
 age generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18370вҖ“18380, 2023b.

Shariq Farooq Bhat, Niloy J Mitra, and Peter Wonka. Loosecontrol: Lifting controlnet for general-
  ized depth conditioning. In ACM Siggraph Conference, 2024.

Garrick Brazil, Abhinav Kumar, Julian Straub, Nikhila Ravi, Justin Johnson, and Georgia Gkioxari.
  Omni3D: A large benchmark and model for 3D object detection in the wild. In CVPR, Vancouver,
  Canada, June 2023. IEEE.

Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.08465, 2023.

Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Training-free layout control with cross-attention
 guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
 Vision, pp. 5343вҖ“5353, 2024.

Guillaume Couairon, MarleМҖne Careil, Matthieu Cord, SteМҒphane LathuilieМҖre, and Jakob Verbeek.
  Zero-shot spatial layout conditioning for text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2174вҖ“2183, 2023.

Abdelrahman Eldesokey and Peter Wonka. Latentman: Generating consistent animated characters
  using image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7510вҖ“7519, 2024.

Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu,
 Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual planning and genera-
 tion with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15393, 2023.

Hanan Gani, Shariq Farooq Bhat, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, and Peter Wonka. Llm
  blueprint: Enabling text-to-image generation with complex and detailed prompts. In ICLR, 2024.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1501вҖ“1510,
  2017.

Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511вҖ“22521, 2023.
Long Lian, Boyi Li, Adam Yala, and Trevor Darrell. Llm-grounded diffusion: Enhancing prompt
  understanding of text-to-image diffusion models with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.13655, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  DollaМҒr, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  VisionвҖ“ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740вҖ“755. Springer, 2014.
Jiaqi Liu, Tao Huang, and Chang Xu. Training-free composite scene generation for layout-to-image
   synthesis, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13609.
Jian Ma, Junhao Liang, Chen Chen, and Haonan Lu. Subject-diffusion: Open domain personalized
   text-to-image generation without test-time fine-tuning. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference
   Papers, pp. 1вҖ“12, 2024.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and
  Xiaohu Qie. T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Weili Nie, Sifei Liu, Morteza Mardani, Chao Liu, Benjamin Eckart, and Arash Vahdat. Composi-
 tional text-to-image generation with dense blob representations. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas MuМҲller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv:2303.09535,
  2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748вҖ“8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Dillon Reis, Jordan Kupec, Jacqueline Hong, and Ahmad Daoudi. Real-time flying object detection
  with yolov8. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09972, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjoМҲrn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684вҖ“10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500вҖ“
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479вҖ“36494, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=St1giarCHLP.
Yizhi Song, Zhifei Zhang, Zhe Lin, Scott Cohen, Brian Price, Jianming Zhang, Soo Ye Kim, and
  Daniel Aliaga. Objectstitch: Object compositing with diffusion model. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18310вҖ“18319, 2023.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1921вҖ“1930, June 2023.
Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Haofan Wang, Zekui Qin, and Anthony Chen. Instantid: Zero-shot identity-
  preserving generation in seconds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07519, 2024.
Zhonghao Wang, Wei Wei, Yang Zhao, Zhisheng Xiao, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, Humphrey Shi,
  and Tingbo Hou. Hifi tuner: High-fidelity subject-driven fine-tuning for diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00079, 2023.
Jinheng Xie, Yuexiang Li, Yawen Huang, Haozhe Liu, Wentian Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, and
   Mike Zheng Shou. Boxdiff: Text-to-image synthesis with training-free box-constrained diffusion.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7452вҖ“7461,
   2023.
Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth
  anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. In CVPR, 2024.
Shuai Yang, Yifan Zhou, Ziwei Liu, , and Chen Change Loy. Rerender a video: Zero-shot text-
  guided video-to-video translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings, 2023a.
Zhengyuan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Chenfei Wu, Nan Duan, Zicheng
  Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, et al. Reco: Region-controlled text-to-image generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14246вҖ“
  14255, 2023b.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721, 2023.
Ziyang Yuan, Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Chun Yuan, and Ying Shan. Customnet:
  Zero-shot object customization with variable-viewpoints in text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
Yu Zeng, Zhe Lin, Jianming Zhang, Qing Liu, John Collomosse, Jason Kuen, and Vishal M Patel.
  Scenecomposer: Any-level semantic image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22468вҖ“22478, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models, 2023.
Guangcong Zheng, Xianpan Zhou, Xuewei Li, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xi Li. Layoutdiffusion:
  Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22490вҖ“22499, 2023.
Dewei Zhou, You Li, Fan Ma, Xiaoting Zhang, and Yi Yang. Migc: Multi-instance generation
  controller for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6818вҖ“6828, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Ours      LooseControl             Ours      LooseControl             Ours      LooseControl


        ZOOM                                ZOOM                               ZOOM
          IN                                  IN                                 IN


        ZOOM                                ZOOM                               ZOOM
         OUT                                 OUT                                OUT


 Figure 10: Additional results for our consistent layout change under zoom-in/out layout changes.


A     A PPENDIX

B     A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Video results of the interactive generation process and more qualitative results are provided in the
attached supplementary.
We also provide additional qualitative results for moving objects towards and away from the observer
in Figure 10 (zoom-in and zoom-out).

C     3D A DHERENCE M ETRICS
We propose two metrics to assess the adherence of different approaches to the requested 3D layout
changes. The first metric, which we term 3D-Dir, evaluates whether the moved box is relocated in
the correct direction. Given a layout change to a box in image I1 , we store the origin of the box that
corresponds to that object before and after applying the layout change as o1 and o2 , respectively.
After generating a new image I2 that corresponds to the layout change, we use a monocular depth
estimation model, i.e. Depth-Anything Yang et al. (2024), to obtain depth maps for both images that
we denote as D1 and D2 . Then, based on the depth maps, we obtain a predicted center point of the
object before and after the layout change that we denote as p1 and p2 . We compute this with the help
of the 3D box masks MF1 G and MF2 G before and after the layout change. Afterward, we define two
directional vectors x = o1 вҲ’ o2, and y = p1 вҲ’ p2 as reference and predicted trajectories. Finally,
we compute the cosine similarity between these two vectors to obtain the 3D Adherence score:
                                                          xВ·y
                                      3D Adherence =            ,                                   (7)
                                                        вҲҘxвҲҘвҲҘyвҲҘ
A high score indicates that the reference and predicted vectors have a similar direction and magni-
tude, meaning the desired layout change was executed correctly.
The second metric is 3D-Rot, which examines if the orientation of the generated object before and
after the layout change aligns with the 3D box. For this purpose, we employ the Omni3D Brazil
et al. (2023) detector that predicts 3D bounding boxes for objects in images I1 and I2 . The Omni3D
detector also predicts the pose of the box in 6D representation that we transform to Euler angles for
comparison. We compute the difference between the Euler angles of the 3D box and the predicted
3D bounding box from I1 and I2 to obtain differences Оё1yaw , Оё1pitch , Оё1roll and Оё2yaw , Оё2pitch , Оё2roll . Finally,
we average over all these angle differences to obtain an average deviation in degrees. Our method
scores the best on these two metrics, and we provide the results Table 1. It is worth noting that
Omni3D is less accurate than 2D object detectors, which leads to inflated error rates across all
methods. Our approach achieves the lowest error relative to the other methods in comparison.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       рқҗј2

                  рқ‘ғ1    Cross-Attn.
                                                         SAM
                       Segmentation



      рқҗј1                                                                              рқ‘Ҷ1
                                                               рқҗјрқ‘Ө
                                                                                           рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў0

                                           Warp                      DDIM
                                                                                рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ө    Latent
                                           Object                   Inversion         Blending
                                                                                                 BAS



      рқҗј0


                        The Cartesian
           рқҗ¶1                                       рқҗ¶2
                         Coordinates

                                                           рқ‘Ҷ2
           рқҗ·1             рқ‘Үрқ‘Ҙ   рқ‘Үрқ‘Ұ     рқ‘Үрқ‘§


                Figure 11: A detailed illustration of our Consistent 3D Translation strategy.


D    O BJECT WARPING

We provide a more detailed explanation of our 3D Consistent 3D Translation in Figure 11. To
translate an object at STAGE i with vector TМӮ , we start by segmenting out the object based on the
cross-attention maps of the object prompt P iвҲ’1 to provide a coarse segmentation map (shown in
yellow). We fit a bounding box (shown in blue) to the coarse segmentation map, and we use it as an
input prompt to the SAM segmentation model to provide a fine segmentation map S iвҲ’1 . Given the
segmented object, we aim to paste it on the image from STAGE i вҲ’ 2 at the new location. However,
since we apply the translations in 3D, there is a perspective change that can not be captured by
directly cutting and pasting the object. Instead, we use the Cartesian coordinates of the rendered
3D box to warp the segmented object and the fine segmentation map to the new location in the
warped image. To achieve this, We render the object box using ray-tracing before and after the 3D
translation to obtain depth maps DiвҲ’1 , Di and Cartesian coordinates maps C iвҲ’1 , C i for the point-
of-hit of the rays. We align C i with C iвҲ’1 by subtracting the translation vector TМӮ from the former.
Finally, we warp the 4 corners of the segmented object based on the Cartesian coordinate maps to
produce the warped image I w , and warped mask S 2 . This strategy ensures that the object follows
the perspective change of the 3D box and scales the object according to the translation in 3D, not
the image plane.
Given the warped image I w , we invert it using DDIM to obtain a trajectory of latents xw
                                                                                        t . Then, we
generate the final translated image I 2 using latent blending based on Equation (6).


E    M ULTI -S TAGE G ENERATION

To illustrate how our approach maintains scene consistency across different stages, we visualize
individual stages for several examples in Fig. 12. The figure clearly showcases the effectiveness of
our proposed Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA) module in seamlessly integrating new objects into the
scene while preserving the original elements.


F    E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

We present the details for the benchmark and evaluation protocol that was used to evaluate our
approach in Figure 13. First, we randomly select a scene from the вҖҳscenesвҖҳ list. For every scene,
there is a pre-defined list of objects that naturally appear in this scene. Based on this pre-defined list,
we select objects to be added to the scene. To create a reasonable 3D box for every object, the aspect
ratios for different objects were generated by prompting ChatGPT, and then manually refining them.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Build-A-Scene (Ours)
                       Stage 0       Stage 1              Stage 2   Stage 3        LooseControl
 Treasure
 Dog
 Elephant
 A jungle


 Treasure
 Trash can
 Cat
 Neon store


 Chair
 Bucket
 Ball
 A beach


 Rock
 The Joker
 Batmobile
 Snowy road


 Baby crib
 LCD TV
 Tv cabinet
 Brick wall


 Yoda
 Stormtrooper
 Darthvader
 Spaceship


Figure 12: A demonstration for the effectiveness of our proposed Dynamic Self-Attention (DSA) in
seamlessly inserting objects while preserving existing ones.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           object_categories = {
               "animals": ["a cat", "a dog", "a horse", "an elephant", "a grizzly bear"],
               "indoor": ["a teddy bear", "a microwave", "a backpack", "an lcd tv", "a sofa", "a
           chair", "a table", "a bed"],
               "outdoor": ["a car", "a motorcycle", "a backpack", "a bench", "a sofa"],
           }

           scenes = [
               ("An empty desert with cloudy sky", ["animals", "outdoor"]),
               ("An empty room with windows and curtains", ["indoor"]),
               ("An empty street", ["outdoor"]),
               ("An empty jungle", ["animals"]),
               ("An empty road", ["animals", "outdoor"]),
               ("An empty studio", ["indoor"]),
               ("An empty beach", ["animals"]),
               ("A snowy landscape", ["outdoor"]),
               ("An empty apartment", ["indoor"]),
           ]

           aspect_ratios = { # Width, Depth, Height
               "a cat": (0.2, 0.2, 0.4),
               "a dog": (0.3, 0.2, 0.5),
               "a horse": (0.7, 0.3, 0.5),
               "an elephant": (0.9, 0.3, 0.6),
               "a grizzly bear": (0.8, 0.3, 0.5),
               "a teddy bear": (0.3, 0.2, 0.4),
               "a microwave": (0.4, 0.2, 0.25),
               "a backpack": (0.3, 0.1, 0.4),
               "a car": (0.6, 1.2, 0.4),
               "a motorcycle": (0.8, 0.2, 0.35),
               "an lcd tv": (0.5, 0.05, 0.3),
               "a sofa": (0.9, 0.3, 0.4),
               "a chair": (0.25, 0.25, 0.5),
               "a table": (0.5, 0.5, 0.4),
               "a bench": (0.7, 0.3, 0.3),
               "a bed": (0.6, 0.7, 0.25),
           }

           relations = {
               "a cat": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a dog": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a horse": ("l", "r"),
               "an elephant": ("l", "r"),
               "a grizzly bear": ("l", "r"),
               "a teddy bear": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a microwave": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a backpack": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a car": ("l", "r"),
               "a motorcycle": ("l", "r"),
               "an lcd tv": ("l", "r", "a"),
               "a sofa": ("l", "r"),
               "a chair": ("l", "r"),
               "a table": ("l", "r"),
               "a bench": ("l", "r"),
               "a bed": ("l", "r"),
           }


Figure 13: Objects and scenes used for the evaluation Protocol, вҖңlвҖқ, вҖңrвҖқ, and вҖңaвҖқ in relations stand
for left, right, and above respectively.


The relationships between objects were selected based on how they usually co-occur in nature. For
instance, an LCD TV can be on top of another object, but an elephant can not.

G    U SER I NTERFACE
To enable interactive scene building with our approach, we developed a Gradio-based web interface
that is illustrated in Figure 14. At each stage, users can create a box and manipulate its scale,


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 14: The user interface for Build-A-Scene (BAS)


translation, and rotation in 3D space. The boxвҖҷs contents are defined through a text prompt, and
clicking the вҖқGenerateвҖқ button produces the corresponding image. Users can then iteratively refine
the box, modify the prompt, and adjust the seed to achieve the desired outcome. Once satisfied with
the current stage, users can click the вҖқNext StageвҖқ button to save the sceneвҖҷs state and proceed. A
вҖқStart OverвҖқ button is also provided to create a new scene from scratch.


                                                18
