Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B I -FACTORIAL P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION :
BALANCING S AFETY-H ELPFULNESS IN L ANGUAGE
M ODELS
 Wenxuan Zhang1 , Philip H.S. Torr2 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1∗ , Adel Bibi2∗
 1
   King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
 2
   University of Oxford
 {wenxuan.zhang,mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa
 {philip.torr,adel.bibi}@eng.ox.ac.uk



                                               A BSTRACT

            Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) on human preferences, typically
            through reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), has proven suc-
            cessful in enhancing their capabilities. However, ensuring the safety of LLMs
            during fine-tuning remains a critical concern, and mitigating the potential conflicts
            in safety and helpfulness is costly in RLHF. To address this issue, we propose a su-
            pervised learning framework called Bi-Factorial Preference Optimization (BFPO),
            which re-parameterizes a joint RLHF objective of both safety and helpfulness into
            a single supervised learning objective. In the supervised optimization, a labeling
            function is used to capture global preferences ranking to balance both safety and
            helpfulness. To evaluate BFPO, we develop a benchmark including comprehensive
            discriminative and generative tasks for helpfulness and harmlessness. The results
            indicate that our method significantly outperforms existing approaches in both
            safety and helpfulness. Moreover, BFPO achieves the same level of safety as
            methods that heavily rely on human labor with less than 10% of the computational
            resources and human prompting and annotation process. The training recipes can
            be found here: https://github.com/wx-zhang/bfpo.
            Warning: This paper contains offensive or harmful content.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Fine-tuning the large language models (LLMs) on human preferences, also known as model alignment,
has been shown to greatly enhance their text generation abilities (Ouyang et al., 2022; Askell et al.,
2021; OpenAI, 2023). When prompted with well-formatted instructions, these models can generate
helpful responses for various tasks like scientific questions answering (Singhal et al., 2023), creative
writing (Yuan et al., 2022), coding (Chen et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2024), and planning (Wang et al.,
2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023). However, with this instruction following ability, the models can
also be prompted to generate harmful content, such as sexist or racist comments, suggestions for
committing crimes, or sensitive medical advice (Bender et al., 2021; Weidinger et al., 2021; Zou
et al., 2023). Therefore, it is crucial to ensure that LLMs are both helpful and safe (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022).
The challenge of improving both safety and helpfulness of LLMs arises from the inherent tension
between these two objectives (Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023). A perfectly safe
model may refuse to answer even non-harmful questions (Figure 1-left, b), while a highly helpful
model (Figure 1-right, a) may compromise safety. Additionally, training a model on a mix of data
annotated with different preference objectives can lead to issues, as shown with model (c) in Figure 1,
where the model refuses to generate code (left) yet still produces harmful content (right).
To resolve this problem, recent studies propose to train separate reward models tailored to each
objective, safety and helpfulness, and optimize LLMs via multi-objective RLHF, which aggregates
    ∗
        Equal Advising


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Look for a code snippet related to the search query: Python loop                                  Which drug feels better cocaine or heroine?

 Here's a Python       Yes, in Python     Python has           Here is an               It depends on       I can't answer     The euphoric         Neither drug
 code snippet for                         various types of     example of a             the individual.                                             feels better
                       you can use                                                                          that question.     effects of
 a common loop         loops to iterate   loops, such as:      Python loop:             For some            However, it's      cocaine are          ...
 structure:            over collections   - `for` loop         ```python                                    important to       generally            It is best to
 ```python
                                                                                        people, cocaine
                                                               for i in
 for item in           and perform        - `while` loop                                may give them       note that both     shorter-lived        avoid drug use
                                                               range(5):
 some_iterable:        actions on each    (to iterate based     print(i)                more energy...      drugs are highly   compared to          and seek out
   print(item)
                       item.              on a condition)      ```                                          addictive...       heroin...            alternative...
 ```

    (a) Helpful Data    (b) Safety Data   (c) Helpful Data +   (d) Helpful Data +        (a) Helpful Data    (b) Safety Data   (c) Helpful Data +   (d) Helpful Data +
         + DPO               + DPO        Safety Data + DPO    Safety Data + Ours             + DPO               + DPO        Safety Data + DPO    Safety Data + Ours


Figure 1: Four models are trained with different data sources and algorithms. Model (a), trained
only on a helpfulness dataset using DPO, generates harmful content (right). Model (b), trained solely
on a safety dataset with DPO, fails to follow instructions to write a snippet (left). Model (c), trained
with a naive mix of datasets using DPO, may be both non-helpful and harmful. Our algorithm aligns
Model (d) to achieve both helpfulness and harmlessness.


reward scores over all objectives (Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024; Mu
et al., 2024). However, developing a safety reward model requires a sufficient number of unsafe
responses specific to the model being trained, often by a process known as red teaming, which is
both labor-intensive and computationally demanding (Touvron et al., 2023; Mu et al., 2024). In
contrast, Rafailov et al. (2023) re-parameterized RLHF into more efficient supervised optimization.
However, current work typically focuses on re-parameterizing single reward RLHF objective within
the supervised learning framework, and extending this re-parameterization to the multi-reward case is
not straightforward (Zhou et al., 2023).
In light of these challenges, we first introduce a labeling function that accurately represents the global
ranking of responses based on both helpfulness and harmlessness within the supervised learning
framework. We then establish theoretical equivalence between this supervised optimization and the
well-established multi-objective RLHF with a combination of the rewards of safety and helpfulness.
This equivalence ensures that the optimal model obtained through our supervised learning framework
also optimizes both safety and helpfulness reward in RL. We denote this framework as Bi-Factorial
Preference Optimization (BFPO). To evaluate our framework, we first establish a benchmark including
both safety and helpfulness tasks for LLMs. Using this benchmark, we demonstrate that BFPO
effectively develops highly safe LLMs while preserving their helpfulness. Our approach relies only on
publicly available datasets, and achieves results comparable to those of methods requiring extensive
human labeling efforts to model specific outputs. Moreover, we show that this approach can further
enhance the safety of aligned models using just 1.5K red teaming prompts, achieving comparable
performance with those methods requiring expensive red teaming. Our contributions are:
• We re-parameterize the multi-reward RLHF objective, that balances safety and helpfulness, into
  a single supervised learning objective. In the supervised optimization, we introduce a labeling
  function that captures global preferences ranking to balance both safety and helpfulness.
• We establish a safety evaluation protocol that includes extensive discriminative and generative
  tasks, and we perform evaluations on open-sourced LLMs.
• Using our algorithm, we efficiently improve the harmlessness of open-sourced models by 15% with
  a public dataset and by 13% with only 1.5K red teaming data, all while preserving helpfulness. Our
  method achieves safety scores comparable to those of labor-intensive methods without requiring
  human prompting or annotations specific to the model being trained.

2       P RELIMINARY
Notation and Terminology. Let x and y denote the input prompts their corresponding responses,
respectively. For any two responses, y, y ′ generated from a prompt x, we denote y is preferred over
y ′ as y ≻ y ′ . Then human annotators can provide binary preference labels I(y ≻ y ′ |x) on whether
y is preferred. The preferred response is termed the “win response”, denoted as y w , and the other
as the “lose response”, y l . A dataset D = {(x, y, y ′ , I(y ≻ y ′ |x))} that contains prompts, multiple
responses, and the human preferences over the responses is referred to as a preference dataset.


                                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following Azar et al. (2024), we define the ground-truth preference p∗ of y over y ′ as   the expected
preference label across a broad group of human annotators, i.e., p∗ (y ≻ y ′ |x) = E I(y ≻ y ′ |x) .
The ground-truth score of a single response y generated by model π is then
                                                                          the expected    value of its
paired preferences with all other responses, i.e., p∗ (y ≻ π|x) = Ey′ ∼π p∗ (y ≻ y ′ |x) .
RLHF. RLHF typically consists of two phases (Stiennon et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2023): supervised
reward learning and policy optimization by reinforcement learning (RL). The training of the reward
model rϕ , parameterized by ϕ, is framed by Bradley-Terry (BT) modeling (Bradley & Terry, 1952),
which employs the logistic loss to maximize the distance between the output reward scores of win
and lose responses,
                            Lr (ϕ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ(rϕ (x, y w ) − rϕ (x, y l )) ,

                                                                                                           (1)
where σ is a sigmoid function, and D is a preference dataset. The trained reward model rϕ then
provides reward scores for the RL phase. The language model πθ , or policy in the RL phase, is
optimized with the objective of maximizing the KL-regularized reward (Schulman et al., 2017), i.e.,

                          max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) rϕ (x, y) − τ KL [πθ (y|x)||πref (y|x)] ,                    (2)
                           πθ

where τ is a penalty coefficient for the KL divergence term, which prevents the policy πθ from
significantly deviating from a reference policy πref . In practice, the reward learning and policy
training are often carried out iteratively, with πref as the initial model at the start of each round of RL.
Multi-objective RLHF. In multi-objective RLHF, Equation (2) is extended to include multiple reward
functions, each corresponding to a specific objective (Touvron et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2023; Chakraborty et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b),

             max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) g(rϕ1 (x, y), . . . , rϕn (x, y)) − τ KL [πθ (y|x)||πref (y|x)] ,         (3)
              πθ

where rϕ1 , . . . , rϕn are reward models, each trained separately, and g : Rn → R is a function that
combines the reward scores from multiple reward models.
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). Rafailov et al. (2023) reveals that the reward r can be
re-parameterized by the policy π, and the policy can be optimized through supervised reward learning:
                                         h            πθ (y w |x)           πθ (y l |x)  i
                      min −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ τ log               − τ log               .                (4)
                       θ                              πref (y w |x)         πref (y l |x)

Notably, the data points x, y w , y l in this objective are not necessarily generated from πθ while it is
updated; instead, they can instead be drawn from a public preference dataset D.
Generalization of DPO. Azar et al. (2024); Tang et al. (2024) further reveals that a single reward
                            ∗                                                            ∗
                           π of RLHF in Equation (2) are wrelated lby the equation π (y|x) ∝
r and the optimal solution
                −1
πref (y|x) exp τ r(x, y) . When comparing two responses, y and y , this relationship yields:
                                               π ∗ (y w |x)π (y l |x)
                                                            ref
                   hπ∗ (y w , y l ) := log                              = τ −1 r(x, y w ) − r(x, y l ) .

                                                 ∗
                                                                                                           (5)
                                               π (y |x)πref (y |x)
                                                      l         w


Details of the relationship are elaborated in Theorem 3.1. As Equation (5) holds for the optimal
policy π ∗ , we can directly minimize the difference of the two sides with a supervised loss L
                                               h                                           i
                             min E(x,yw ,yl )∼D L hπθ (y w , y l ), τ −1 gI (y w , y l |x) ,               (6)
                                θ

where gI : R2 → R is a real-valued label function that approximates the value r(x, y w ) − r(x, y l ).
The optimal policy obtained by Equation (6) is then equivalent to that of Equation (2).
Notation Modification. In this paper, we use subscripts to distinguish between two key perspectives:
helpfulness and harmlessness. The preference label for helpfulness between two responses is denoted
as Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x), and the safety label for a response y is denoted as Isafe (y|x). We introduce the
notation y hw = y if Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x) = 1, i.e., y hw is the more helpful response, and y hl is the
less helpful response, regardless of safety. Throughout the paper, we refer to the dataset measuring
helpfulness as the helpfulness dataset, which usually provides a label for the preferred response out
of two responses, while the dataset measuring safety with safety labels per response is referred to as
the safety dataset. Please refer to Table 5 for a summary of the notation.


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Helpfulness
        Hateful                                 Desired
                                                                                      Larger Positive Gap
  (c): If you want to take           (a): I strongly advise
 heroin, here are the ways        against taking heroin. If                          : Safe (Desired)
    to obtain it: 1. Street      you or someone you know                      1                               1
                                                                                    : Unsafe (Neutral)
   deals: The majority of         is struggling with heroin
  people who use heroin             addiction, please seek                          : Safe (Desired)
                                                                              2                               2
     obtain it through...           professional help .......                      : Safe (Acceptable)
     Harmful Response                Safe Response                                  : Unsafe (Hateful)
                                                                              3                               3
                                                                                   : Unsafe (Neutral)
    (d): Injecting is the most
                                   (b): I strongly advise
      common method in                                                              : Unsafe (Hateful)
                                   against taking heroin.                     4                               4
          taking heroin.                                                           : Safe (Acceptable)

        Neutral                              Acceptable                           Smaller Negative Gap



Figure 2: Global preference ranking of                          Figure 3: Pair-wise preference of responses y hw , y hl with
different responses.                                            different safety label, and the label values.


3       BFPO F RAMEWORK : B I -FACTORIAL P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION
In this section, we aim to extend the supervised learning framework in Equation (6) to improve
both safety and helpfulness in LLM alignment. Naively, we could combine the helpfulness and
safety datasets, treating safer response in safety dataset and more helpful response in the helpfulness
dataset as the win response y w in Equation (6). However, there is an inherent tension between the
helpfulness and harmlessness objectives. A model that refuses to answer any request would be
perfectly safe, but it would fail to meet the user’s needs. Conversely, a highly responsive model that
attempts to address all requests, including potentially harmful ones, may compromise safety in favor
of helpfulness (Nadeau et al., 2024). The naive combination of datasets could inadvertently lead to
training on these contradictory outcomes, as we shall show in the experiments.
On the other hand, Touvron et al. (2023); Dai et al. (2024) developed successful multi-objective
RLHF methods to resolve this tension, with the objective

                                   max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) g(y|x) − τ KL [πθ (y|x)||πref (y|x)] ,                            (7)
                                     πθ

where g(y|x) = g(rhelp (x, y), rsafe (x, y)) is a function that combines the helpfulness reward
rhelp (x, y) and safety reward rsafe (x, y). Therefore, re-parameterizing Equation (7) to a supervised
objective leads to an efficient and effective alignment method. The target objective is:
                                                      h                                              i
                                  min E(x,yhw ,yhl )∼D L hπ (y hw , y hl ), τ −1 gI (y hw , y hl |x) ,                   (8)
                                    θ

where y hw and y hl are the more helpful and less helpful responses, and as we defined in Equation (5)
                                                                       π(y hw |x)πref (y hl |x)
                                            hπ (y hw , y hl ) = log(                            ),
                                                                       π(y hl |x)πref (y hw |x)
and gI is the label function that leverages the safety labels Isafe (y hw |x), Isafe (y hl |x) to approximate
the value g(y hw |x) − g(y hl |x), where g is the global reward function in Equation (7).
In Section 3.1, we first develop an empirical labeling function gI that accurately represents the global
reward of responses based on both helpfulness and harmlessness. We then establish the theoretical
equivalence between Equation (8) with this gI and Equation (7) in Section 3.2. Next, we present the
algorithm in Section 3.3 and provide a sample illustration in Section 3.4.

3.1       E MPIRICAL L ABELING FUNCTION

In previous single-reward optimization methods (Rafailov et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2024; Tang
et al., 2024), gI (y w , y l |x) in Equation (6) is typically a positive constant. However, in our case,
gI (y hw , y hl |x), which approximates the global reward disparity between the more helpful response
and the less helpful response, i.e., g(y hw |x) − g(y hl |x), should vary depending on the safety of y hw


                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and y hl . For example, in Figure 2, response (a) is more helpful than response (b), and the global
reward disparity between (a) and (b) should be positive since both are safe. However, the global
reward disparity between the more helpful (c) and less helpful (b) should be negative, because (c) is
less preferred for its detailed harmful information. In fact, the absolute value of g(y hw |x) − g(y hl |x)
reflects the magnitude of the global preference disparity between the two responses, while its sign
determines whether y hw is globally preferred over y hl .
To assign label values across various y hw , y hl pairs, we first globally rank the responses as illustrated
in Figure 2. Our guiding principle is a general preference for safe responses, prioritizing helpfulness
only if the responses is safe. We desire the helpful and safe responses like (a) in Figure 2, followed
by the acceptable non-helpful but safe responses like (b). We remain neutral toward the harmful but
unhelpful responses like (d), and we hate the harmful yet exhaustive (helpful) responses like (c).
Given two responses y hw , y hl , assuming we have their relative helpfulness ranking, there are four
classes of pairs based on their safety, illustrated in Figure 3. For 1 and 2 , we prefer the safe and
more helpful y hw than the other response, so the signs of the labels should be positive. Similarly, the
signs of 3 and 4 should be negative. The preference gap for 1 (Desired vs. Neutral) is larger than
for 2 , thus the magnitude of the labels should be greater in 1 . Likewise, the magnitude of labels of
 4 should be greater than that of 3 . Consequently, the label value of the four class of pairs should
be ordered as 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 . To construct the label function that fulfills this order, we first need
a minimization over the safety labels. To ensure a positive label for 2 , we require a larger scalar
weighting the safety of y hw compared to that of y hl . We hypothesize the label function gI as:
                       gI (y hw , y hl |x) = B3 (B1 Isafe (y hw |x) − Isafe (y hl |x) + B2 ).            (9)
                                                                             hw
In this equation, B1 is positive scalar that weights the safety of y . B2 is a constant to prevent the
label, which approximates the disparity of the rewards, from collapsing to zero. B3 is a scaling factor
to adjust the overall magnitude of the label values. For instance, let B1 = 3, B2 = −2α, B3 = 0.5,
Figure 3-right illustrates label values of different pairs.

3.2   T HEORETICALLY E QUIVALENT R EWARD

In this section, we show that the supervised optimization problem in Equation (8), with specific label-
ing function in Equation (9), is theoretically equivalent to the multi-objective RLHF in Equation (7)
with a particular reward function. Previous studies (Touvron et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024) in aligning
LLMs for both safety and helpfulness have shown that the global reward function can be effectively
approximated by a bilinear combination of the two sub-rewards; see Appendix C.2 for more details.
We hypothesize the global reward function as follows:
                            g(y|x) = (p∗safe (y|x) + A1 )(p∗help (y ≻ π|x) + A2 ),                      (10)
where A1 , A2 are two constants that prevent the reward from being nullified by zero values, and
p∗help , p∗safe ∈ [0, 1] are the ground-truth helpful and safety preferences of response y. Let A1 =
Es , A2 = 12 , B1 = 3, B2 = 0, B3 = 12 , we have the reward function g and labeling function gI :
                                                                                  1
                        g(y|x) = (p∗safe (y|x) + Es )(p∗help (y ≻ π|x) + ),                    (11)
                                                                                  2
                                                3                   1
                        gI (y hw , y hl |x) = Isafe (y hw |x) − Isafe (y hl |x),               (12)
                                                2                   2
where Es = Ey∼π p∗safe (y|x) represent the ground truth average safety of responses given prompt x.

The following theorems reveal the theoretical equivalence.
Theorem 3.1 ( Azar et al. (2024)). The optimization problem in Equation (7) has a solution π ∗
                                             πref (y|x) exp τ −1 g(y|x)

                            ∗
                           π (y|x) = P                  ′           −1 g(y ′ |x))
                                                                                  ,
                                             y ′ πref (y |x) exp (τ

and π ∗ (y) is the unique solution to the following optimization problem
                                                                               2
                                                           g(y|x) − g(y ′ |x)

                          min Ex∼D,y,y′ ∼πθ hπ (y, y ′ ) −                       .                      (13)
                          πθ                                      τ
Theorem 3.2. The optimization problem in Equation (13) and Equation (8) are equivalent under the
proposed g and gI function.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Action probabilities over steps during the pol-                      Figure 5: Helpfulness and harmless-
icy optimization using DPO, IPO, and our BFPO in syn-                          ness of open sourced models. The mark
thetic dataset. Only ours can recover the desired ranking.                     size represents the approximated train-
                                                                               ing data size and annotation cost.


With Theorem 3.1, we can obtain the optimal π ∗ by solving the supervised optimization problem in
Equation (13). The proof of this theorem is in Appendix B.2. However, the optimization problem in
Equation (13) remains challenging because the function g(y) involves the ground-truth preference
p∗ , which requires estimation by a large group of annotators. To address this, Theorem 3.2 shows it
is equivalent to solve the supervised optimization problem in Equation (8) with the proposed gI to
obtain the optimal π ∗ . The proof of this equivalence is provided in Appendix B.3. We further discuss
the general equivalence with different constants A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , B3 in Appendix B.4.
The proposed supervised optimization problem in Equation (8) and labeling function gI in Equa-
tion (12) also possess several properties that offer flexibility when constructing algorithms. These
properties are discussed in the following proposition and in Appendix B.5.
Proposition 3.3. Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 hold under the shift of the preference values in g and
gI , i.e., for constants p1 , p2 , we have
                                                                                             1
                      g(y|x) = (p∗safe (y|x) + p1 + Es )(p∗help (y ≻ π|x) + p2 +               ),
                                                                                             2
                                              3                          1
                      gI (y hw , y hl |x) =     (Isafe (y hw |x) + p1 ) − (Isafe (y hl |x) + p2 ).
                                              2                          2

This property allows us to adjust the preference labels of the responses. Proof of the proposition is
provided in Appendix B.5. In practice, we further apply a shift of the safety label value α as
                                                      3              1
                           gI (y hw , y hl |x) =        I (y hw |x) − Isafe (y hl |x) − α.                                   (14)
                                                      2 safe         2
The factor α is useful when set to negative values to distinguish unsafe samples, i.e., to make the
value of case 3 in Figure 3, i.e., both responses are not safe, deviate from 0.

3.3   A LGORITHM

With previous discussions, the loss function in the optimization problem in Equation (8) is
                                                                                                                    !2
                                              πθ (y hw |x)π             hl      3       hw     1         hl
                                                                 ref (y |x) − 2 Isafe (y |x) − 2 Isafe (y |x) − α

      LBFPO (θ) = E(x,yhw ,yhl )∼D    log                                                                                .   (15)
                                              πθ   (y hl |x)π   ref (y hw |x)                 τ

In practice, we directly use the above supervised loss to fine-tune the LLMs for both helpfulness
and harmlessness. y hw and y hl can be sampled from a public preference dataset D instead of being
self-generated (Rafailov et al., 2023). The safety labels Isafe (y hw ), Isafe (y hl ) are either provided
in the dataset or obtained by a safety classifier. The probability π(y|x) of generating the response
y given prompt x is obtained by forwarding the prompt and response through the LLM π. πθ is
the language model we are optimizing, and πref is a reference model that can be the model at the


                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Results of fine-tuning pre-trained model, Table 2: Results of further fine-tuning the
Mistral, with various methods. Our method achieves aligned Zephyr model with red teaming data.
the highest harmlessness score and the best balance Our method improves helpfulness and achieves
over helpfulness and harmlessness.                  the highest harmlessness score.
                     Helpfulness               Harmlessness                                  Helpfulness           Harmlessness
                                                                            Model
                     Alpaca(↑)     Disc. (↑)    Gen. (↑)      Savg. (↑)                        Alpaca      Disc.       Gen.       Savg.
    DPO-H (Zephyr)     10.99        59.05         62.94         60.99
                                                                            Zephyr-7b-beta     10.99       59.05      62.94       60.99
    DPO-S              4.34         56.42         96.91         76.66
    DPO                14.71        58.35         39.71         49.03
                                                                              + DPO            13.07       59.28      74.39       66.83
    IPO                13.15        58.41         89.76         74.09         + IPO            13.07       59.32      72.82       66.07
    MORL               10.83        58.54         64.88         61.71         + MORL           13.07       58.57      65.02       61.80
    BFPO (ours)        13.33        59.09         95.24         77.16         + BFPO           14.41       59.02      88.79       73.90


beginning of the optimization. We further sample batches of the same size from the safety dataset
and the helpful dataset, inspired by Chaudhry et al. (2019), to balance safety and helpfulness. The
overall algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

3.4      I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLES

Following Azar et al. (2024), we conduct illustrative experiments on a synthetic dataset to demonstrate
that our method can accurately recover the global preference using paired preferences. For simplicity,
we consider a discrete action space with four actions, Y = {y1 , y2 , y3 , y4 }, without context. We
define the safety labels and helpfulness ranking as
                         Safety: Isafe (y1 ) = 1, Isafe (y2 ) = 0, Isafe (y3 ) = 1, Isafe (y4 ) = 0,
                         Helpfulness: y1 ≻ y2 ≻ y3 ≻ y4 .
Consequently, our proposed global preference, as in Figure 3, is y1 ≻ y3 ≻ y4 ≻ y2 . We encode the
policy as πθ (yi ) = softmax(θ)i using a vector θ ∈ R4 and i = 1, 2, 3, 4. The preference dataset is
constructed from all pairs of actions, along with their paired helpfulness rankings and safety labels.
We optimize the policy with the Adam optimizer for 1800 steps, with a learning rate of 0.01, batch
size of 32 sampled with replacement, τ = 1, and α = 0.5. We compare the supervised optimization
objective proposed in Equation (15) as well as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) and IPO (Azar et al.,
2024), where we take the more helpful response is taken as the win response. Each method is tested
with five repeat experiments, and we plot the average learning curves in Figure 4.
For all τ , we observe that only with our proposed method does π(yi ), i.e., the probability of generating
action yi , converges to the desired ranking, y1 ≻ y3 ≻ y4 ≻ y2 . DPO and IPO can only recover the
ranking based on helpfulness, leading to an incorrect order. While IPO prevents the policy from being
deterministic, our method retains this beneficial property while also achieving the correct ranking.

4      E XPERIMENT
4.1      E VALUATION S ETUP

Harmlessness Benchmark. To evaluate the harmlessness, we first construct a benchmark including
both discriminative tasks and generative tasks based on previous benchmarks (Srivastava et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2023; Tedeschi et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2023). The discriminative tasks measure the
models’ recognition of multiple safety topics, including bias (CrowS-Pairs (Nangia et al., 2020),
BBQ (Parrish et al., 2022), WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021)), ethics (ETHICS (Hendrycks
et al., 2021), Moral Permissibility (Srivastava et al., 2023; Hernandez et al., 2021; Lourie et al.,
2021; Thomson, 2019), Simple Ethics Questions (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Lourie et al., 2021)), and
toxicity (ToxicGen (Hartvigsen et al., 2022), BigBench HHH Alignment (Srivastava et al., 2023)). In
the generative tasks, we prompt the models to generate harmful content using the prompt dataset,
AdvBench (Zou et al., 2023), Real Toxicity Prompts (Gehman et al., 2020), ALERT (Tedeschi et al.,
2024). We report percentage of harmless responses based on the safety classifier HarmBench-Llama2-
13B-Chat (Mazeika et al., 2024). Details of the benchmark can be found in Appendix C.1. We apply
this benchmark to publicly available 7B-level models that have shown strong helpfulness scores in
Gao et al. (2023); Dubois et al. (2024b), and present the performance in Figure 5 and in Appendix C.4.


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Overall Evaluation Metrics. In the following experiments, we report both the helpfulness and
harmlessness performance. Helpfulness is measured using AlpacaEval 2.0 (Alpaca) (Dubois et al.,
2024a; Li et al., 2023; Dubois et al., 2024b). Harmlessness is assessed using the performance of
discriminative tasks (Disc.), generative tasks (Gen.) from aforementioned benchmark, and the average
safety over these two metrics (Savg.).

4.2   A LIGNMENT WITH BFPO O BJECTIVE

From the evaluation on the open model in Figure 5, we observe that Zephyr-7b-beta (Tunstall et al.,
2023), an open-sourced model fine-tuned over Mistral-7B-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2023a) with DPO
algorithm (Rafailov et al., 2023), exhibits a low score in harmlessness, particularly in generative
tasks. In this section, we apply the BFPO algorithm to finetune the same base model Mistral-7B-v0.1,
aiming to improve harmlessness while maintaining the same level of helpfulness.
Training Details. Our training process consists of two stages: supervised fine-tuning and BFPO
optimization. The supervised fine-tuned model is used as the reference model πref in the BFPO stage.
We set τ = 0.01, α = 0.5. We implement PEFT training for all baselines, where we only unfreeze
the selected layers θ′ , the second MLP layers in each transformer block, in the policy πθ Zhang et al.
(2024). All other hyperparameters remain the same as in the original Zephyr training.
Dataset Details. In the supervised fine-tuning stage, we follow Tunstall et al. (2023); Dai et al.
(2024) to use a mix of helpfulness data from UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023) and safety data from
PKU-SafeRLHF (Dai et al., 2024). In the BFPO stage, we use 30K helpfulness data from Ultra-
Feedback (Cui et al., 2023) and 30K safety data from PKU-SafeRLHF. UltraFeedback contains
instruction-following tasks that provide paired helpfulness preference rankings, and we treat all re-
sponses as safe since they undergo human filtering. PKU-SafeRLHF provides both paired helpfulness
preference rankings and binary safety labels. Details are in Appendix C.4.
Baselines. We first compare our method to the supervised method DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) using
different datasets., which directly leads to the Zephyr-7b-beta model, only uses the helpfulness dataset,
UltraChat. DPO-S only uses the safety dataset, PKU-SafeRLHF. We also compare our method to
existing approaches, DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), IPO (Azar et al., 2024), and MORL (Ramé et al.,
2023), when using a naive mix of the helpfulness and safety datasets. In DPO and IPO, we treat the
safer response from the harmlessness dataset and the more helpful response from the helpfulness
dataset as the win response. MORL, representing the line of multi-objective reinforcement learning
methods using PPO optimization (Touvron et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024; Ramé et al., 2023; Dong
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b), requires reward models. Following Wang et al. (2024b), we use a
single highly-ranked (Lambert et al., 2024), publicly available reward model, ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-
v0.1 (Wang et al., 2024c), to provide reward scores for both helpfulness and harmlessness. Refer to
Appendix C.2 for more details. All methods use the same pre-trained model.
Results and Comparisons. The results are presented in Table 1. DPO-H, which is trained only on the
helpfulness dataset, achieves a reasonable helpfulness score but a low harmlessness score, averaging
60.99%. Conversely, DPO-S, trained only on the safety dataset, achieves a high harmlessness score,
but the helpfulness score drops significantly to 4.34%.
Training with a naive mix of the helpfulness and safety datasets tends to bias the model toward
learning more from the helpful data, resulting in even lower harmlessness scores, as shown by DPO.
This aligns with previous findings that the mix ratio of helpfulness and harmlessness data is difficult
to control, and training often focuses on a single perspective (Touvron et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022).
In comparison to these supervised methods, BFPO achieves the highest average harmlessness score
of 77.16% and significantly improves the generative tasks score from 39.71% to 95.24%.
MORL, the multi-objective reinforcement learning method, shows a relatively small improvement in
the harmlessness score. We suspect the primary reason is that the reward scores of different responses
provided by the public reward model are not sufficiently distinguishable, making it inefficient for
the model to learn to generate good responses while avoiding bad ones. This highlights the need
for training a reward model specific to the model being fine-tuned, which involves the costly human
prompting (red teaming) and annotation process.
At the same time, we maintain the same level of helpfulness as the model trained only with the helpful
dataset and even improve it by incorporating the safety dataset. Full results are in Appendix C.4.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Efficiency comparison of our method to Table 4: Ablation study on the shifting factor and
previous PPO-based safety alignment methods. buffer training
          Data     Red                                                              Helpfulness       Harmlessness
 Method                    Iteration   Alpaca   Savg.       Model
          Size   Teaming
                                                                                      Alpaca      Disc.   Gen.       Savg.
 Beaver   300K     ✓          3        1.00     71.80
 Llama2    1M      ✓          6        7.60     73.80       BFPO                      13.33       59.09   95.24      77.16
 BFPO     30K      -          1        13.33    77.16       BFPO, α = 0               12.76       59.09   92.87      75.98
                                                            BFPO, α = 0, - buffer     15.59       60.14   88.76      74.45


Comparison against Previous Safety Alignment Methods. We compare our method with two
successful open-source safety alignment methods: Beaver (Dai et al., 2024) and Llama2 (Touvron
et al., 2023). We present statistics on the data size used for RLHF, the need for the red teaming
process, and the number of training iterations in Table 3. Our method involves only supervised
learning, whereas both Beaver and Llama2 employ reinforcement learning and require red teaming
to identify harmful responses generated by the model being trained, which is computationally
expensive. Moreover, our approach requires only one iteration of training with BFPO objective
with just 30K data points, while Beaver and Llama2 conduct multiple iterations of reward learning
and reinforcement learning with much larger datasets. Despite its efficiency, our method achieves a
comparable harmlessness score to Beaver and Llama2 while preserving the helpfulness score. These
results indicate strong potential for our method to be applied in the future development of open-source
models at a minimal cost.

4.3   I MPROVE P RE - ALIGNED M ODELS WITH R ED T EAMING DATA

In this section, we apply our method as an additional safety alignment stage for existing pre-aligned
models with a few thousand red teaming data. We compare our method with DPO (Rafailov et al.,
2023), IPO (Azar et al., 2024), MORL (Ramé et al., 2023) as in Section 4.2.
Data Preparation. We first use 9K harmful prompts from the PKU-SafeRLHF dataset (Dai et al.,
2024) and have the Zephyr-7b-beta Tunstall et al. (2023) model generate two responses for each
prompt. We then use the HarmBench-Llama2-13B-Chat (Mazeika et al., 2024) classifier to determine
whether the generated responses are harmful. For prompts that result in harmful responses, we use
PairRM (Jiang et al., 2023b) to rank the responses in terms of helpfulness. This process results in 1.5K
harmful prompts, responses, safety labels for each response, and pairwise helpfulness preferences.
Results. Table 2 shows the results. Our method improves the harmlessness of the Zephyr-7b-beta
model from 60.99% to 73.90%, while preserving the helpfulness. The improvement in generative
tasks is particularly significant, from 62.94% to 88.79%. The supervised methods, DPO and IPO,
can also improve the harmlessness, but the improvement is not as substantial as with our method.
When fine-tuning the model with MORL using specific prompts where the model initially struggled
as in this experiment, the performance gain is still marginal, though larger than when using general
data, as in Table 1. This aligns with the observation that using RL methods to improve safety requires
a large amount of model-specific data, high-quality labels, and a reward model specifically trained
on these data to provide distinguishable scores. In contrast, BFPO achieves similar goals without
the need for large amounts of helpfulness data mixed with red teaming data. Moreover, our overall
pipeline of this experiment is efficient and automatic, requiring no human annotation. These results
strongly indicate that our method can be effectively used in an additional safety alignment stage for
existing chat models to improve harmlessness at minimal cost. Full results are in Appendix C.4.

4.4   A BLATIONS

We validate the technical design, especially the shifting parameter α and the buffer training in
Table 4. In the BFPO α = 0 experiment, we set the shift parameter α to 0. The results indicate
that, as illustrated in Section 3.4, the shift parameter α is useful in distinguishing unsafe data, and
thus improves performance on generative tasks in harmlessness slightly. In the BFPO - w/o buffer
experiment, we do not balance examples from the safety dataset and the helpful dataset, but instead
mix the two datasets and randomly sample data from them. The lower harmlessness performance
provides the evidence that buffered training helps mitigate the tension between helpfulness and
harmlessness. Full results and detailed ablation are provided in Appendix C.4 and Appendix C.3.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Other hyper-parameters, like τ, B1 , are set based on either our theoretical understanding or the past
work (Tang et al., 2024), and the fine-tuning strategy is orthogonal to the algorithm, while we further
include their ablation in Appendix C.3.

5    R ELATED W ORK
Alignment with Diverse Preferences. Traditional language model alignment methods (Christiano
et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2021) typically use a single reward or unified
preference model.However, recent work suggests that human preferences are diverse and cannot be
adequately represented by a single reward model. To address this, Chakraborty et al. (2024) propose
learning a mixture distribution for the reward using the EM algorithm, which they then apply in
their MaxMin RLHF approach. Dong et al. (2023); Ramé et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024b) explore
training multi-objective reward models for the alignment stage. These methods primarily focus on
improving reward models for RL based alignment. The most closely related work of supervised
alignment methods is by Zhou et al. (2023), who, despite advocating for direct policy optimization,
still rely on training reward models. In contrast, our approach completely eliminates the two-stage
training process and directly integrates multiple preferences into the supervised optimization.
Safety Alignment. Aligning large language models (LLMs) with both helpfulness and harmlessness
is a specific case of addressing diverse preferences. To enhance safety, many researchers conduct
additional safety data annotation alongside algorithm design. Touvron et al. (2023) utilizes substantial
amounts of human-labeled safety data and combines safety and helpfulness rewards by utilizing the
safety reward as a threshold function for the helpfulness reward. Dai et al. (2024); Ji et al. (2024)
engage in red teaming to gather extensive safety data and frame safety alignment as a conditioned
Markov Decision Process (MDP) problem. Mu et al. (2024) propose a rule-based reward as a
complement for the common reward to improve the safety, which, although data-efficient, still
requires human annotation and reward learning. In contrast, our method is fully automated and
efficient, eliminating the need for human intervention in the safety alignment process. On the other
hand, Huang et al. (2024) propose generation-aware alignment, which improves the safety over
different generation configurations. With our focus on improving safety under specific configurations,
this work can be a strong complement to ours.
Safety Evaluation. Supervised benchmarks, such as OpenLLM (Gao et al., 2023) and BigBench (Sri-
vastava et al., 2023), include datasets related to various aspects of safety, such as toxicity, truthfulness,
morality, and social bias. Adversarial attack research (Zou et al., 2023) and red teaming efforts (Ji
et al., 2024; Mazeika et al., 2024) provide valuable toxic prompts to assess if models can generate
harmless content in response to these prompts. To identify if the output content contains harmful
information, some studies (Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) rely on human annotators, while oth-
ers employ AI models like GPT-4 (Wang et al., 2024a). Mazeika et al. (2024) offer fine-tuned Llama2
models to as harmful content classifier, offering an efficient alternative to GPT-4 in model-based
evaluation.

6    L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we propose a novel supervised optimization method, Bi-Factorial Preference Optimiza-
tion (BFPO), to balance the safety and helpfulness during the alignment of LLMs. We theoretically
prove that this direct optimization is equivalent to previous multi-objective reinforcement learning
that combine safety and helpfulness rewards. With BFPO, we outperform existing methods in terms
of safety and helpfulness in both fine-tuning the pre-trained LLMs and pre-aligned models. Our
method is highly effective, significantly more computationally efficient, and does not require any
human annotation or additional data collection.
Furthermore, our approach is versatile and does not rely on any specific property of harmlessness
itself. This flexibility allows it to be applied to improve various other potentially conflicting objectives
in aligning LLMs. To achieve this, we only need characteristic-specific labels for the field-specific
dataset. We believe our proposed method can serve as a general framework for the transfer learning
of aligned models. However, our method relies on specific label formats for helpfulness and safety
may present a limitation when addressing different tasks. Moreover, extending our work to handle
more objectives (beyond just two) is also a promising direction for future research.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A KNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by a KAUST CRG (URF/1/4648-01-01) and a UKRI grant Turing AI
Fellowship (EP/W002981/1). A. Bibi acknowledges the Google Gemma 2 Academic Award 2024.
We also thank the Royal Academy of Engineering.

R EFERENCES
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal
 Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from
 human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.

Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
 dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 610–623, 2021.

Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qiu, Hui Yuan, Alec Koppel, Furong Huang, Dinesh Manocha, Amrit
  Bedi, and Mengdi Wang. Maxmin-RLHF: Towards equitable alignment of large language models
  with diverse human preferences. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Models of Human Feedback for AI
  Alignment, 2024.

A Chaudhry, M Rohrbach, M Elhoseiny, T Ajanthan, P Dokania, P Torr, and M Ranzato. Con-
  tinual learning with tiny episodic memories. In ICML Workshop on Multi-Task and Lifelong
  Reinforcement Learning, 2019.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback, 2023.

Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Ruiyang Sun, Jiaming Ji, Xinbo Xu, Mickel Liu, Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong
  Yang. Safe RLHF: Safe reinforcement learning from human feedback. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Bowen
  Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional conversations. In The
  2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.

Yi Dong, Zhilin Wang, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Xianchao Wu, and Oleksii Kuchaiev. Steerlm:
  Attribute conditioned sft as an (user-steerable) alternative to rlhf. In The 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled
  alpacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475, 2024a.

Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024b.

Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster,
  Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff,
  Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika,
  Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot
  language model evaluation, 12 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/records/10256836.

Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. Realtoxici-
  typrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 3356–3369, 2020.

Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao
  Bi, Y Wu, YK Li, et al. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–the
  rise of code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196, 2024.

Thomas Hartvigsen, Saadia Gabriel, Hamid Palangi, Maarten Sap, Dipankar Ray, and Ece Kamar.
  Toxigen: A large-scale machine-generated dataset for implicit and adversarial hate speech detection.
  In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andrew Critch Critch, Jerry Li Li, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Aligning ai with shared human values. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.

Yangsibo Huang, Samyak Gupta, Mengzhou Xia, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. Catastrophic jailbreak of
  open-source LLMs via exploiting generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.

Jiaming Ji, Mickel Liu, Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Chi Zhang, Ce Bian, Boyuan Chen, Ruiyang Sun,
   Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong Yang. Beavertails: Towards improved safety alignment of llm via a
   human-preference dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023a.

Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
 with pairwise comparison and generative fusion. In Proceedings of the 61th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2023), 2023b.

Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models for language modeling. https://huggingface.
  co/spaces/allenai/reward-bench, 2024.

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.

Nicholas Lourie, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Scruples: A corpus of community ethical judgments
  on 32,000 real-life anecdotes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 13470–13479, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mantas Mazeika, Long Phan, Xuwang Yin, Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Norman Mu, Elham Sakhaee,
 Nathaniel Li, Steven Basart, Bo Li, et al. Harmbench: A standardized evaluation framework for
 automated red teaming and robust refusal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04249, 2024.

Tong Mu, Alec Helyar, Johannes Heidecke, Joshua Achiam, Andrea Vallone, Ian Kivlichan, Molly
  Lin, Alex Beutel, John Schulman, and Lilian Weng. Rule based rewards for language model safety.
  2024.

David Nadeau, Mike Kroutikov, Karen McNeil, and Simon Baribeau. Benchmarking llama2, mistral,
  gemma and gpt for factuality, toxicity, bias and propensity for hallucinations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.09785, 2024.

Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman. CrowS-pairs: A challenge
  dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1953–1967,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.154.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.

Alicia Parrish, Angelica Chen, Nikita Nangia, Vishakh Padmakumar, Jason Phang, Jana Thompson,
  Phu Mon Htut, and Samuel R Bowman. Bbq: A hand-built bias benchmark for question answering.
  In 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2022, pp. 2086–
  2105. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2022.

Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson.
  Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to! In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Alexandre Ramé, Guillaume Couairon, Mustafa Shukor, Corentin Dancette, Jean-Baptiste Gaya,
  Laure Soulier, and Matthieu Cord. Rewarded soups: towards pareto-optimal alignment by interpo-
  lating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An
  adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106,
  2021.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunhao Tang, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Rémi Munos, Mark Rowland,
  Pierre Harvey Richemond, Michal Valko, Bernardo Ávila Pires, and Bilal Piot. Generalized
  preference optimization: A unified approach to offline alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05749,
  2024.
Simone Tedeschi, Felix Friedrich, Patrick Schramowski, Kristian Kersting, Roberto Navigli, Huu
  Nguyen, and Bo Li. Alert: A comprehensive benchmark for assessing large language models’
  safety through red teaming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08676, 2024.
Judith Jarvis Thomson. Killing, letting die, and the trolley problem. In Death, Dying and the Ending
  of Life, Volumes I and II, pp. V2_17–V2_30. Routledge, 2019.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
  Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, et al. Zephyr: Direct
  distillation of lm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944, 2023.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the
  planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:75993–76005, 2023.
Boxin Wang, Weixin Chen, Hengzhi Pei, Chulin Xie, Mintong Kang, Chenhui Zhang, Chejian Xu,
  Zidi Xiong, Ritik Dutta, Rylan Schaeffer, et al. Decodingtrust: A comprehensive assessment of
  trustworthiness in gpt models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. In
 NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2023.
Haoxiang Wang, Yong Lin, Wei Xiong, Rui Yang, Shizhe Diao, Shuang Qiu, Han Zhao, and Tong
  Zhang. Arithmetic control of llms for diverse user preferences: Directional preference alignment
  with multi-objective rewards. In ACL, 2024b.
Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
  via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12845,
  2024c.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
  Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. Wordcraft: story writing with large
  language models. In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 841–852,
  2022.
Wenxuan Zhang, Paul Janson, Rahaf Aljundi, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Overcoming generic
 knowledge loss with selective parameter update. In IEEE / CVF Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition Conference, 2024.
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Yuan Hua, Wei Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin,
  Qin Liu, Yuhao Zhou, et al. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part i: Ppo. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04964, 2023.
Zhanhui Zhou, Jie Liu, Chao Yang, Jing Shao, Yu Liu, Xiangyu Yue, Wanli Ouyang, and Yu Qiao.
  Beyond one-preference-fits-all alignment: Multi-objective direct preference optimization. arXiv
  preprint ArXiv:2310.03708, 2023.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial
  attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043, 2023.



                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 shows the BFPO algorithm. As mentioned in Section 2, in practice, we refer to datasets
related to safety topics, collected through red teaming, as safety datasets. A typical safety dataset will
contain a safety label Isafe (y), which is the binary label indicating whether the response y is harmful,
as well as the preference label Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) in terms of helpfulness. If a certain safety dataset does
not provide helpfulness labels, we can use the ranking models, like PairRM (Jiang et al., 2023b), as
discussed in Section 4.3, to generate the pairwise helpfulness labels. We refer to datasets designed
to improve the helpfulness of the model as helpfulness datasets. A typical helpfulness dataset will
contain the helpfulness preference labels Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ). Since most helpfulness data undergoes human
filtering, the responses are usually safe. Therefore, we assign the safety label Isafe (y) = 1 to all
responses in the helpfulness dataset.
We further require a pre-trained language model πref , the total number of optimization steps T , the
penalty coefficient τ for the KL divergence term, and the shifting parameter α. We also need to
specify the layers to be unfrozen for the policy optimization, denoted as θ′ .
At the beginning of the algorithm, we initialize the policy πθ with the pre-trained language model
πref , and unfreeze the selected layers θ′ (line 1-2). In each gradient step, we first sample a batch from
the safety dataset Ds and a batch from the helpful dataset Dh (line 4) of the same size. We then
compute the loss of both batches according to Equation (15) (line 6-8). We accumulate the gradients
of the loss for the both batches and update the policy πθ (line 10). This process is repeated until the
total number of optimization steps T is reached.

Algorithm 1 BFPO Algorithm
Require: Safety dataset Ds = {(x, y hw , y hl , Isafe (y hw ), Isafe (y hl ))} and helpful dataset Dh =
    {(x, y hw , y hl )}.
Require: Total number of optimization steps T . Pre-trained language model πref , and unfrozen layer
    θ′ . τ , α
 1: Initialize πθ ← πref
 2: Only unfreeze selected layers θ ′
 3: while t < T do
 4:      Sample batch Bs ∼ Ds , Bh ∼ Dh .
 5:      for batch = Bs , Bh do
 6:           Compute h(y hw , y hl ) with Equation (5)
 7:           Compute gI with Equation (14)                        ▷ Isafe (y) = 1 for the helpful dataset.
 8:           Compute and accumulate gradients w.r.t Equation (15)
 9:      end for
10:      Update πθ .
11: end while



B     P ROOF

B.1     N OTATION


                                                Table 5: Notations
  Notation              Meaning
  y, y ′ ∼ π(x)         Two responses generated independently by the policy.
  p∗help (y ≻ y ′ |x)   Ground-truth helpfulness preference of y being preferred to y ′ knowing the context x
  p∗safe (y|x)          Ground-truth safety of y knowing the context x
  Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x)    Binary label of helpfulness preference of y being preferred to y ′ knowing the context x
  Isafe (y|x)           Binary label of safety of y knowing the context x
  yw , yl               globally preferred and dispreferred responses knowing the context x
  y hw , y hl           preferred and dispreferred responses in terms of helpfulenss knowing the context x
  Es                    Expected safety of a response y given the context x


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5 summarizes the notations used in this paper based on Rafailov et al. (2023); Azar et al. (2024).
In the appendix, we will employ the ordering-free notation systemy, y ′ for the proof. Specifically, we
express the transformation equations from y hw , y hl to y, y ′ as:
                Isafe (y hw |x) = Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x)Isafe (y|x) + Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y|x)Isafe (y ′ |x)
                Isafe (y hl |x) = Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x)Isafe (y ′ |x) + Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y|x)Isafe (y|x)


For brevity and clarity, we further adopt the notation y to represent y|x. This simplification does not
sacrifice generality, as the dependence of y on x remains consistent across all the equations.

B.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

We begin by restating Theorem 3.1 with the notation system y, y ′ . Note that the different notation
systems will only affect the presentation of the reward function g and the labeling function gI , which
we will discuss in the proof.
Theorem B.1. Let τ > 0 be a real number, πθ , πref be two policy. Then
                                        πref (y) exp τ −1 g(y)

                             ∗
                           π (y) = P                       −1 g(s))
                                                                                                    (16)
                                       s∈S πref (s) exp (τ

is an optimal solution to the optimization problem

                            max Ey∼πθ (y) g(y) − τ KL [πθ (y)||πref (y)] ,                          (17)
                               πθ

and π ∗ (y) is the optimal unique solution of
                                                                           2
                                                           g(y) − g(y ′ )

                                                      ′
                            min Ey,y′ ∼πθ (y) hπ (y, y ) −                   ,                      (18)
                             πθ                                 τ
where
                                                           πθ (y)πref (y ′ )

                                             ′
                                    hπ (y, y ) = log                               .                (19)
                                                           πθ (y ′ )πref (y)

To establish optimal solution, we follow Azar et al. (2024) to leverage the following lemma.
Lemma B.2 ( Rafailov et al. (2023), Azar et al. (2024)). Let
                                    Lτ (δ) = Es∈δ [f (s)] − τ KL[δ||η],
where s ∈ S and S is a finite set, f ∈ RS is a function mapping elements of S to real numbers,
δ ∈ ∆(S) is a probability distribution over S, η ∈ ∆(S) is a fixed reference distribution, and
τ ∈ R∗+ is a strictly positive number. Then the argmax problem with the regularized criterion
                                                 arg max Lτ (δ)
                                                 δ∈∆(S)

                           ∗
has an optimal solution δ , where
                                             η(s) exp(τ −1 f (s))
                            δ ∗ (s) = P            ′        −1 f (s′ ))
                                                                        , ∀s ∈ S
                                          s′ ∈S η(s ) exp(τ


To establish the uniqueness of the solution in Equation (16) for the optimization problem in Equa-
tion (18), we leverage the following lemma.
Lemma B.3 (Theorem 2 in Azar et al. (2024)). Let
                                                                       2
                                                       g(y) − g(y ′ )

                                                  ′
                   L(πθ ) = Ey,y′ ∼πθ (y) hπ (y, y ) −                   ,                          (20)
                                                            τ
then minπθ L(πθ ) has a unique optimal solution π ∗ expressed in Equation (16) , and no other local
or global minima exist.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let J = Supp(π) = {y1 , . . . , yn }, where n = |J|, and Π be the set of policies with support
set J. It is straightforward that minπ∈Π L(π) = L(π ∗ ) = 0, thus π ∗ is a global optimal solution. We
now prove the uniqueness of this optimal solution by the re-parameterization trick.
We parameterize Π via vectors of logits s ∈ RJ of π, i.e., si = log(π(yi )). Set πs (y) = Pnexp(si)
                                                                                           i=1 exp(si )
                                                            ∗
for y = yi ∈ J and πs (y) = 0 otherwise. Specially, let s be the vector of logits corresponding to
π ∗ , we have π ∗ = πs∗ .
We first prove that s∗ is the global optimal solution to the optimization problem
                                                                                   2
                                                                   g(y) − g(y ′ )

                     L(s) := L(πs ) = Ey,y′ ∼πs hπs (y, y ′ ) −                        .
                                                                         τ
It is obvious that L(s∗ ) = 0, thus it is a local minimum. By expanding the square term, we have
                                                                                         2
                                 g(y) − g(y ′ )                            πref (y ′ )

            L(s) = Ey,y′ ∼πs                    − (s(y) − s(y ′ )) − log
                                       τ                                   πref (y)
                                          h                                                i
                                                        ′ 2
                      X
                  =         πs (y)πs (y ) ((s(y) − s(y )) + C1 · ((s(y) − s(y ′ )) + C2 ,
                                        ′

                     y,y ′ ∈J
where C1 , C2 are two terms independent of s. The above equation is a positive semidefinite quadratic
form, and hence is convex. Thus, all local minima are global minima.
Now we prove that πs∗ is the unique global minima to L(s). Since πs is a surjective continuous
mapping from s to π, then every local minima π to L(π) corresponds to a set of s that minimizes
L(s). The uniquess of s∗ will deduce that π ∗ is the unique optimal solution to Equation (18) and
concludes the proof. Consider s′ = s∗ + r · ∆s, where the only r is the radius and ∆s is the direction
under the polar coordinate. The only direction that not increase L(s′ ) away from 0 is e = ( n1 , . . . , n1 )
(Boyd & Vandenberghe (2004), Chap. 3). However, we have
                               exp(si + r · n1 )       exp(si )
            πs∗ +r·e (si ) = Pn                  1 =
                                                     Pn            = πs∗ (si ), ∀i ∈ [n].
                              i=1 exp(si +  r  · n )  i=1 exp(si )
This indicates that πs∗ is the unique global minima to L(πs∗ ) and thus π ∗ is the unique optimal
solution to Equation (18).

Now we provide the proof of Theorem 3.1, most of which follows Azar et al. (2024).

Proof. Let S be the set of all possible token combinations with fixed token length, then it is finite.
Let f (s) = (p∗safe (s) + Es )(p∗help (s ≻ π) + 12 ), δ(s) = πθ (s) and η(s) = πref (s). All the conditions
in the Lemma B.2 are satisfied. Thus, Equation (16) is a solution to the optimization problem in
Equation (17).
Now we prove Equation (16) is also a solution to the optimization problem Equation (18). Plug
Equation (16) in the Equation (18), we have
                                                                       !
                                                     exp τ −1 g(y)
                           ∗
                          π (y)πref (y ′ )

                ′
       hπ∗ (y, y ) = log                       = log                     = τ −1 (g(y) − g(y ′ )),
                          π ∗ (y ′ )πref (y)         exp (τ −1 g(y ′ ))
which validates Equation (16) is a solution to the optimization problem Equation (18).
Finally, Lemma B.3 indicates Equation (16) is the unique solution to Equation (18). This concludes
the proof.

The above proof holds for any order of y, y ′ since the equation in Equation (19) is skew-symmetric,
i.e.,                                               2                                   2
                                    g(y) − g(y ′ )                     g(y ′ ) − g(y)

                     hπ (y, y ′ ) −                   = hπ (y ′ , y) −                    .
                                         τ                                     τ
This allows us to freely arrange the order of y, y ′ in Equation (18) without loss of generality. Therefore,
Equation (18) can be written as
                                                                                   2
                                                              g(y hw ) − g(hhl )

                                                   hw hl
                        min Ey,y′ ∼πθ (y) hπ (y , y ) −                              ,
                         πθ                                            τ

                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
                                                           if Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x) = 1,

                                        hw           y
                                    y        =
                                                     y′    otherwise,
and                                                ′
                                                  y        if Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ |x) = 1,
                                     y hl =
                                                  y        otherwise.
With this reordering, the theorem reduces to Theorem 3.1

B.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

In this section, we prove the Theorem 3.2. We begin by rewriting the formula in Equation (12) into a
function of y, y ′ .

              gI (y, y ′ ) = B3 B1 Isafe (y)Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) + Isafe (y ′ )Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y)

                                                                                                               (21)
              − Isafe (y)Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y) + Isafe (y ′ )Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) + B2 · 2Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) − 1 ,



Here, Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) determines whether y is the win response or lose response. In other words,

                       Isafe (y hw ) = Isafe (y)Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) + Isafe (y ′ )Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y),

and the same applies to Isafe (y hl ). To enable the reordering of the variables, we further multiply the
formula by 2Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) − 1, since hπ (y, y ′ ) = −hπ (y ′ , y) By organizing the terms, we have
         gI (y, y ′ ) =(B1 B3 − B3 )Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y) + (B1 B3 − B3 )Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ )
                       − B1 B3 Isafe (y ′ ) + B3 Isafe (y) + 2B2 B3 Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) − B2 B3
We first establish the equivalence of the two optimization problems in Equation (22) and Equation (23)
under the specific choice of constants, and then provide the general relation of constants for the
equivalence.
Here, we use the following constants:
                                                          1                       1
                               A1 = Es , A2 =               , B1 = 3, B2 = 0, B3 = .
                                                          2                       2
Theorem B.4. The optimization problem
                                             g p∗safe (y), p∗help (y) − g p∗safe (y ′ ), p∗help (y ′ ) i2

                               h
                                        ′
          min Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼πθ (y) hπ (y, y ) −                                                              ,    (22)
          πθ                                                           τ
where g(y) = (p∗safe (y) + Es )(p∗help (y ≻ π) + 12 ), is equivalent to the optimization problem

                                                                       gI (y, y ′ )  2

                     min Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼πθ (y),I∼Bernoulli hπ (y, y ′ ) −                   ,                      (23)
                      πθ                                                   τ
where
                                                                                   1           3
          gI (y, y ′ ) = Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y) + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                                                                   2           2

Here, I ∼ Bernoulli denotes the Bernoulli variables Isafe (y) and Isafe (y ′ ).

Proof. The two minimization problems are both over πθ , so we only need to focus on the terms that
involve πθ . Specifically, the first term and the cross term after expanding the square expression in the
two minimization problems. The first term is the same. Here we prove the cross term is also the same.
Let πy = log(π(y)), πyR = log(πref (y)), then we can write

                                        hπ (y, y ′ ) = πy − πy′ + πyR′ − πyR


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let ph (y) = p∗help (y ≻ π) and ps (y) = p∗safe (y). The cross term of Equation (22) can be written as
           Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π hπ (y, y ′ ) g p∗safe (y), p∗help (y ≻ π) − g p∗safe (y ′ ), p∗help (y ′ ≻ π)


         =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π (πy − πy′ + πyR′ − πyR ) g ps (y), ph (y)) − g(ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ )

                                                                                                          (24)
         =Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) g(ps (y), ph (y)) − Ey′ ∼π g ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ )


         +Ex∼ρ,y′ ∼π (−πy′ + πyR′ ) Ey∼π g ps (y), ph (y) − g ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ )


The third equality is by the independence of y and y ′ . By the change of notation, the second term of
the last line can be written as
                Ex∼ρ,y′ ∼π (−πy′ + πyR′ ) Ey∼π g(ps (y), ph (y)) − g(ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ ))

                                                                                                  (25)
              =Ex∼ρ,y∼π (−πy + πyR ) Ey′ ∼π g(ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ )) − g(ps (y), ph (y))


Then Equation (24) can be written as
           (24) = Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) · 2 g(ps (y), ph (y)) − Ey′ ∼π g(ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ ))

                                                                                                  (26)

Now we plug in g(ps (y), ph (y)) = (ps (y)+Es )(ph (y)+ 12 ) and use the fact Ey′ ∼π [ph (y ′ ≻ π)] = 12 .
Equation (26) can be expanded as

                                                           1                                         1
(24) =Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) · 2 (ps (y) + Es )(ph (y) + ) − Ey′ ∼π (ps (y ′ ) + Es )(ph (y ′ ) + )

                                                           2                                         2

                                                           1
     =Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) · 2 (ps (y) + Es )(ph (y) + ) − 2Es
                                                           2
     =Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) · (2ps (y)ph (y) + 2Es ph (y) + ps (y) − 3Es )


                                                                                                    (27)

The cross term of Equation (23) can be written as
                     Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli [hπ (y, y ′ )gI (y, y ′ )]
                                                                                                                 (28)
                   =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (πy − πy′ + πyR′ − πyR )gI (y, y ′ )


Now we plug in gI = Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y) + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + 21 Isafe (y) − 23 Isafe (y ′ ),
                                 h
  (28) =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (πy − πy′ + πyR′ − πyR ) Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                                       1           3             i
                                                       + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                   h                                                   2           2
         =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (πy − πyR ) Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                                       1           3             i
                                                       + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                       h                                               2           2
            + Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (−πy′ + πyR′ ) Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                                   1           3            i
                                                  + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                                                                   2           2
With the similar change of notation as Equation (25), as well as the fact that 1 − Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) =
Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y), the last line can be written as
                                h
      Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (−πy′ + πyR′ ) Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                              1           3            i
                                             + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                h                                             2           2
                                            R          ′               ′
   =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (−πy + πy ) Ihelp (y ≻ y)Isafe (y )
                                                                             1            3           i
                                             + Ihelp (y ′ ≻ y)Isafe (y) + Isafe (y ′ ) − Isafe (y)
                                h                                            2            2
                                            R                      ′           ′
   =Ex∼ρ,y,y ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (−πy + πy ) (1 − Ihelp (y ≻ y ))Isafe (y )
                ′


                                                                                    1            3           i
                                             + (1 − Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ))Isafe (y) + Isafe (y ′ ) − Isafe (y)
                                                                                    2            2

                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we further expand Equation (28) as
                               h
(28) =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (πy − πyR ) Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                                 1           3             i
                                                 + Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − Isafe (y ′ )
                                   h                                             2           2
        + Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (−πy + πyR ) (1 − Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ))Isafe (y ′ )
                                                                                    1              3           i
                                                 + (1 − Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ))Isafe (y) + Isafe (y ′ ) − Isafe (y)
                                h                                                   2              2
      =Ex∼ρ,y,y′ ∼π EI∼Bernoulli (πy − πyR ) 2Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y)
                                                                                                             i
                                                 + 2Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ ) + Isafe (y) − 3Isafe (y ′ )
                                                                                                                 (29)
Taking the expectation over y ′ and the Bernoulli variables, we have
                               h                                                   i
            (28) = Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) 2ph (y)ps (y) + 2Es ph (y) + ps (y) − 3Es                                (30)

This equation is the same as Equation (27), which ends the proof that Equation (22) and Equation (23)
are equivalent!

As discussed in Appendix B.2, we can freely change the order of y and y ′ in Equation (22) and
Equation (23). Thus, the proof of Theorem B.4 also applies to Theorem 3.2.

B.4    R ELATION OF THE C ONSTANTS

In this section, we derive a more general form of Theorem B.4, where, with specific relations between
the constants in g and gI , the optimization problem in Equation (22) is equivalent to the optimization
problem in Equation (23).
We restate g and gI here with the notations used in the Appendix for convenience.
                                      g = (ps (y) + A1 )(ph (y) + A2 ),
and
         gI (y, y ′ ) =(B1 B3 − B3 )Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y) + (B1 B3 − B3 )Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ )Isafe (y ′ )
                      − B1 B3 Isafe (y ′ ) + B3 Isafe (y) + 2B2 B3 Ihelp (y ≻ y ′ ) − B2 B3
As discussed in the proof of Theorem B.4, we only need to find the relationship such that the
cross terms of the two optimization problems are identical. We first expand the cross term of the
optimization problem in Equation (22). As in Equation (26), it can be written as
         (24) = Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) · 2 g(ps (y), ph (y)) − Ey′ ∼π g(ps (y ′ ), ph (y ′ ))

                                                                                               (31)

Using the same strategy of obtaining Equation (29), we have
                    h
  (28) = Ex∼ρ,y∼π (πy − πyR ) 2B3 (B1 − 1)ps (y)ph (y)
                                                                                                            i
                      + 2B3 ((B1 − 1)Es + 2B2 )ph (y) + 2B3 ps (y) − 2B1 B3 Es − 2B2 B3                          (32)

Aligning the coefficients of each term in Equation (31) and Equation (32), we derive the following
set of equations:
                                              B3 (B1 − 1) = 1,
                                             Es + 2B3 B3 = A1 ,                                                  (33)
                                                      B 3 = A2 .
Solving these equations gives us the specific forms of g and gI . Here B2 is a shifting value that we
define to align with our intuition. B3 is a scaling factor that is related to the penalty τ .


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.5    D ISCUSSION OF THE P ROPERTY OF gI

In this section, we discuss the two beneficial properties of gI that we proposed in Section 3.2.
Skew-Symmetric Property. First, we examine the skew-symmetric property of gI . When combined
with the skew-symmetric property of h, this implies:
                                                   2                                  2
                  hπ (y, y ′ ) − τ −1 gI (y, y ′ ) = hπ (y ′ , y) − τ −1 gI (y ′ , y) .

This means that for the same data point, regardless of the order of y and y ′ , we are always driving
hπ (y, y ′ ) to the same value. In contrast, in IPO (Azar et al., 2024), different orders will push hπ (y, y ′ )
to different values, i.e., they form two different optimization problems:
                            (hπ (y, y ′ ) − τ −1 gI (y, y ′ ))2   and   (hπ (y ′ , y))2 .
Their final optimization problem, (hπ (y, y ′ ) − 12 τ −1 gI (y, y ′ ))2 , tries to find a middle point of h that
optimizes both. However, this point is neither the optimal solution of the first problem nor the second
problem.
Shifting Property. Second, we discuss the shifting properties of gI . Since Theorem 3.2 holds
based on the equality of Equation (30) and Equation (27), and all the operations to derive these two
equations are valid under linear transformations of p∗safe , p∗help and Isafe , Ihelp , respectively. It implies
that Theorem 3.2 also holds under the same linear transformations of p∗safe , p∗help and Isafe , Ihelp .
This property is useful when we want to manually design the values of gI , as shown in Figure 3.


C     E XPERIMENT

C.1    D ETAILS OF H ARMLESSNESS B ENCHMARK

The following are the details of the datasets used in the benchmark:

       • CrowS-Pairs: A challenge set for evaluating the tendency of language models (LMs)
         to generate biased outputs. We evaluate the English subset and implementation by LM
         Evaluation Harness and report the Percentage of Stereotype metric.
       • Bias Benchmark for QA (BBQ): Measures social biases in the output of multiple-choice
         question-answering models. We use the Lite version and implementation by BigBench and
         report the Accuracy metric.
       • WinoGrande: A collection of 44K problems inspired by the Winograd Schema Chal-
         lenge, adjusted to improve scale and robustness against dataset-specific biases. We use the
         implementation by LM Evaluation Harness and report the Accuracy metric.
       • ETHICS: A benchmark spanning concepts in justice, well-being, duties, virtues, and
         commonsense morality. We use the implementation by LM Evaluation Harness and report
         the Accuracy for all sub-tasks.
       • BigBench Moral Permissibility: Tests whether ultra-large language models can read a short
         story where a moral scenario is presented and answer the question, "Is it morally permissible
         to do X?" in a manner similar to humans. We use the implementation by BigBench and
         report the Accuracy metric.
       • BigBench Simple Ethics Questions: Assesses a language model’s responses to hypothetical,
         consequential, political, and social questions. We use the implementation by BigBench and
         report the Accuracy metric.
       • ToxicGen: A benchmark for evaluating the ability of language models to classify input text
         as either hateful or not hateful. We use the implementation by LM Evaluation Harness and
         report the Accuracy metric.
       • BigBench HHH Alignment: Evaluates language models on alignment, pragmatically
         broken down into the categories of helpfulness, honesty/accuracy, harmlessness, and other
         aspects. We use the implementation by BigBench and report the Accuracy metric.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • AdvBench contains harmful prompts. We use the prompts provided here and generation
        implementation by LM Evaluation Harness. We report the percentage of harmless responses
        measured by HarmBench-Llama-2-13b-cls model.
      • RealToxicityPrompts: A benchmark for evaluating the ability of language models to
        continue a prompt in a non-toxic way. We use the implementation by LM Evaluation
        Harness report the percentage of harmless responses measured by HarmBench-Llama-2-
        13b-cls model.
      • ALERT: A benchmark to assess the safety of LLMs through red teaming methodologies. We
        use the prompts provided here and generation implementation by LM Evaluation Harness.
        We report the percentage of harmless responses measured by HarmBench-Llama-2-13b-cls
        model.
      • ALERT Adversarial: A benchmark to assess the safety of LLMs through red teaming
        methodologies with adversarial prompts. We use the prompts provided here and generation
        implementation by LM Evaluation Harness. We report the percentage of harmless responses
        measured by HarmBench-Llama-2-13b-cls model.
      • AlpacaEval Based on the AlpacaFarm evaluation set, which tests the ability of models to
        follow general user instructions. We employ the official implementation report the LC Win
        Rate.

C.2   D ETAILS OF BASELINES

The following are the details of the methods that align LLMs for multiple objectives.

      • Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023) trains the safety reward rsafe and the helpfulness reward rhelp
        separately, and defines the global reward g as a combination of these rewards, i.e.,

                                 r (y|x) if IS_SAFETY(x), or rsafe (y|x) < 0.15,
                     g̃(y|x) = safe
                                 rhelp (y|x) otherwise,
                       g(y|x) = WHITEN(LOGIT(g̃(y|x))).
          Here IS_SAFETY(x) indicates whether prompts are tagged as unsafe in their dataset, and
          the 0.15 threshold is chosen to filter unsafe responses according to the evaluation on Meta
          Safety test set. Whitening the final linear scores is to increase stability. The global reward is
          used in the RLHF objective in Equation (3).
      • Beaver (Dai et al., 2024) trains the safety reward rsafe and the helpfulness reward rhelp
        separately, and defines the final RLHF objective as the dual optimization problem of the
        conditional RLHF, obtained by Lagrangian dual transformation, i.e.,
                            min max Ex∼D,y∼πθ [−rhelp (y|x) + λ (rsafe (y|x) + d)] ,
                             θ   λ≥0

          where λ ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier. In practice, the model parameter θ and the Lagrange
          multiplier λ are updated iteratively.
      • RBR (Mu et al., 2024) requires separate reward models, rϕ1 , . . . , rϕk , for each objective,
        and propose to learn the weight for each objective, i.e.,
      •
                                                          k
                                                          X
                                               g(y|x) =         λi ri (y|x),
                                                          i=1
          where λi are learnable parameters. The global reward is used in the RLHF objective in
          Equation (3).
      • SteerLM (Dong et al., 2023) trains models to generate response according to a specific
        reward vector r = (r1 , r2 , r3 , . . . , rk ). They first train a model to predict the score for each
        objective in a dataset. Supervised fine-tuning is performed to maximize the probability of
        generating responses conditioned on the reward vector and the prompt, i.e.,
                                         max E(x,y,r)∼D log pθ (y|x, r).
                                           θ


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • MORL (Ramé et al., 2023) trains reward models for each objective separately, and defines
         the global reward g as a combination of rewards, i.e.,
                                                          k
                                                          X
                                               g(y|x) =         λi ri (y|x),
                                                          i=1

         The global reward is used in the RLHF objective in Equation (3).
       • ArmoRM (Wang et al., 2024b) applies the same training strategy as MORL, but uses a
         single publicly available reward model, ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-v0.1 (Wang et al., 2024c), to
         provide the reward scores for all objectives.
       • MODPO (Zhou et al., 2023) trains margin reward models ri , i = 1, . . . , k for each objective
         separately, and performs supervised fine-tuning with the objective,

           max E(x,yw ,yl )∼D
                            πθ (y w |x)           πθ (y l |x)

                 1                                                  T            w               l
         log σ       τ log                − τ log               − ω−k (r−k (x, y   ) − r−k (x, y   ))    ,
                 ωk         πref (y w |x)         πref (y l |x)
         where ωk is the weight for the objective k, ω−k is the weight vector for all other objectives,
         and r−k is the reward vector for all other objectives than k. This fine-tuning is performed
         for each objective.
       • MinMaxRLHF (Chakraborty et al., 2024) addresses the scenario where different annotators
         h may have preferences for different objectives. The algorithm uses the EM algorithm to
         learn the distribution of rewards for multiple objectives. In the E step, they find the certain
         objective i that each human annotator h relates to, i.e.,
                                                              exp(rϕi (x, y))
                          Ih = arg max Πx,y,y′ ,h                                         ,
                                     i               exp(rϕi (x, y)) + exp(rϕi (x, y ′ ))
         where rϕi is the reward model for the objective i. In the M step, each reward model i is
         updated by the reward learning objective in Equation (1) with the data assigned to objective
         i, i.e., the dataset is Di = {(x, y, y ′ , h), Ih = i}. In the RLHF stage, they maximize the
         minimum reward of all reward scores, i.e.,

                            Ex∼D,y∼πθ min rϕi (x, y) − τ KL [πθ (y|x)||πref (y|x)] .
                                           i

Among these methods, MODPO is highly inefficient since it requires separate RLHF for each
objective. Other methods typically use a linear combination of reward scores for multiple objectives
or one reward as a threshold for others. For the combination of thresholding, the global function can
be approximated by the multiplication of rewards for each objective when the reward scores are on
the same scale. Maximizing the multiplication of rewards has the same effect as maximizing the
minimum reward. Therefore, we hypothesize that the global reward should be a bilinear combination
of the reward scores as in Equation (10). As such, in the experiment section, we select MORL as a
representative for this line of approach.

C.3   A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES

We include additional ablation studies of other hyper-parameters in our algorithms. Full results are in
Table 10.

LoRA finetuning. We follow the setting of Section 4.2 and conduct additional experiments to
compare our method and the best performed baseline, IPO, with LoRA fine-tuning. During the
training, we apply the same training hyper-parameters to both algorithms, like learning rate, training
epochs, beta, and so on. The results are in Table 6. Results show that BFPO consistently outperformed
the baselines when training with LoRA. However, we observed that LoRA training required additional
hyperparameter tuning, which posed challenges due to the limited time. Consequently, both methods
achieved lower overall performance and worse balance compared to selective fine-tuning.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               LoRA Fine-tuning                        Selective Fine-tuning
                  Helpfulness          Harmlessness           Helpfulness              Harmlessness
                     Alpaca        Disc.   Gen.    Savg.          Alpaca           Disc.     Gen.      Savg.
          IPO           6.14       58.05   93.97    76.1           13.15           58.41     89.76     74.09
          BFPO          7.77       64.36   94.73   79.54            3.33           59.09     95.24     77.16

        Table 6: Comparison of Helpfulness and Harmlessness Metrics with LoRA finetuning


 Table 7: Ablation Study of α in Equation (15)             Table 8: Ablation Study of τ in Equation (15)
          Helpfulness           Harmlessness                         Helpfulness               Harmlessness
    α                                                         τ
            Alpaca         Disc.    Gen.   Savg.                           Alpaca          Disc.     Gen.      Savg.
    0.1      13.61        59.81    87.39   73.60            0.01           13.33           59.09     95.24     77.16
    0.3      14.06        60.31    91.73   76.02            0.1             6.4            55.44     81.45     68.44
    0.5      13.33        59.09    95.24   77.16            0.5            6.53            54.01     78.14     66.07
    0.7       9.01        57.34    96.28   76.81            1.0            6.74            54.10     77.52     65.81
    0.9       7.21        56.44    96.66   76.55



The hyperparameter α. The hyperparameter controls the label values (represent the difference of
the preference of a pair of response) of the four cases in Figure 3. To ensure the desired behavior, that
helpful-safe responses are preferred over helpless-safe ones (case 2 in Figure 3 yields a positive value)
and that helpful-unsafe responses are not preferred over helpless-unsafe ones (Case 3 in Figure 3
yields a negative value), we constrain α ∈ (0, 1). When α = 0.5, the label values for the four cases
are 1, 0.5, −0.5, −1, where the absolute label values are symmetric for positive and negative pairs.
As α increases, the absolute label values in case 1,2 in Figure 3 decrease, and the absolute label
values in case 3,4 in Figure 3 increase. In other words, positive pairs will have smaller differences
and negative pairs will have larger differences.
In the ablation study, we follow the experiment of Section 4.2 with values of 0.1, 0.3, 00.5, 0.7, 0.9 to
systematically explore its effects. The results in Table 7 show that higher α values reduce distinctions
between positive pairs, particularly helpful-safe vs. non-helpful-safe, leading to a lower helpfulness
score. However, it increases distinctions between negative pairs, especially helpful-unsafe vs. non-
helpful-safe, resulting in improved harmlessness, particularly in generative tasks.

The hyperparameter τ . The hyperparameter τ is the coefficient of the KL term in Equation (7),
which prevents the policy from deviating from the reference policy. In practice, it is important to note
that is more related to the training and convergence (as shown in Figure 4) rather than being a core
component to balance the safety and helpfulness.
In our experiments, we follow the settings from Tunstall et al. (2023), where τ = 0.01 is used. This
value is applied consistently across all baselines to ensure a fair comparison. For the ablation study,
we adopt values inspired by Tang et al. (2024), specifically τ = 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0. The results in
Table 8 indicate that performance can vary significantly with different τ values. With different τ ,
other training hyperparameters, like learning rate, training iterations also need to be carefully chosen.

Ablation on B1 , B2 , B3 . both B1 , B3 must be positive. For this ablation study, we explore the
following values B3 = 2, 1, 12 , 41 . Given the constraint B3 (B1 − 1) = 1 as in Equation (33), the
corresponding values of B1 are determined for each B3 . Additionally, B2 is adjusted to balance the
cases described in Figure 3 (Case 2 and Case 3). The experiment results are in Table 9.
When B3 is smaller, the label differences for cases 1,2 and 3,4 in Figure 3 become less pronounced.
For example, in Cases 1 and 2, the pairs (helpful-safe, non-helpful-unsafe) and (helpful-safe, non-
helpful-safe) have smaller differences in their label values. This means there is less distinction
in whether the non-helpful response is safe or not. As a result, the model shows slightly worse
performance in helpfulness but performs better in safety. When B3 is larger, the label differences
for the aforementioned two cases become more distinct, and the label value for (helpful-safe, non-


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


helpful-unsafe) becomes significantly higher. This leads the model to prioritize safety more strongly,
which results in improved safety performance but a sacrifice in helpfulness.
To conclude, larger B3 values emphasize safety at the expense of helpfulness, while proper values
allow for more balanced performance across both objectives.


                      Table 9: Ablation study for B1 , B2 , B3 in Equation (9)
      B3     B1     B2     Values for four cases in Figure 3   Helpfulness       Harmlessness
                                                                 Alpaca      Disc.  Gen.    Savg.
        2    1.5   -0.25          2.5,0.5,-0.5,-0.25              9.00       58.67   95.47   77.07
        1     2     -0.5           1.5,0.5,-0.5,-1.5             11.36       60.28   95.12   77.70
       0.5    3      -1              1,0.5,-0.5,-1               13.33       59.09   95.24   77.16
      0.25    5      -2          0.75, 0.5, -0.5, -0.75          13.15       59.63   94.25   76.94



C.4   F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Here are the details of each open-sourced models:

       • Zephyr: https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/zephyr-7b-beta
       • Juanako: https://huggingface.co/fblgit/juanako-7b-UNA
       • OpenChat: https://huggingface.co/openchat/openchat_3.5
       • Mistral:                                         https://huggingface.co/mistralai/
         Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
       • Beaver: https://huggingface.co/PKU-Alignment/beaver-7b-v3.0
       • Llama2: https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
       • Llama3:                                     https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/
         Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct

Table 10 shows the full results of all experiments throughout the paper. Here are the details of the
data used in our model and the baselines.
We use 4 Nvidia A100 GPUs for each experiment, and the training time for each experiment is around
6 hours for SFT and 6 hours for BFPO. For the experiments with red teaming data, we use 1.5K data
collected as described in Section 4.3 and only performs the BFPO stage. The training time for this
experiment is around 10 minutes with 4 Nvidia A100 GPUs.


                                                    25
                                                                                   Table 10: Full results of all experiments
     Model / Method                    Alpaca   Crows   BBQ     WinograndeEthics   Ethics   Ethics   Ethics   Ethics   Moral    Simple   Toxigen   HHH      Real-     Adv-    ALERT   ALERT    Discri-    Genera-   Safety
                                       Eval     Pairs                     CM       Jus-     De-      Util-    Virtue   Per-     Eth-               Align-   Toxicity- Bench           Ad-      minative   tive      Aver-
                                                                                   tice     ontol-   itar-             missi-   ical               ment     Prompts                   ver-     Aver-      Aver-     age
                                                                                            ogy      ian-              bility   Ques-                                                 sarial   age        age
                                                                                                     ism                        tions

     Zephyr-7b-beta                    10.99    62.02   39.00   72.38     68.37    69.71    56.98    73.59    91.30    51.00    33.00    45.21     46.00    85.82    20.19    79.08   66.68    59.05      62.94     60.99
     Juanako-7b-UNA                    2.88     63.74   84.00   77.43     75.96    76.41    64.10    73.79    89.13    49.00    82.00    60.96     49.00    85.90    27.50    80.70   72.79    70.46      66.72     68.59
     OpenChatv3.5                      11.08    66.67   61.00   72.69     68.88    77.74    63.96    73.48    88.70    50.00    91.00    42.34     46.00    87.82    48.27    75.36   73.09    66.87      71.13     69.00
     Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2          14.72    64.88   61.84   73.80     73.46    71.93    60.26    66.78    90.87    47.95    53.91    55.11     47.06    83.74    65.38    90.44   77.71    63.99      79.32     71.65
     Beaver3                           1.00     56.23   31.37   65.35     59.43    64.61    61.48    56.01    61.61    47.66    45.22    36.17     43.44    85.07    93.20    91.83   94.80    52.38      91.23     71.80
     Llama2                            7.60     63.98   32.99   66.46     56.14    50.00    50.00    57.97    72.00    47.37    24.35    51.00     44.34    87.91    100.00   98.62   98.32    51.38      96.21     73.80
     Llama3                            22.90    63.45   60.68   71.82     58.64    70.38    64.49    62.92    81.49    48.54    54.78    45.74     45.25    89.49    99.42    95.18   95.08    60.68      94.79     77.74

     Mistral + DPO + Helpful Data      10.99    62.02   39.00   72.38     68.37    69.71    56.98    73.59    91.30    51.00    33.00    45.21     46.00    85.82    20.19    79.08   66.68    59.05      62.94     60.99
     Mistral + DPO + Safety Data       4.34     65.65   39.50   74.03     64.22    55.29    50.86    60.00    89.73    46.78    38.26    47.45     45.25    87.74    100.00   99.91   99.98    56.42      96.91     76.66
     Mistral + DPO + Naive mix Data    14.71    65.59   43.68   74.27     56.47    71.01    58.20    57.15    86.71    51.17    39.13    51.06     45.70    82.49    4.23     38.64   33.46    58.35      39.71     49.03
     Mistral + IPO + Naive mix Data    13.16    66.25   42.44   74.66     62.03    66.35    54.67    67.03    89.17    47.37    37.39    48.72     44.80    86.41    88.65    96.00   88.00    58.41      89.76     74.09
     Mistral + MORL + Naive mix Data   10.83    61.66   39.43   71.51     68.01    67.71    55.70    72.57    91.08    50.58    33.91    44.15     46.15    87.07    21.15    82.13   69.16    58.54      64.88     61.71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Mistral + BFPO + mix Data         13.33    65.77   45.25   74.98     65.25    59.13    51.97    70.36    90.41    47.37    39.13    54.15     45.25    87.32    98.65    98.56   96.42    59.09      95.24     77.16

     Red Teaming + DPO                 13.07    61.84   38.95   72.45     67.77    69.12    57.48    73.63    91.42    50.88    36.52    45.11     46.15    87.99    44.00    89.22   76.33    59.28      74.39     66.83


26
     Red Teaming + IPO                 13.74    61.96   38.89   72.77     68.03    69.30    57.62    73.54    91.48    50.58    36.52    45.43     45.70    87.91    41.35    87.48   74.55    59.32      72.82     66.07
     Red Teaming + MORL                12.56    61.66   38.47   71.98     66.07    69.16    56.98    73.02    91.36    51.17    33.04    44.26     45.70    87.66    21.15    82.13   69.16    58.57      65.02     61.80
     Red Teaming + BFPO                14.41    61.72   39.44   72.45     67.28    68.01    57.20    73.46    91.54    49.12    37.39    45.32     45.25    87.82    86.54    86.34   94.47    59.02      88.79     73.90

     BFPO w\o shift                    12.76    65.95   44.44   74.98     62.50    59.87    52.28    66.64    88.78    47.66    50.43    49.89     45.70    84.32    96.15    96.90   94.12    59.09      92.87     75.98
     BFPO w\o buffer                   15.59    65.65   44.43   74.43     61.13    69.05    56.56    67.08    89.79    47.37    46.96    53.94     45.25    84.82    85.77    95.37   89.08    60.14      88.76     74.45

     IPO + LoRA Finetuning             6.14     65.95   43.13   75.06     63.81    58.91    52.25    68.78    88.76    47.37    37.39    49.89     45.25    84.40    98.65    97.76   95.07    58.05      93.97     76.01
     BFPO + LoRA Finetuning            7.77     66.25   46.41   74.90     72.20    73.00    58.40    66.53    91.38    47.08    64.35    66.06     45.70    85.82    98.85    98.23   96.03    64.36      94.73     79.54

     BFPO α = 0.1                      13.61    65.59   42.91   74.27     62.52    68.16    55.73    66.87    90.29    47.95    44.35    53.40     45.70    83.49    82.31    94.96   88.81    59.81      87.39     73.60
     BFPO α = 0.3                      14.06    65.41   43.71   74.82     62.50    67.01    55.76    68.34    90.19    47.66    50.43    52.13     45.70    84.82    93.46    96.61   92.05    60.31      91.73     76.02
     BFPO α = 0.5                      13.33    65.77   45.25   74.98     65.25    59.13    51.97    70.36    90.41    47.37    39.13    54.15     45.25    87.32    98.65    98.56   96.42    59.09      95.24     77.16
     BFPO α = 0.7                      9.01     65.71   43.06   75.06     68.34    54.33    51.22    67.74    89.97    47.08    26.96    53.83     44.80    86.57    99.81    99.72   99.01    57.34      96.28     76.81
     BFPO α = 0.9                      7.21     65.83   44.44   75.30     69.03    51.48    50.44    68.41    89.25    47.08    21.74    49.47     44.80    87.49    99.81    99.84   99.50    56.44      96.66     76.55

     BFPO τ = 0.01                     13.33    65.77   45.25   74.98     65.25    59.13    51.97    70.36    90.41    47.37    39.13    54.15     45.25    87.32    98.65    98.56   96.42    59.09      95.24     77.16
     BFPO τ = 0.1                      6.4      66.01   40.64   74.82     63.78    57.10    51.78    63.66    88.50    47.37    22.61    45.11     43.89    84.82    63.65    91.01   86.31    55.44      81.45     68.44
     BFPO τ = 0.5                      6.53     66.31   38.78   74.74     62.08    54.29    51.17    60.69    86.37    48.54    17.39    43.40     44.34    84.90    50.00    91.54   86.10    54.01      78.14     66.07
     BFPO τ = 1.0                      6.74     66.01   39.34   74.90     62.08    55.36    51.64    60.17    85.87    49.12    17.39    43.40     43.89    85.07    48.08    91.04   85.91    54.10      77.52     65.81

     BFPO B3 = 2                       9.00     65.65   45.72   75.61     70.35    52.59    50.61    68.51    89.73    46.78    38.26    54.57     45.70    85.49    99.62    98.92   97.85    58.67      95.47     77.07
     BFPO B3 = 1                       11.36    65.65   44.00   74.51     65.97    65.27    54.51    70.61    90.39    47.37    46.09    53.72     45.25    85.65    99.62    98.93   96.30    60.28      95.12     77.70
     BFPO B3 = 0.5                     13.33    65.77   45.25   74.98     65.25    59.13    51.97    70.36    90.41    47.37    39.13    54.15     45.25    87.32    98.65    98.56   96.42    59.09      95.24     77.16
     BFPO B3 = 0.25                    13.15    65.59   43.96   75.06     62.88    65.46    54.59    68.64    89.83    47.66    43.48    53.19     45.25    86.07    98.46    97.85   94.62    59.63      94.25     76.94
