Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS AUTO -R EGRESSIVE N EXT-T OKEN P REDIC -
TION : I N - CONTEXT LEARNING E MERGES FROM G EN -
ERALIZATION

 Zixuan Gong∗ , Xiaolin Hu∗ , Huayi Tang, Yong Liu†
 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
 Renmin University of China
 Beijing, China
 {zxgong,xiaolinhu,huayitang,liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

             Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning
             (ICL) abilities. However, existing theoretical analysis of ICL primarily exhibits
             two limitations: (a) Limited i.i.d. Setting. Most studies focus on supervised
             function learning tasks where prompts are constructed with i.i.d. input-label pairs.
             This i.i.d. assumption diverges significantly from real language learning scenarios
             where prompt tokens are interdependent. (b) Lack of Emergence Explanation.
             Most literature answers what ICL does from an implicit optimization perspective
             but falls short in elucidating how ICL emerges and the impact of pre-training
             phase on ICL. In our paper, to extend (a), we adopt a more practical paradigm,
             auto-regressive next-token prediction (AR-NTP), which closely aligns with the
             actual training of language models. Specifically, within AR-NTP, we emphasize
             prompt token-dependency, which involves predicting each subsequent token based
             on the preceding sequence. To address (b), we formalize a systematic pre-training
             and ICL framework, highlighting the layer-wise structure of sequences and topics,
             alongside a two-level expectation. In conclusion, we present data-dependent, topic-
             dependent and optimization-dependent PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for
             pre-trained LLMs, investigating that ICL emerges from the generalization of
             sequences and topics. Our theory is supported by experiments on numerical linear
             dynamic systems, synthetic GINC and real-world language datasets.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited intriguing emergent capabilities in in-context learning
(ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), which allows effective predictions on downstream tasks only based on a
short context without any parameter fine-tuning (Black et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2021). Since then,
more scholars have increasingly focused on the intrinsic mechanisms of ICL (Chan et al., 2022; Garg
et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023), aiming to gain a better understanding of LLMs.
For simple supervised function learning tasks, the analysis framework for ICL has been well-
established, where independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) input-label pairs are stacked
into a prompt so that the model directly gives the predicted label for query input without parameter
updates. Following that, empirically, Garg et al. (2022) demonstrates that pre-trained LLMs can
approximate linear functions with a performance that is nearly equivalent to the least squares estimator.
Theoretically, many studies reveal that ICL implicitly employs optimization algorithms. Among
these, a prominent viewpoint demonstrates that pre-trained LLMs performing ICL is equivalent to
mimicking a single step of gradient descent on linear regression tasks (Ahn et al., 2024; Akyürek
et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2023; Nichani et al., 2024; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a).
However, there are two main limitations in this literature: (a) Limited i.i.d. Setting. The i.i.d.
assumption in prompt tokens is potentially strong and unrealistic in language tasks where prompt
    ∗
        Equal contribution.
    †
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tokens are dependent, making it challenging to easily extend the aforementioned analysis framework
for supervised learning tasks to language modeling. (b) Lack of Emergence Explanation. Most
literature answers what ICL does from an optimization algorithm perspective but falls short in
explaining how pre-trained LLMs can be good enough to emerge ICL ability as well as the impact
of pre-training phase on ICL. Therefore, the following fundamental questions remain relatively
underexplored:
  (a) How can we model language tasks with token-dependency, going beyond the i.i.d. limitation?
  (b) How can ICL emerge from pre-trained LLMs?
For question (a), in extending existing work on supervised function learning, we are eager to explore
research on the auto-regressive next-token prediction (AR-NTP) paradigm, which is key to the
success of modern LLMs (Achiam et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020) in practical language tasks.
Specifically, there are generally successive tokens in both training sequences and ICL prompts, which
are drawn from the unsupervised corpus. Through AR-NTP, each subsequent token in sequences
or prompts is generated based on the preceding tokens. Drawing inspiration from the Bayesian
perspective in statistical field, we utilize conditional probability distribution (Han et al., 2023; Jiang,
2023; Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2021) to
theoretically model AR-NTP. In the line of Bayesian research, most view ICL as a process of implicit
Bayesian inference, where the pre-trained LLM is thought to subconsciously deduce a concept while
generating a prediction. These works assume tokens are generated from Hidden Markov Models.
In our paper, we consider a more relaxed generation mode, AR-NTP, where each token depends
on all the preceding tokens rather than just one preceding token. Consequently, our core task is
to model language tasks, and the core challenge of modeling language tasks is to consider prompt
token-dependency.
To analyze question (b), we intuitively recognize that the prompt sequence may be new or unseen
and the corresponding ICL topic for the sequence is generally unknown. We desire a well-pretrained
in-context learner, i.e., the LLM can effectively utilize ICL to generate high-quality responses to
any sequence under any topic, regardless of whether the sequence and topic are seen or unseen
during pre-training. This necessitates examining population loss by considering expectations over
distribution, rather than focusing solely on empirical loss. A low population loss indicates that the
model possesses strong generalization ability for diverse sequences and topics, thereby facilitating
the emergence of ICL. Therefore, it is natural to explore the origin of ICL from the perspective
of measuring generalization ability. Specifically, we formalize a systematic pre-training and ICL
framework that incorporates data distribution and topic distribution, allowing us to establish the
population loss with a two-level expectation. By adopting PAC-Bayesian generalization analysis
techniques, we gain a clearer understanding of how ICL emerges.
Based on the above analysis, we summarize our main contributions as follows.
1. Pre-training and ICL Framework under AR-NTP Paradigm. Towards practical AR-NTP
paradigm rather than i.i.d. setting, we establish a systematic pre-training and ICL framework
considering layer-wise structure of sequences and topics (Section 3.1). Meanwhile, we propose
two-level expectation over data and topic distribution to link pre-training and ICL phase, thereby
providing well-defined population loss based on empirical loss (Section 3.2 and 3.3).
2. ICL Emerges from Generalization. Our theoretical results of population loss reveal that
model generalization, tightly with ICL abilities, is influenced by model size, optimization iterations,
pre-training data and prompt length. This further demonstrates that ICL emerges from the excellent
generalization of sequences and topics (Section 4.1 and Section 4.2).
3. Generalization Analysis. By dealing with prompt token-dependency and employing continuous
mathematical techniques such as Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE), we present data-dependent
and topic-dependent, as well as optimization-dependent PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for
population loss (Section 4.1 and Section 4.2).
4. Empirical Verification of Theory. We perform experiments on numerical linear dynamic
system, synthetic GINC and real-word language datasets (Section 5 and Appendix D). By discussing
the effects of pre-training data, optimization process and prior model initialization, we verify our
theoretical results and offer practical implications (Appendix E).



                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK

Optimization Perspective on ICL. The field of ICL in transformers has been extensively explored
from various analytical perspectives. A prominent approach is to view ICL as an implicit execution
of gradient descent algorithm (Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023a). This concept is well-illustrated (Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023), which
demonstrates that pre-trained transformers can mimic a single step of gradient descent on linear
regression tasks. Huang et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023a) specifically provide evidence that learning
linear models via gradient flow aligns with transformers learning in-context, based on optimization
convergence analysis. However, all this literature falls short in explaining how LLMs develop the
ability of ICL and the connection between the pre-training and ICL phases.
Bayesian Perspective on ICL. There is some existing work from Bayesian view enriching the
understanding of ICL (Han et al., 2023; Jiang, 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Wies et al., 2023; Xie et al.,
2021). Xie et al. (2021) interpreter ICL as implicit Bayesian inference, where the pre-trained LLM is
seen as intuitively deducing a concept during prediction. Following Xie et al. (2021), the assumption
that the pre-training distribution is a Hidden Markov Model, is relaxed in Wies et al. (2023). Further,
Zhang et al. (2023a) consider the pre-training and ICL phase and assume that prior and posterior
satisfy a uniform distribution. In our study, we adopt data-dependent and topic-dependent prior
without relying on some predetermined distribution assumptions. A topic distribution is considered
in our pre-training and ICL framework, which weakens the assumption that the pre-training topic
distribution covers the ICL topic distribution in Zhang et al. (2023a) to some extent.
From Multi-Task Learning to Meta-Learning. Training LLMs to perform ICL can be viewed as
an approach for addressing the wider tasks of meta-learning or learning-to-learn (Naik & Mammone,
1992; Schmidhuber, 1987). In pre-training phase, the LLM is trained on multiple tasks. We expect
that a well-pretrained LLM serves as a good meta-learner possessing the ICL ability to generalize to
new unseen tasks, not only as a multi-task learner (Radford et al., 2019). Theoretical analysis of
meta-learning has received significant attention (Chua et al., 2021; Denevi et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2020;
Tripuraneni et al., 2020). Drawing inspiration from the assumption of an unknown task distribution
in meta-learning analysis, we establish a pre-training and ICL framework with topic/task distribution
and data distribution, to describe the model’s generalization ability to new test prompts and unseen
topics (Details in Section 3.1). However, it is worth emphasizing that our ICL generalization analysis
under AR-NTP cannot be equivalent to meta-learning generalization, since the expectation over
sequence would be specially spilt into two parts due to the prompt token-dependency (Details in
Section 3.3). We defer more discussion in Appendix C.


3     P ROBLEM S ETUP

In this section, for question (a), Section 3.1 establishes the pre-training and ICL framework under
AR-NTP paradigm. Following that, to address question (b), Section 3.2 and 3.3, formalize the
optimization objective and generalization of pre-trained LLMs, to illustrate how pre-trained LLMs
can be good enough to emerge ICL ability.
Notations. Let E[·] be the expectation of random variables. The KL divergence between distribution
    Pν is DKL (µ ∥ ν) = Eθ∼µ [log µ(θ)/ν(θ)] and total variation (TV) distance is DTV (µ, ν) =
µ and
1/2 θ∈Θ |µ(θ) − ν(θ)|. The detailed notations is shown in Appendix A Table 1.

3.1   AR-NTP PARADIGM AND P RE - TRAINING AND ICL F RAMEWORK

We model the practical AR-NTP paradigm in language learning tasks, where any training sequence
or ICL prompt consists of successive tokens drawn from the unsupervised corpus. Within AR-NTP,
each subsequent token in the sequence is generated based on the preceding tokens, referred to as
prefix sequences. Thus, the data distribution of each token is represented as a conditional probability
distribution in statistics. From the analysis to question (b), it’s necessary to consider the impact of
pre-training and formalize a systematic pre-training and ICL framework to facilitate the generalization
analysis where ICL emerges. The overview of pre-training and ICL framework, including topic
distribution and data distribution, is shown in Figure 1.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 ......   ......    ......
                 Topic K

              Topic 2
                                                          train
           Topic 1
                                       Sequence 1                    Pre-train Auto-regressive LLM
              Pre-training             Sequence 2
                Topics                 Sequence N
                                                                                 ......    ......   ......



                                                           or



            Topic Distribution      Data Distribution                     Make            be close to

                                                prompt     or

                                                                                 ......    ......   ......



                                                         ultilize
                                                                    Pre-trained Auto-regressive LLM
              ICL Topics
                                                                                 ......    ......   ......


                                                                                            Learnable        Frozen



                Figure 1: Overview of Pre-training and In-context Learning Framework.
Pre-training Phase. In pre-training phase, the training data typically encompasses sequences from
various topics. To model the training process more realistically, it’s essential to characterize and
distinguish the training sequences and their respective topics in detail. In the following, we describe
the generating process of all training sequences.
      1. Generate One Training Sequence Under a Pre-training Topic: Under the assumption
         of topic distribution PW and a fixed topic wk ∼ PW , the n-th sequence E k,n satisfies
         the true data distribution Pwk , or denoted by P(· | wk ). According to the auto-regressive
         generating process, (t + 1)-th token xk,n t+1 in E
                                                            k,n
                                                                is generated depending on the prefix
         sequence Et = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xt }. It also means xk,n
                      k,n      k,n   k,n       k,n                                   k,n
                                                                     t+1 ∼ P(· | Et , wk ). When the
                                                                            Tk,n −1
         token count reaches Tk,n , the sequence E k,n = {(Etk,n , xk,n
                                                                      t+1 )}t=1     is already formed.
      2. Generate Nk Training Sequences Under a Pre-training Topic: Repeat step 1, Nk training
         sequences following the same data distribution Pwk or P(· | wk ), are i.i.d. sampled. The
         pre-training sequences under topic wk can be denoted by E k = {E k,n }N       k
                                                                                     n=1 .
      3. Generate Complete Training Sequences Under K Pre-training Topics: Considering that
         the set of topics used for pre-training is Wpre which contains K topics, then repeat Step 2,
                                                                                           k,n K,Nk
         the complete pre-training sequences can be denoted by E = {E k }K     k=1 = {E       }k,n=1 .
Note that the number of sequences for different topics (Nk ) and sequence length (Tk,n ) vary from
each other. We give more discussion for Nk and Tk,n in Remark F.2. For theoretical convenience, we
unify N and T in our main analysis. Using pre-training data E containing a total of KN sequences,
the model gives predictions that still follow the AR-NTP methods. Then the LLM Pθ parameterized
by θ ∈ Θ is pre-trained by establishing AR-NTP loss.
Note: Throughout our paper, the subscripts or superscripts k, n, and t represent the topic index,
sequence index and token index, respectively.
ICL Phase. In ICL phase, for any ICL topic w that satisfies the same topic distribution PW as
pre-training topics, prompt = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xTp } is generated from data distribution Pw (or P(· | w)).
Similarly to the above generation process of pre-training sequence E k,n , xt ∼ P(· | promptt−1 , w).
The goal for an ICL learner is to make the prediction Pθ (xTp | promptTp −1 , w), given by the
pre-trained LLM Pθ , as close as possible to P(xTp | promptTp −1 , w). To test the performance
of ICL on different topics, a set of ICL topics WICL is adopted. Note that different numbers of
demonstrations may be used in standard ICL. In our theoretical modeling, we consider directly
concatenating demonstrations into ICL prompts. The distinction between zero-shot ICL and few-shot
ICL is reflected in the prompt length Tp , and our theoretical results reveal the impact of prompt length
on model generalization and ICL emergence.

                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2       O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE : E MPIRICAL L OSS

Considering the pre-training phase, finite topics and finite sequences are i.i.d. sampled from topic
distribution PW and data distribution Pwk or P(· | wk ). During the training process, for any sequence
E k,n under topic wk , each token xk,nt+1 can be predicted depending on the prefix sequence Et ,
                                                                                                     k,n

optimizing the negative log-likelihood loss − log Pθ (xk,n    k,n
                                                       t+1 |Et , wk ) in practice. When with fixed the
true data distribution P(· | wk ), minimizing − log Pθ (xt+1 |Etk,n , wk ) is equivalent to minimize the
                                                         k,n

      P(xk,n |E k,n ,wk )
               t
log P (xt+1
         k,n
             |E k,n ,w )
                         . It is expected that the prediction of LLM could be close to the true sequence.
      θ    t+1   t     k


Under k-th topic, we average the prediction loss of all tokens for the n-th sequence and then average
this over N sequences, with the definition of LE k (θ, wk ). Finally, averaging over K topics, the
optimization objection (empirical loss) of the pre-training phase is defined as
                                     K            N    T
                                                                                   !
                                  1 X        1 XX             P(xk,n      k,n
                                                                   t+1 |Et , wk )
                 LE (θ, Wpre ) =                          log                        ,             (1)
                                 K
                                    k=1
                                            N T n=1 t=1       Pθ (xk,n     k,n
                                                                    t+1 |Et , wk )
                                         |                    {z                   }
                                                                 LE k (θ,wk )
                          PT
where LE k,n (θ, wk ) = T1 t=1 log P(xk,n    k,n           k,n   k,n
                                       t+1 |Et , wk )/Pθ (xt+1 |Et , wk ), represents the average
loss of one sequence. Define the minimum of empirical loss as
                                             θ̂ = argminθ LE (θ, Wpre ).                               (2)
In our theoretical analysis, LLMs perform Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as an optimization
algorithm to update parameters θ in order to get the minimum θ̂. We formalize optimization error ϵopt
with the logarithmic distribution distance between the pre-trained model Pθ and the ideal model Pθ̂ ,
                      K N    T
                  1 XXX
                                log Pθ̂ (xk,n   k,n                 k,n   k,n
                                          t+1 |Et , wk ) − log Pθ (xt+1 |Et , wk ) .                   (3)
                 KN T   n=1 t=1
                            k=1


3.3       G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS : T WO -L EVEL E XPECTATION

We expect a good ICL learner, which means that the pre-trained LLM has the ability to identify new
topics and predict new sequences. As introduced in Section 3.1, we hope that the pre-trained LLM
can infer unseen sequences under unseen ICL topics with the assumption of data distribution and
topic distribution. Therefore, it’s natural to define a two-level expectation, aiming to minimize the
expected / population loss.
The First-level Expectation over Sequence. The first-level expectation (i.e. inner expectation)
is taken over sequence E k,n , indicating a sufficient number of sequences for each topic to facilitate
comprehensive learning in the ideal case so that the pre-trained model can perform excellently when
faced with new sequences under seen topics. In Equation 1, rather than using LE k (θ, wk ) with N
sequences, we define L(θ, Wpre ) with sufficient sequences as
                                          K
                                                     "                         #
                                       1 X                P(xk,n      k,n
                                                               t+1 |Et , wk )
                     L(θ, Wpre ) =           EE k,n log                          .
                                      K
                                                  k=1     Pθ (xk,n     k,n
                                                                t+1 |Et , wk )

More concretely, the prompt token-dependency in AR-NTP (i.e. the tokens are dependently generated
in sequence E k,n ) motivates that the first-level expectation EE k,n needs to be divided into two parts:
expectation over each token when given prefix sequences Exk,n ∼P(·|E k,n ,wk ) and expectation over
                                                                 t+1        t
prefix sequences EE k,n . Then combining the definition of KL divergence, it can be transformed
                     t
                     h                                               i
      1
        PK                            k,n                  k,n
into K    k=1 EE k,n DKL P(· | Et , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Et , wk )
                      t
                                                                       . Using any prefix sequence P to
replace Etk,n , we simply the representation and the first-level expected loss finally becomes
                                             K
                                          1 X
                          L(θ, Wpre ) =       EP [DKL (P(· | P, wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | P, wk ))] .             (4)
                                          K
                                            k=1



                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The Second-level Expectation over Topic. The second-level expectation (i.e. outer expectation) is
taken over topic wk . A well-trained LLM with the objective of minimizing the population loss over
infinite topics will demonstrate good generalization of topics, which will be directly reflected in the
model’s accuracy in predicting ICL prompts under unseen topics during the ICL phase, provided
these unseen ICL topics satisfy the assumption of topic distribution. Therefore, rather than using K
topics in Equation 4, we define L(θ) with sufficient topics as
                         L(θ) = Ew EP [DKL (P(· | P, w) ∥ Pθ (· | P, w))] ,
which is called population loss with two-level expectation. To specifically align to the ICL phase and
test the impact of different prompt lengths, we calculate the average loss over each token, similar to
pre-training, i.e.,
                         Tp
                     1 X
            L(θ) =          Ew Epromptt [DKL (P(· | promptt , w) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , w))] .         (5)
                     Tp t=1


4     ICL E MERGES FROM G ENERALIZATION OF P RE - TRAINED LLM S

In this section, we sequentially present Theorems for the generalization of sequences and topics.
Specifically, Theorem 4.3 considers the generalization of sequences, providing the upper bound of
the first-level expected loss defined in Equation 4. Theorem 4.6 further considers the generalization
of topics and provides the upper bound of the two-level expected loss (i.e. population loss defined in
Equation 5) by integrating Theorem 4.3. Thus, we answer question (b) that ICL emerges from the
excellent generalization of sequences and topics.

Summary of Challenges. Before diving into the details of Theorems, we summarize the challenges
in both modeling and theoretical proof, in comparison to previous research.
(1) The consideration of two-level expectation. In contrast to focusing solely on the ICL process,
we model the entire process of training and utilization, aiming to mirror real-world training scenarios
and explore the origin of ICL from the perspective of generalization. The consideration of two-level
expectation over sequence and topic under a reasonable pre-training and ICL framework significantly
amplifies our workload.
(2) The dealment of prompt token-dependency. Under the setting of AR-NTP, we make great
efforts to address the dependency between the current token and its preceding tokens by constructing
ghost sequences (see the detailed construction in Appendix G.2.1, where we summarize the proof
sketch), thereby enabling the possibility of taking expectation over each token within all possible
sequences. It’s worth noting that such a dependency is not present in the supervised function learning
tasks in other ICL research.
(3) The connection of negative logarithm likelihood, KL divergence and TV distance. We
examine the primary optimization objective: negative logarithm likelihood. Naturally, this leads to a
connection with KL divergence, thereby formalizing the expression of population loss. Furthermore,
in addressing the aforementioned token-dependency, we establish connections between TV distance
and the expectation over a single token when given its predecessors. Therefore, it’s necessary to
establish connections between the two key distribution metrics: TV distance and KL divergence
(see in Lemma G.7), to obtain our final generalization bounds. The AR-NTP setup necessitates the
establishment of the above series of connections, which are not considered in the previous ICL work.

4.1   G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES : T HE F IRST-L EVEL E XPECTATION

Under finite (K) pre-training topics, L(θ, Wpre ) defined in Equation 4, represents the first-level
expected loss where infinite sequences per topic are utilized. It describes comprehensive learning
for each pre-training topic in the ideal case so that the pre-trained model can give excellent answers
for new sequences on the seen topics in ICL phase. In the following theorem, we present the upper
bound of L(θ, Wpre ).
Based on basic notations of general PAC-Bayesian theory, in our discussion, we define the posterior
distribution of model parameters as µ(θ), which is obtained by training the LLM using K topics


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and N sequences per topic. Define the prior distribution as ν(θ), which is an assumed probability
distribution before some evidence is taken into account. In the formal Theorem for L(θ, Wpre ),
we derive the KL distance between the posterior and prior in the upper bound, specifically with a
data-dependent prior (Li et al., 2019). Furthermore, continuous mathematical analysis tools such as
SDE are used to detail the KL divergence between posterior and data-dependent prior, which further
considers the optimization algorithm. Since then, we can provide data-dependent and optimization-
dependent generalization bound of the first-level expected loss.
Data-Dependent Prior. We employ the following method for generating a data-dependent prior
(Li et al., 2019). Let J include N ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [N ] without replacement and I is
[N ] \ J, splitting pre-training sequences under fixed topic wk into two parts EIk and EJk . Under all
pre-training topics, we have EI = {EIk }K                       k K
                                            k=1 and EJ = {EJ }k=1 . The prior distribution of model
parameters θ depends on the subset EJ , which is denoted by νJ and the posterior distribution of
θ depends on EI denoted by µ. Thus, a parallel training process with EJ are conducted, and after
that, a data-dependent prior νJ will be obtained. We emphasize that extracting a portion of training
data to learn the prior distribution of model parameters has significant implications. Specifically, this
approach allows the prior to adapt to specific features and trends in the data, enhancing the model’s
ability to capture and learn from these nuances. Even if we sacrifice a portion of the training data, the
prior will lead to a posterior distribution that is better aligned with the actual data distribution. In
high-dimensional spaces, a data-dependent prior provides a more informed starting point.
Assumption 4.1 (Bounded Loss Function). Given fixed topic wk and prefix sequence Etk,n , for the
true data distribution P(· | wk ) (or Pwk ) and pre-trained LLM Pθ , we have
                                          P(xk,n    k,n
                                             t+1 | Et , wk )
                                    log                          ≤ S.
                                          Pθ (xk,n    k,n
                                               t+1 | Et , wk )

This assumption shows that the logarithm ratio of P(· | wk ) and Pθ is bounded suggesting that the
learned model is expected to closely approximate the true data distribution. According to the true data
distribution, the probability of xk,n
                                  t+1 tends to 1. Thus by scaling
                                                                 law (Kaplan et al., 2020), the training
                                                                         αN
                                      k,n     k,n
loss for specific tokens − log Pθ (xt+1 | Et , wk ) equals to NNparam c
                                                                            , where Nparam represents
the number of parameters in the model,  Nc and     αN  are constants obtained through statistical fitting.
                                                    αN
                                            Nc
Thus, S can further be measured with       Nparam        .
Assumption 4.2 (Bounded Gradient). Suppose that for topic wk and model parameters θt at step t
(for any 0 ≤ t ≤ T ′ , T ′ is the total iteration steps), we have ∥∇LE k,n (θt , wk )∥ ≤ L.
Assumption 4.2 is the classical L-Lipschitz continuous condition, which is widely used in generaliza-
tion analysis (Elisseeff et al., 2005; Li et al., 2019). This suggests that the gradient of an average loss
of one sequence (see in Equation 1) is bounded.
Theorem 4.3 (Data-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound of the First-level
Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM Pθ be the empirical solution of Equation 1, and P(· | w)
denotes the true data distribution under topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2, for any 0 < δ < 1,
with probability at least 1 − δ, the first-level expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per
topic, denoted by L(θ, Wpre ) (see in Equation 4), satisfies,
                                  (r                s                                          )
                                       log 1/δ           1                          1
         Eµ [L(θ, Wpre )] = O                    +              DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log       − ϵopt ,
                                        KN T          KN T                          δ
then considering data-dependent prior νJ and detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ), L(θ, Wpre ) is further
bounded by
           s                       v                                                          
                                                                  1
                                                                      , T ′)
                                                                                     !
                                                         L2 C( Nparam
                                    u
                      log 1/δ      u         1                                    1           
        O                         + t                                        + log     − ϵ opt   , (6)
            K(N − N ′ )T             K(N − N ′ )T              N′                 δ           
                                            T′

            1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) . ϵopt is the optimization error (see in Equation 3).
K, N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic and the sequence
length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′ denotes the total training iterations.
Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 4.4. Theorem 4.3 reveals        √that when considering the first-level expectation over sequence,
the expected loss achieves O{1/ KN T } rate. This indicates that an increase in the number of
training topics (K), the number of sequences per topic (N ), and the sequence length (T ) leads to a
reduction in the first-level expected loss, aligning with both intuitive understanding and empirical
evidence. Furthermore, from the term C( Nparam  1
                                                   , T ′ ), the expected loss is smaller with a larger model
size (i.e., larger Nparam ). It reveals why LLMs outperform small language models in emerging ICL,
even though they adopt a similar AR-NTP paradigm. T ′ is related to the optimization process. As
T ′ increases, C(β, T ′ ) increases, i.e., the generalization error increases. This reflects the influence
of total training iterations T ′ on testing loss, corresponding to the classical viewpoint ‘train faster,
generalize better’ (Hardt et al., 2016; Lei & Ying, 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). We defer more detailed
discussion to Appendix F.4 and proof to Appendix G.2.1 and G.2.2.

4.2   G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES AND T OPICS : T WO -L EVEL E XPECTATION

Up to now, we have analyzed the first-level expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences
per topic. With small first-level expected loss, the pre-trained LLM can perform excellently on
the new test prompt under seen topics in ICL phase. In this section, we use similar techniques to
further consider the second-level expectation with infinite topics, so that the pre-trained LLM with
small population loss can perform well on unseen topics. At this moment, ICL emerges from the
generalization of sequences and topics.
In the following theorem for the two-level expected loss (population loss) L(θ), similarly, we derive
the KL distance between the posterior µ and prior ν in the upper bound, specifically propose a
topic-dependent prior whose core idea comes from data-dependent prior (Li et al., 2019), i.e., a
portion of K topics will be used for calculating model prior and other topics will be used for
obtaining posterior. Based on SDE analysis, we detail the KL divergence between posterior and
topic-dependent prior. Since then, we can provide data-dependent, topic-dependent and optimization-
dependent generalization bound of the population loss.
Topic-Dependent Prior. We employ the following method for generating a topic-dependent prior,
similar to data-dependent prior (Li et al., 2019). We split topics into two parts and let J include
K ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [K] without replacement and let I be [K] \ J, then the total
sequences are divided into E I = {E k }k∈Wpre,I and E J = {E k }k∈Wpre,J . Assume that the posterior
distribution of model parameters θ depends on E I denoted by µ and the prior distribution of θ
depends on the topic subset E J denoted by νJ . A parallel training process is performed with E J
based on the same LLM architecture, and after that, a topic-dependent prior νJ will be obtained.
Assumption 4.5 (Bounded Expected Gradient). Suppose that for topic wk and model parameters θt
at step t (for any 0 ≤ t ≤ T ′ , T ′ is the total iteration steps), we have ∥EE k,n [∇LE k,n (θt , wk )]∥ ≤ σ.
Note that LE k,n denotes the average loss of one sequence (Equation 1). Then EE k,n [∇LE k,n (θt , wk )]
denotes the gradient averaging over all possible sequences E k,n , therefore σ is less than the common
Lipschitz constant L, which bounds the gradient at individual sample points.
Theorem 4.6 (Data-Dependent, Topic-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound
of the Two-level Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM Pθ be the empirical solution of
Equation 1, and P(· | w) is the true data distribution under topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1, 4.2 and
4.5, for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ, the two-level expected loss (population loss)
with infinite topics and infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ) (see in Equation 5), satisfies,
                           (s                                                              )
                                   1                        1                         ′
           Eµ [L(θ)] = O                DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log       + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T ) ,
                                 KTp                        δ
then considering data-dependent and topic-dependent prior νJ and detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ),
L(θ) is further bounded by
                                            1
                                   σ 2 C( Nparam , T ′)
              (s                                                !                            )
                          1                                   1
           O                                            + log     + U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) ,     (7)
                   (K − K ′ )Tp           K′                  δ
                                             T′

             1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) , U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) denotes the right hand of
Equation 6. K(K ′ ), N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the sequence length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′ denotes the total
training iterations. Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.
Remark 4.7 (Optimality Analysis). The term U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) comes from Theoremp4.3 whose
analysis can refer to Remark 4.4. As for the first term in the result, with order O{1/ KTp }, it
illustrates the impact of training with a finite number of topics on the model’s predictive ability for
unseen topics in ICL. In addition, by directly concatenating demonstrations into the ICL prompt
in our setting, ICL prompt length reflects the distinction between zero-shot ICL and few-shot ICL.
Our theorem exhibits that longer prompts (i.e. larger Tp ) with more demonstrations lead to smaller
population loss, facilitating the emergence of ICL. In total, our guarantees reveal the impact of
pre-training on the generalization √performance on unseen topics and sequences in ICL, with order
          1
             , T ′ )(1/ KTp + 1/ KN T )}. In comparison, Li et al. (2023) derive a generalization
                       p
O{C( Nparam
                                                                                     √         √
bound on unseen topics based on algorithm stability technique, with order O{1/ T + 1/ nM T }
where n, M, T denote the sequence length, number of sequences per topic and number of source
topics. Our bound is tighter than Li et al. (2023) in the first term, with a compatible second term. We
defer the proof to Appendix G.3.1 and G.3.2.

More Insights Beyond Recent ICL Research. Our PAC-Bayesian approach offers statistical insights
into model performance, emphasizing the impact of pre-training topics, sequences and sequence
length. The data-dependent and topic-dependent prior uniquely enhances optimization and may
provide more practical guidance on model training, data selection and deduplication, distinguishing
our work from related generalization studies (Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b). Detailed practical
implications are discussed in Appendix E.


5       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we primarily provide some typical experiments to verify our theory, observe the
optimization process and prior model initialization. We defer more experiments on linear dynamic
systems, synthetic language dataset GINC and real-world language datasets to Appendix D 1 .
Experiments on Synthetic Language Dataset GINC. Inspired by Xie et al. (2021), we first
perform experiments on the synthetic language dataset GINC to verify our theory. GINC is a small-
scale language dataset generated from uniform Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) over topics, where
distinct state transition matrices represent the unique topics for each HMM, without defining topics
explicitly. We train the GPT-2 model with GINC dataset using a single 24GB NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3090. Detailed data-generating process, model and Hyperparameter settings are provided in
Appendix D.2.
In the following, we arrange groups of comparative experiments to explore the separate effects of the
number of topics (K), number of sequences per topic (N ), sequence length (T ) and prompt length
(Tp ). We also provide an interesting case where ICL failed.
Observation (1): Separate Effects of K, N , T and Tp . In Figure 2, we first present four groups
of experiments 2(a)-2(d) to analyze the impact of different factors on generalization. In Figure 2(a):
For pre-training, take K = 10 topics and generate N ∈ {20, 40, 60, 80, 100} pre-training sequences
per topic with varying sequence length T ∈ {1280, 2560, 5120, 10240}. The ICL performance of
pre-trained model is then tested with Tp = 128 prompt length. Each line exhibits a growing trend,
indicating a better generalization performance with increasing sequences per topic. Comparing the
four lines, a larger sequence length also brings better generalization. From Figure 2(b)-2(d), we
vary K ∈ {10, 20, 30}. Under each K, keep T = 10240, adjust N ∈ {20, 40, 60, 80, 100} and
Tp ∈ {48, 80, 128, 160}. Combining these experiments, we validate the effects of K, N, Tp on
generalization to emerge ICL ability, closely aligning our Theorems.
Observation (2): An Interesting Case that ICL Fails. In Figure 2(e), when the pre-training data
contains random transitions, the model observes all token transitions, yet ICL fails. This suggests
that the pre-trained models cannot extract information when data distributions do not match the topic,
thus failing to achieve ICL.

    1
        Our code is available at https://github.com/zx-gong/ICL-Emerge.


                                                        9
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                                                      1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                                               0.75
                 0.70
                                                                               0.70                                                                   0.9                                                                  0.9
                 0.65

                 0.60                                                          0.65
                                                                                                                                                      0.8


                                                                                                                                        Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
      Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy
                 0.55                                                          0.60

                 0.50                                                          0.55                                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.7
                 0.45                                                          0.50
                                                     T=1280                                                                Tp=48                      0.6                                       Tp=48                                                                           Tp=48
                 0.40                                                                                                                                                                           Tp=80                                                                           Tp=80
                                                     T=2560                    0.45                                        Tp=80                                                                                           0.6
                                                     T=5120                                                                Tp=128                                                               Tp=128                                                                          Tp=128
                 0.35                                T=10240                                                               Tp=160                                                               Tp=160                                                                          Tp=160
                                                                               0.40                                                                   0.5
                        20   40         60      80       100                          20          40         60      80        100                          20          40         60      80       100                          20          40         60             80            100
                             # Sequences per topic                                                # Sequences per topic                                                 # Sequences per topic                                                # Sequences per topic

                                  (a)                                                                  (b)                                                                   (c)                                                                  (d)
                                                                                                                          logN=8                                                                T=48                                                         Random Initialization
           0.035                                                                                                                                     4.4                                        T=64                                                         Prior Model Initialization
                                                                               5.00                                       logN=10
                                                                                                                          logN=12                                                               T=128                     4.2
           0.030                                                                                                                                                                                T=256
                                                                                                                          logN=14
                                                                               4.75                                                                  4.2
           0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.0
                                                                               4.50


                                                                                                                                     Training loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Training loss
           0.020                                               Training loss                                                                         4.0
Accuracy


           0.015                                                               4.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.8
                                                                                                                                                     3.8
           0.010                                                               4.00
           0.005                                                                                                                                     3.6                                                                  3.6
                                                     Tp=48                     3.75
           0.000                                     Tp=80
                                                     Tp=128                    3.50
                                                     Tp=160                                                                                          3.4                                                                  3.4
           0.005
                        20   40         60      80       100                          0    5000    10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                            0    5000   10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                            0    5000   10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
                             # Sequences per topic                                                     Global step                                                           Global step                                                          Global step

                                  (e)                                                                  (f)                                                                   (g)                                                                  (h)
                                             Figure 2: Experiments on GINC and Real-world Language Datasets.

   Experiments on Real-world Language Dataset. We further perform experiments on real-world
   language datasets, inspired by (Min et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023). We train the GPT2-large
   model over 20 diverse pre-training datasets covering sentiment analysis, question answering and
   reasoning tasks. We defer the detailed description of datasets, model and Hyperparameter settings,
   and observations on the effects of training data, to Appendix D.3. Here, we focus on more insightful
   experiments regarding the effects of optimization on generalization, as well as potential benefits of
   effective prior model initialization, guided by the KL term in generalization bounds.
   Observation (1): Optimization Process. Through continuous analysis of optimization trajectory,
   our generalization bounds are optimization-dependent, extending beyond the influence of training
   data. In Figure 2(f), we present four training processes with varying N ∈ {28 , 210 , 212 , 214 }, while
   keeping K = 20 and T = 256 fixed. We observe that larger N brings faster convergence in addition
   to better performance. Similarly, in Figure 2(g), we take varied T ∈ {48, 64, 128, 256} and keep
   K = 20 and N = 214 fixed. All these observations align with our Theorems that faster training leads
   to better generalization.
   Observation (2): Prior Model Initialization. Building on our generalization results with data-
   dependent and topic-dependent prior, we design experiments to observe the effects of prior model
   initialization on training and performance (detailed designation is deferred to Appendix D.3). Our
   results show that in the random initialization regime, where all pre-training data is used, training
   for 30,000 steps takes nearly 7 hours on four A100 GPUs. In contrast, under the prior model
   initialization regime, where a smaller model is used for warmup and serves as the prior for initializing
   the larger model, training the GPT2-large model takes only 4 hours for the same 30,000 steps
   on four A100 GPUs, with 0.5 hours required for training the GPT2-small model for 15,000 steps.
   Furthermore, as shown in the optimization loss curve in Figure 2(h), prior model initialization not
   only accelerates training but also stabilizes the training process (especially in the early stages), leading
   to comparable model performance. This approach demonstrates the effectiveness of leveraging prior
   knowledge in enhancing both training efficiency and model performance, supporting the KL term in
   our generalization bounds and offering more practical insights.


    6                   C ONCLUSION

   In this paper, under the AR-NTP paradigm, we propose a systematic pre-training and ICL framework
   with a layer-wise structure of sequences and topics, alongside two-level expectation. By employing
   PAC-Bayesian analysis and continuous mathematical techniques like SDE, we provide a comprehen-
   sive analysis of data-dependent, topic-dependent and optimization-dependent generalization bounds,
   demonstrating that ICL emerges for the excellent generalization of sequences and topics. Ultimately,
   our work aims to take an initial exploration of the origin of ICL ability from the perspective of
   generalization, supported by both theoretical and experimental results.


                                                                                                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62476277), Na-
tional Key Research and Development Program of China (NO.2024YFE0203200), CCF-ALIMAMA
TECH Kangaroo Fund (No.CCF-ALIMAMA OF 2024008), and Huawei-Renmin University joint
program on Information Retrieval. We also acknowledge the support provided by the fund for
building worldclass universities (disciplines) of Renmin University of China and by the funds from
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Gaoling School of Artificial
Intelligence, Renmin University of China, from Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation
Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of Education, from Intelligent Social Governance
Interdisciplinary Platform, Major Innovation & Planning Interdisciplinary Platform for the ‘Dou-
bleFirst Class’ Initiative, Renmin University of China, from Public Policy and Decision-making
Research Lab of Renmin University of China, and from Public Computing Cloud, Renmin University
of China.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural complexity
  and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:20095–20107, 2020.
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36, 2024.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians:
  Provable in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 36, 2024.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and Devon Hjelm. Mutual information neural estimation. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 531–540. PMLR, 2018.
Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace He,
  Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, et al. Gpt-neox-20b: An open-source autoregressive
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06745, 2022.
Olivier Bousquet and André Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2:499–526, 2002.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Olivier Catoni. Pac-bayesian supervised classification: the thermodynamics of statistical learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:0712.0248, 2007.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learning
  in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kurtland Chua, Qi Lei, and Jason D Lee. How fine-tuning allows for effective meta-learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8871–8884, 2021.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt
  learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. In
  ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2023.
Vı́ctor H de la Peña, Evarist Giné, Vı́ctor H de la Peña, and Evarist Giné. General decoupling
   inequalities for tangent sequences. Decoupling: From Dependence to Independence, pp. 291–324,
  1999.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Elliot Catt, Tim Genewein, Christo-
  pher Mattern, Jordi Grau-Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Matthew Aitchison, Laurent Orseau, et al.
  Language modeling is compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10668, 2023.
Giulia Denevi, Carlo Ciliberto, Dimitris Stamos, and Massimiliano Pontil. Incremental learning-to-
  learn with statistical guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08089, 2018.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1703.11008, 2017.
Andre Elisseeff, Theodoros Evgeniou, Massimiliano Pontil, and Leslie Pack Kaelbing. Stability of
  randomized learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(1), 2005.
Vitaly Feldman and Jan Vondrak. Generalization bounds for uniformly stable algorithms. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Chi Han, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhao, and Heng Ji. In-context learning of large language models explained
  as kernel regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12766, 2023.
Moritz Hardt, Ben Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic
 gradient descent. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1225–1234. PMLR, 2016.
Yu Huang, Yuan Cheng, and Yingbin Liang. In-context convergence of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05249, 2023.
Kaiyi Ji, Jason D Lee, Yingbin Liang, and H Vincent Poor. Convergence of meta-learning with
  task-specific adaptation over partial parameters. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:11490–11500, 2020.
Hui Jiang. A latent space theory for emergent abilities in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.09960, 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
S Kwapien and WA Woyczynski. Semimartingale integrals via decoupling inequalities and tangent
  processes. Probab. Math. Statist, 12(2):165–200, 1991.
Yunwen Lei and Yiming Ying. Fine-grained analysis of stability and generalization for stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5809–5819. PMLR, 2020.
David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times, volume 107. American Mathemat-
  ical Soc., 2017.
Jian Li, Xuanyuan Luo, and Mingda Qiao. On generalization error bounds of noisy gradient methods
   for non-convex learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00621, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yingcong Li, Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers
  as algorithms: Generalization and stability in in-context learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 19565–19594. PMLR, 2023.
Xuanyuan Luo, Bei Luo, and Jian Li. Generalization bounds for gradient methods via discrete and
  continuous prior. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:10600–10614, 2022.
David A McAllester. Some pac-bayesian theorems. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference
  on Computational learning theory, pp. 230–234, 1998.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Metaicl: Learning to learn in
  context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15943, 2021.
Wenlong Mou, Liwei Wang, Xiyu Zhai, and Kai Zheng. Generalization bounds of sgld for non-convex
 learning: Two theoretical viewpoints. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 605–638. PMLR,
 2018.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain generalization
  in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Devang K Naik and Richard J Mammone. Meta-neural networks that learn by learning. In [Proceed-
  ings 1992] IJCNN International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, volume 1, pp. 437–442.
  IEEE, 1992.
Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14735, 2024.
Daniel Paulin. Concentration inequalities for markov chains by marton couplings and spectral
  methods. Electron. J. Probab, 20(79):1–32, 2015.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Daniel Russo and James Zou. Controlling bias in adaptive data analysis using information theory. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1232–1240. PMLR, 2016.
Daniel Russo and James Zou. How much does your data exploration overfit? controlling bias via
  information usage. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 66(1):302–323, 2019.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to learn:
   the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, Nathan Srebro, and Karthik Sridharan. Learnability, stability
  and uniform convergence. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2635–2670, 2010.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance
  of task diversity. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:7852–7862, 2020.
Vladimir Vapnik, Esther Levin, and Yann Le Cun. Measuring the vc-dimension of a learning machine.
  Neural computation, 6(5):851–876, 1994.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, and William Yang Wang. Large language models are implicitly topic
  models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.11916, pp. 3, 2023.
Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. Two facets of sde under an information-theoretic lens: Generalization
  of sgd via training trajectories and via terminal states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10691, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.07895, 2023.
T Wolf. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Zixiang Chen, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Peter L Bartlett.
   How many pretraining tasks are needed for in-context learning of linear regression? arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.08391, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
Aolin Xu and Maxim Raginsky. Information-theoretic analysis of generalization capability of learning
  algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding deep
  learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–115,
  2021.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023a.
Yikai Zhang, Wenjia Zhang, Sammy Bald, Vamsi Pingali, Chao Chen, and Mayank Goswami.
  Stability of sgd: Tightness analysis and improved bounds. In Uncertainty in artificial intelligence,
  pp. 2364–2373. PMLR, 2022.
Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and how does in-context
  learning learn? bayesian model averaging, parameterization, and generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.19420, 2023b.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Appendix
  A    Table of Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  B    Overview of Two-Level Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  C    More Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  D    More Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       D.1 Experiments on Linear Dynamic System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       D.2 Experiments on GINC Synthetic Language Dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
       D.3 Experiments on Real-world Language Datasets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  E    Practical Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
  F    Complete Theorems: ICL Emerges from Generalization of Pre-trained LLMs . . . 26
       F.1 Generalization of Sequences: The First-Level Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
       F.2 Generalization of Sequences and Topics: Two-Level Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . 28
  G    Proof of Theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
       G.1 Useful Definitions, Lemmas and Propositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
       G.2 Generalization of Sequences: The First-Level Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
       G.3 Generalization of Sequences and Topics: Two-Level Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . 41


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     TABLE OF N OTATIONS

                                    Table 1: Table of Notations.

 Notation                 Description
 K                        Number of pre-training topics
 K′                       Number of pre-training topics used to compute topic-dependent prior
 N                        Number of pre-training sequences per topic
 N′                       Number of pre-training sequences per topic used to compute data-
                          dependent prior
 T                        Pre-training Sequence length
 Tp                       ICL Prompt length
 wk                       A pre-training topic with index k
 w                        A ICL topic
 Wpre                     The set of pre-training topics
 WICL                     The set of ICL topics
 PW                       Topic distribution, each topic wk ∈ Wpre , w ∈ WICL is i.i.d. drawn from
                          the topic distribution.
 E k,n                    The n-th pre-training sequence under the k-th topic
 Etk,n                    The subsequence consisting of the first t tokens of E k,n
 Ek                       The set of pre-training sequences under the k-th topic, |E k | = N .
                                                                                          k,n K,N
 E                        The set of all pre-training sequences, E = {E k }K  k=1 = {E       }k,n=1 ,
                          |E| = KN .
 ETp                      ICL prompt under ICL topic w
 Pwk or P(· | wk )        Data distribution, each pre-training sequence E k,n ∈ E k is i.i.d. drawn
                          from the data distribution.
 Pw or P(· | w)           Data distribution, ICL prompt ETp is drawn from the data distribution.
 xk,n
  t+1                     The t + 1-th token of pre-training sequence E k,n , generated depending
                          on the prefix sequence Etk,n .
 xt                       The t-th token of ICL prompt ET
 θ                        The parameters of the pre-trained LLM
 θ̂                       The optimal parameters of the pre-trained LLM
 P(xk,n    k,n
    t+1 | Et , wk )       The true data distribution of token xk,n
                                                                t+1 when given topic wk and the
                                            k,n
                          prefix sequence Et .
 Pθ (xk,n    k,n
      t+1 | Et , wk )     The prediction of token xk,n
                                                    t+1 , made from the pre-trained model, when
                          given topic wk and the prefix sequence Etk,n .
 Pθ̂ (xk,n    k,n
       t+1 | Et , wk )    The prediction of token xk,n
                                                   t+1 , made from the optimal pre-trained model,
                          when given topic wk and the prefix sequence Etk,n .
 LE (θ, Wpre )            The empirical loss of all pre-training sequences in E, see in Equation 1.
 LE k (θ, wk )            The loss of sequences in E k , see in Equation 1.
 LE k,n (θ, wk )          The loss of sequence E k,n , see in Equation 1.
 L(θ, Wpre )              The first-level expected loss, take expectation over sequence, see in
                          Equation 4.
 L(θ)                     The population loss, take expectation over topic and sequence, see in
                          Equation 5.



B     OVERVIEW OF T WO -L EVEL E XPECTATION
Decomposition of Population Loss. No matter the inner or outer expectation, the expected loss
L(θ) is incalculable since the data distribution Pwk and topic distribution PW are both unknown (as
introduced in Section 3.2, finite sequences and topics are utilized to optimize the empirical loss in


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             Population Loss
                                          (Upper Bound of       , See in Theorem 4.1 or 5.6)   (Upper Bound of              , See in Theorem 5.3)


          : The second-level expectation over               : Averaging            over                   : Averaging                                   : Averaging
     topic    of          .                      topics.                                       over   topics.                                over   topics.

      infinite topics & infinite sequences           topics & infinite sequences                      topics &     sequences                         topics &     sequences
             [See in Equation (15)]                    [See in Equation (13)]                         [See in Equation (11)]                          [See in Equation (9)]


               : The first-level expectation over                           : Averaging                   over                                : Averaging               over
       sequence     of            .                              sequences per topic.                                              sequences per topic and sequence length .


                                                                   : The partial first-level expectation of             .

                                                                            [See in Equation (11)]


                                                             : Averaging logarithmic likelihood loss                           .

                                                                Optimization Objective [See in Equation (9)]


Figure 3: Overview of Two-Level Expectation. From a horizontal perspective: The first
box (from top to bottom): according to Equation 8, the population loss is decomposed into
four parts. We ultimately obtain the upper bound of the population loss by separately defining
the upper bound for each part. Combining Part I, Part II and Part III, we obtain Theorem 4.3;
further combining with Part IV, we obtain Theorem 4.6. The second box: comparing L(θ) and
L(θ, Wpre ), we aim to describe the second-level expectation defined over topic. The third box:
comparing L(θ, wk ) and L′x (θ, wk ), we aim to describe the complete first-level expectation defined
over sequence. The fourth box: comparing L′x (θ, wk ) and Lx (θ, wk ), L′E k,n (θ, wk ) is a partial
first-level expectation over token xk,n                   k,n
                                    t+1 conditioned on Et . The fifth box: Negative logarithmic
likelihood loss, the optimization objective for a token. From a vertical perspective, the formulas
described in the four columns can be found in Equation 15, 13, 11 and 9, respectively. The first
column: the chain of L(θ) → L(θ, wk ) → L′x (θ, wk ) → Lx (θ, wk ). The second column: the
chain of L(θ, Wpre ) → L(θ, wk ) → L′x (θ, wk ) → Lx (θ, wk ). The third column: the chain
of L′ (θ, Wpre ) → L′E k (θ, wk ) → L′x (θ, wk ) → Lx (θ, wk ). The fourth column: the chain of
LE (θ, Wpre ) → LE k (θ, wk ) → Lx (θ, wk ).


practical). ICL ability can be measured by population loss, which can be decomposed by simply
adding and subtracting three terms LE (θ, Wpre ), L′ (θ, Wpre ) and L(θ, Wpre ) in Equation 8. A good
ICL learner means a small population loss, i.e. a small value in all four parts. The overview of
two-level expectation is shown in Figure 3 and the table of notations is shown in Table 2.
  L(θ) = L(θ) − L(θ, Wpre ) + L(θ, Wpre ) − L′ (θ, Wpre )
         |      {z       } |              {z           }
                     Part IV: gentopic                                Part III: genseq-2

                                                                                       + L′ (θ, Wpre ) − LE (θ, Wpre ) + LE (θ, Wpre )                                            (8)
                                                                                         |             {z           }    |    {z    }
                                                                                                              Part II: genseq-1                          Part I: empirical loss


Part I: empirical loss. For Part I, the training of the LLM takes into account K topics and N
sequences per topic. In this setting, finite topics and finite sequences could affect the performance


                                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of model so that the training loss is called as empirical loss (optimization objective). For a detailed
explanation of empirical loss, the same as Equation 1,
                                                          K
                                                    1 X
                                 LE (θ, Wpre ) =        LE k (θ, wk ),
                                                    K
                                                       k=1
                                                          N
                                                  1 X
                                  LE k (θ, wk ) =      L k,n (θ, wk ),                                  (9)
                                                  N n=1 E
                                                          T
                                                    1X
                                LE k,n (θ, wk ) =         Lx (θ, wk ),
                                                    T t=1
                                                          P(xk,n    k,n
                                                             t+1 | Et , wk )
                                   Lx (θ, wk ) = log                             .
                                                          Pθ (xk,n    k,n
                                                               t+1 | Et , wk )


Part II : genseq-1 . Through Part I, we have obtained the empirical loss with finite sequences and
finite topics. To address the first-level expectation, it’s necessary to evaluate the expected loss over
sequence, that is, utilizing an infinite number of sequences for each pre-training topic. Given that
the sequential dependence in token generation or prediction, where each subsequent token relies
on the preceding tokens, our approach involves initially calculating the expectation of token xk,n      t+1
conditioned on Etk,n in this Part II. It’s a partial generalization error for the first-level expected loss.
This is followed by taking expectation over Etk,n in the Part III, thereby achieving the comprehensive
first-level expectation over sequence E k,n .
According to the definition of KL divergence, the partial        first-level expectation over sequences

Exk,n ∼P(·|E k,n ,wk ) [Lx (θ, wk )] can be related to DKL P(· | Etk,n , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ) , i.e.
   t+1      t

                                                                      "                           #
                                                                             P(xk,n    k,n
                                                                                t+1 | Et , wk )
         Exk,n ∼P(·|E k,n ,wk ) [Lx (θ, wk )] = Exk,n ∼P(·|E k,n ,wk ) log
            t+1       t                             t+1  t
                                                                       Pθ (xk,n        k,n
                                                                              t+1 | Et , wk )

                                             = DKL P(· | Etk,n , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk )
                                             ≜ L′x (θ, wk ).                                           (10)

Then, taking average of all tokens in a sequence, N sequences per topic and K topics and combining
with Equation 10, we define a partial first-level expected loss L′ (θ, Wpre ) as
                                             K
                                         1 X ′
                      L′ (θ, Wpre ) =       LE k (θ, wk ),
                                         K
                                            k=1
                                             N
                                         1 X ′
                      L′E k (θ, wk ) =        L k,n (θ, wk ),                                          (11)
                                         N n=1 E
                                            T
                                         1X ′
                    L′E k,n (θ, wk ) =        L (θ, wk ),
                                         T t=1 x

                          L′x (θ, wk ) = DKL P(· | Etk,n , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ) .

Finally, a partial generalization error for the first-level expected loss can be described as
                                  genseq-1 = L′ (θ, Wpre ) − LE (θ, Wpre ).                            (12)

Part III : genseq-2 . Through Part II, we derived a partial first-level expected loss L′ (θ, Wpre ).
Subsequently, in this part, by taking expectation over Etk,n , we will achieve a comprehensive first-
level expectation over prefix sequence E k,n . Utilizing infinite sequences per topic rather than N


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Table 2: Table of Notations in Figure 3.

                Notation             Description
 LE (θ, Wpre ) LE (θ, Wpre )         Averaging LE k (θ, wk ) over K topics, see in Equation 9.
               LE k (θ, wk )         Averaging LE k,n (θ, wk ) over N sequences per topic.
               LE k,n (θ, wk )       Averaging Lx (θ, wk ) over sequence length.
                                                                                  P(xk,n |E k,n ,wk )
                                                                                         t
                Lx (θ, wk )          Negative logarithmic likelihood loss log P (xt+1
                                                                                   k,n
                                                                                       |E k,n ,w )
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                  θ   t+1   t      k

    ′             ′
 L (θ, Wpre )   L (θ, Wpre )         Averaging L′E k (θ, wk ) over K topics, see in Equation 11.
                L′E k (θ, wk )       Averaging L′E k,n (θ, wk ) over N sequences per topic.
                L′E k,n (θ, wk )     Averaging L′x (θ, wk ) over sequence length.
                L′x (θ, wk )         Taking the partial first-level expectation over token xk,n
                                                                                            t+1 ∼ P(· |
                                     Etk,n , wk ).
 L(θ, Wpre )    L(θ, Wpre )          Averaging L(θ, wk ) over K topics, see in Equation 13.
                L(θ, wk )            Taking the complete first-level expectation over prefix sequence
                                     Etk,n and token xk,n              k,n
                                                         t+1 ∼ P(· | Et , wk ).
                L′x (θ, wk )         The partial first-level expectation over token xk,n
                                                                                     t+1 .
 L(θ)           L(θ)                 Taking the second-level expectation over topic wk of L(θ, wk ),
                                     see in Equation 15.
                L(θ, wk )            The first-level expectation over sequence E k,n .


sequences, the first-level expected loss L(θ, Wpre ) can be more concretely described as
                                                            K
                                                      1 X
                                      L(θ, Wpre ) =       L(θ, wk ),
                                                      K
                                                        k=1
                                       L(θ, wk ) = EE k,n [L′x (θ, wk )] .                              (13)
                                                        t



Compared with L(θ, Wpre ) and L′ (θ, Wpre ), the difference lies in the second line of Equation 13 and
11 with infinite sequences or N sequences. This difference represents the complete generalization
error of sequences which can be denoted as genseq-2 ,
                                    genseq-2 = L(θ, Wpre ) − L′ (θ, Wpre ).                             (14)

Part IV : gentopic . In this part, we further consider the second-level expectation over topic, that is,
considering the population loss with infinite sequences and infinite topics. According to the difference
between Equation 13 and population loss lies in the number of topics with infinite or K, we have the
population loss,
                                        L(θ) = Ewk [L(θ, wk )] .                                    (15)

After which ICL will emerge from the good generalization of sequences and topics. It can be denoted
as gentopic ,
                                 gentopic = L(θ) − L(θ, Wpre ).                                (16)

C       M ORE R ELATED W ORK
From Multi-Task Learning to Meta-Learning. Although drawing inspiration from the assumption
of an unknown task distribution in meta-learning analysis, it is worthy to emphasize that ICL
generalization analysis under auto-regressive next-token prediction cannot be equivalent to meta-
learning generalization. We conduct our analysis under the unique setup of auto-regressive pre-trained
LLMs. The prompt token-dependency issue brought by auto-regressive language modeling implies
that we cannot directly apply the general meta-learning analysis to ICL generalization analysis.
For instance, the study in Bai et al. (2024) directly applied the general approach of meta-learning,
assuming that a prompt consists of N + 1 i.i.d. samples, which is unreasonable for AR-NTP problem


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we investigate. For a prompt (x1 , x2 , · · · , xT ) under AR-NTP, we do not require x1 ∼ xT to be
independent of each other; instead, subsequent tokens depend on previously generated tokens. As
mentioned in Section 4.2, addressing prompt token-dependency is one of the significant contributions
and challenges compared to other works, including meta-learning works in non-ICL domains. This is
the key distinction from traditional meta-learning approach.

Generalization Analysis. Understanding the generalization error in learning algorithm which
meansures the model performance on unseen data with population loss, has led to the development
of several classic methods for establishing its upper bounds. Among these, uniform convergence
(including VC dimension, Rademacher complexity) (Bartlett et al., 2017; Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2010; Vapnik et al., 1994), algorithm stability (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Feldman & Vondrak,
2018; Hardt et al., 2016; Lei & Ying, 2020; Zhang et al., 2022), information-theoretic bounds (Russo
& Zou, 2016; 2019; Xu & Raginsky, 2017), and PAC-Bayesian (Catoni, 2007; Dziugaite & Roy,
2017; McAllester, 1998) are prominent techniques. For VC dimension, it depends solely on the
hypothesis class which offers the worst-case analysis. For Rademacher complexity, it depends both
on the hypothesis class and on the unknown distribution which can be understood as an average-case
analysis. The above obtained bounds almost depend on the size of hypothesis space, and become
vacuous hence may be unable to explain generalization in deep learning with over-parameterized
neural network (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021). Additionally, compared with
algorithm stability theory, it considers worst-case and fails in analyzing the relationship between
input data and output model. Therefore, we turn to the PAC-Bayesian approach for its unique
data-dependent and hypothesis space-independent analysis. In our work, we specifically incorporate
a topic-dependent prior within the PAC-Bayesian framework, adding a novel dimension to this
analysis. Furthermore, by detailing the KL divergence when considering the optimization process, we
obtain optimization algorithm-dependent generalization bound, naturally combining the advantage of
algorithm stability technique.

D     M ORE E XPERIMENTS
D.1    E XPERIMENTS ON L INEAR DYNAMIC S YSTEM

We conduct numerical experiments of linear dynamic system. Our experimental setup follows Li
et al. (2019): All ICL experiments are trained and evaluated using the same GPT-2 architecture with
12 layers, 8 attention heads, and 256 dimensional embeddings, on NVIDIA 3090 GPUs.
For a partially-observed dynamical system, the mathematical model can be represented by state and
observation equation. Consider the state equation xt+1 = W xt + ζt , where xt represents the state
vector at time t in a d-dimensional space. This is analogous to the tokens in our analysis. W denotes
the state transition matrix and ζt is the process noise satisfying N (0, σ 2 Id ). The observation equation
is given by yt+1 = Cxt+1 , where C is the observation matrix, indicating that only partial dimensions
of the state vector are observable. The uniqueness of different topics is reflected in the parameters
W and C. Within this linear dynamic system setting, we examine how the number of pre-training
topics (K), the number of sequences per topic (N ), and the sequence length (T ) significantly affect
the generalization performance of auto-regressive LLMs. Additionally, we highlight the advantages
of both data-dependent and topic-dependent priors.
The Comparison of Overall Loss and In-context Learning Loss. Before embarking on our main
experiments, we conduct a preliminary comparison between the absolute values of the overall loss and
the in-context learning (ICL) loss. In the pre-training phase, we predict all tokens in a sequence and
consider the average of these predictions as the overall loss. According to our theoretical proof, this
average prediction loss can be naturally generalized to the ICL phase to represent the ability of ICL.
Although in more scenarios, the focus often shifts to the predicted outcome of the last token, here the
prediction loss of the last token is denoted as ICL loss. In the left of Figure 4, our observations reveal
that the ICL loss is consistently lower than the overall loss with a different number of sequences per
topic. It’s because the prediction loss decreases as the sequence length increases, corresponding to
our theory. Consequently, our theoretical bounds hold validity and significance under both overall
and ICL loss assessments.
Separate Effects of K, N and T . In our experimental design, we manipulate the variables K, N ,
and T independently and the experimental results are shown in Figure 5. In Figure 5(a), with fixed


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        0.30                                                                                                                                                    Complete set of topics: log(#Topics)=16
                                                                          Overall loss                                                             0.9
                        0.27                                              ICL loss                                                                                              Subset of topics: log(#Topics)=15
                        0.24                                                                                                                       0.8

                        0.21                                                                                                                       0.7


                                                                                                                                   Training loss
                 Loss   0.18                                                                                                                       0.6
                        0.15                                                                                                                       0.5
                        0.12                                                                                                                       0.4
                        0.09
                                                                                                                                                   0.3
                        0.06
                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                        0.03
                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                        0.00
                                10          15           20          25                 30                                                                    0   2000                4000        6000         8000        10000
                                           # Sequences per topic                                                                                                                      Global step


Figure 4: Experiments on Linear Dynamic System. Left: The comparison of overall loss and in-
context learning loss. Right: The comparison of experiments conducted on complete topic set and
subset of topics.


                                           #Sequences per topic=10                      25                                     log(#Topics)=13
            25                             #Sequences per topic=20                                                             log(#Topics)=14                                                                               log(#Topics)=14
                                           #Sequences per topic=30                                                             log(#Topics)=15                                0.050
                                           #Sequences per topic=40                      20                                     log(#Topics)=16
            20

                                                                                                             0.050                                                            0.045
            15                                                                          15
 ICL loss


                                                                             ICL loss


                                                                                                             0.048


                                                                                                                                                                   ICL loss
                                                                                                             0.046
            10                                                                          10                   0.044                                                            0.040
                                                                                                             0.042
                                                                                                             0.040        log(#Topics)=16
            5                                                                            5                                                                                    0.035
                                                                                                                     10   15     20         25           30


            0                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.030
                 10      11    12     13   14      15    16     17                           5   10    15    20      25     30        35            40                                10     15   20      25   30     35    40     45   50
                                    log(#Topics)                                                      # Sequences per topic                                                                              Sequence length

             (a) Vary number of topics.                                     (b) Vary number of sequences per                                                                     (c) Vary sequence length.
                                                                            topic.

Figure 5: Experiments on Linear Dynamic System: The effect of the number of pre-training topics
(K), the number of sequences per topic (N ) and sequence length (T ).


number of sequences per topic and sequence length (T = 11) for each line (N = 10, 20, 30, 40),
we vary the number of topics within the range of K = 210 ∼ 217 . As K increases, it’s noticeable
that the ICL loss consistently show a downward trend across all four lines. Furthermore, the sharp
drops in ICL loss observed in these cases suggests that LLMs exhibit emerging abilities when the
accumulated topic count reaches certain thresholds. In Figure 5(b), holding the number of topics
and sequence length (T = 11) constant for each line (with topics set at K = 213 , 214 , 215 , 216 ), we
adjust the number of sequences per topic, varying it within a range of N = 5 ∼ 40. Comparing the
four cases, the ICL loss diminishes as N grows. Notably, in cases with less sufficient topics (like
K = 213 and 214 ), a larger N leads to significant reductions in ICL loss. Specially, the decrease
trend of ICL loss is particularly evident in the magnified view of the case where K = 216 . In Figure
5(c), maintaining a constant number of topics (K = 214 ) and sequence per topic (N = 40), we
modify the sequence length, allowing it to vary within a range of T = 11 ∼ 51. We can find that ICL
loss clearly decreases as the sequence length grows.
The Advantages of Both Data-dependent and Topic-dependent Priors. As introduced before,
data-dependent and topic-dependent priors provide a chance to make the generalization bound
computable. To illustrate this, we take the example of topic-dependent prior and two experiments
are conducted: one with a complete set of topics (K = 216 ) and another with its subset (K ′ = 215 ).
Observing the results in the right of Figure 4, both training processes eventually converge to nearly
identical steady states. This suggests that using a subset of topics to obtain a topic-dependent prior in
preliminary experiments yields a prior that is closer to the posterior than a randomly selected prior.
Then for the KL divergence between prior and posterior distribution of model parameters in our
generalization bounds, assume these distributions are either uniform or Gaussian allows us to derive
the closed-form expressions for the KL divergence.


                                                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                                                             1.0                                                                     1.0
                                                                               0.75
           0.70
                                                                               0.70                                                                          0.9                                                                     0.9
           0.65

           0.60                                                                0.65
                                                                                                                                                             0.8


                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.55                                                                0.60

           0.50                                                                0.55                                                                          0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.7
           0.45                                                                0.50
                                                         T=1280                                                                        Tp=48                 0.6                                                 Tp=48                                                       Tp=48
           0.40                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tp=80                                                       Tp=80
                                                         T=2560                0.45                                                    Tp=80                                                                                         0.6
                                                         T=5120                                                                        Tp=128                                                                    Tp=128                                                      Tp=128
           0.35                                          T=10240                                                                       Tp=160                                                                    Tp=160                                                      Tp=160
                                                                               0.40                                                                          0.5
                  20    40              60          80        100                     20         40              60               80        100                    20        40             60              80      100                    20        40         60      80      100
                        # Sequences per topic                                                    # Sequences per topic                                                       # Sequences per topic                                                   # Sequences per topic

                             (a)                                                                         (b)                                                                          (c)                                                                   (d)

                                        0.75                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.035
                                        0.70
                                                                                                                       0.8                                                                         0.030
                                        0.65                                                                                                                                                       0.025
                             Accuracy


                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                        0.60                                                                           0.7                                                                         0.020


                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.015
                                        0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.010
                                        0.50                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                Tp=48                                                                                              0.005
                                                                                                                                                                             Tp=48                                                                   Tp=48
                                        0.45                                                    Tp=80                                                                        Tp=80                 0.000                                             Tp=80
                                                                                                Tp=128                 0.5                                                   Tp=128                                                                  Tp=128
                                        0.40                                                    Tp=160                                                                       Tp=160                0.005                                             Tp=160
                                               20        40           60                   80         100                    20        40            60                 80        100                      20      40           60              80        100
                                                         # Sequences per topic                                                         # Sequences per topic                                                       # Sequences per topic

                                                              (e)                                                                               (f)                                                                     (g)

                                                     Figure 6: Experiments on GINC Synthetic Language Dataset.


D.2                    E XPERIMENTS ON GINC S YNTHETIC L ANGUAGE DATASET

Inspired by Xie et al. (2021), we perform experiments on a synthetic language dataset GINC to verify
our theoretical results.
GINC Dataset. GINC is a small-scale language dataset generated from a uniform mixture of
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) over a family of topics/concepts (Xie et al., 2021). The generation
steps are as follows: (1) Prepare transition matrix for HMMs: The topic/concept determines the state
transition matrix in HMM. For simulation, the transition matrix is randomly generated for each topic
(each HMM), respectively; (2) Prepare vocabulary: The vocabulary is generated as combinations of
letters starting from ‘a’ to ‘z’, ‘aa’ to ‘az’, and so on. We can obtain vocabularies with different sizes;
(3) Prepare memory matrix: A unique matrix is created that records the mapping of vocabulary and
state; (4) Generate sequences: Given a fixed topic and an initial state, generate the next state based
on the transition matrix, and then obtain the observed token using the memory matrix. In total, each
sequence is sampled from a random HMM in the family.

Model and Hyperparameter Settings. Our transformer model is based on the GPT-2 architecture
with 4 layers, 12 attention heads, and 768-dimensional embeddings (Wolf, 2019). We train the model
for 20 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a batch size of 8 and a linear learning rate schedule.
The schedule includes a warmup phase of 1000 steps, up to the learning rate of 8e-4. Notably, we
adopt a large portion of the code from Xie et al. (2021). All experiments on GINC are conducted
using a single 24GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090.
In the following, We empirically explore the separate effects of the number of topics (K), number of
sequences per topic (N ), sequence length (T ) and prompt length (Tp ). We detail K ∈ {10, 20, 30},
N ∈ {20, 40, 60, 80, 100}, T ∈ {1280, 2560, 5120, 10240}, Tp ∈ {48, 80, 128, 160}, where ranging
T with directly masking the token that exceeds the specified length and do not taking special
consideration. In totoal, we arrange groups of comparative experiments to verify that increasing
K, N, T, Tp individually improves the model’s generalization performance as demonstrated in our
Theorems. Additionally, we discuss the effect of vocabulary size and provide an interesting case
involving with a failed ICL.

Observation (1): Separate Effects of K, N , T and Tp . We first present four groups of experiments
6(a)-6(d) in Figure 6. In Figure 6(a): For pre-training data, take K = 10 topics and generate N ∈
{20, 40, 60, 80, 100} pre-training sequences/documents per topic, in addition with varying sequence
length T ∈ {1280, 2560, 5120, 10240}. Then with the pre-trained model, test ICL performance on
the prompt with Tp = 128 prompt length. Each line exhibits a growing trend, indicating a better


                                                                                                                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    90                                                                            90                                                                       90

                                                                                                  80                                                                       80
                    80
                                                                glue-sst2
                                                                blimp                             70                                    glue-sst2                          70                                         glue-sst2


                                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy
      Accuracy
                                                                ethos                                                                   poem_sentiment                                                                poem_sentiment
                    70
                                                                                                                                        dbpedia_14                                                                    dbpedia_14
                                                                                                  60                                    ag_news                            60                                         ag_news
                    60
                                                                                                  50                                                                       50
                    50
                                                                                                  40                                                                       40

                              6      8    10    12    14   16     18        20                         8     9      10     11      12       13       14                         50          100        150           200           250
                                               # Topics                                                       log(# Sequences per topic)                                                          Sequence length

                                               (a)                                                                       (b)                                                                         (c)
                                                                  logN=8                                                                         T=48                                                        Random Initialization
                                                                                                 4.4                                             T=64                                                        Prior Model Initialization
                   5.00                                           logN=10
                                                                  logN=12                                                                        T=128                    4.2
                                                                  logN=14                                                                        T=256
                   4.75                                                                          4.2
                                                                                                                                                                          4.0
                   4.50

                                                                                 Training loss


                                                                                                                                                          Training loss
   Training loss


                                                                                                 4.0
                   4.25
                                                                                                                                                                          3.8
                                                                                                 3.8
                   4.00

                                                                                                 3.6                                                                      3.6
                   3.75

                   3.50
                                                                                                 3.4                                                                      3.4
                          0       5000   10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                 0   5000   10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                 0    5000    10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
                                            Global step                                                              Global step                                                                   Global step

                                            (d)                                                                      (e)                                                                            (f)

                                                     Figure 7: Experiments on Real-world Language Dataset.


generalization performance with increasing sequences per topic. Comparing the four lines from
bottom to top, a larger sequence length also brings better generalization. From Figure 6(b)-6(d),
we vary K ∈ {10, 20, 30}. Under each K, keep sequence length T = 10240, with varying N ∈
{20, 40, 60, 80, 100} and Tp ∈ {48, 80, 128, 160}. Combining these three groups of experiments, we
validate the effects of K, N, Tp on generalization, closely aligning our Theorems.

Observation (2): Effect of Vocabulary Size and an Interesting Case that ICL Fails. In Figure
6(b), 6(e) and 6(f), We vary the vocabulary size within {50, 100, 150}. With fixed K = 10 topics,
we vary N ∈ {20, 40, 60, 80, 100} and Tp ∈ {48, 80, 128, 160}. Apart from the observations
similar to Figure 6(b)-6(d) about N, Tp , we surprisingly find that a larger vocabulary size leads to
higher ICL prediction accuracy. This aligns with our understanding that the number of possible
token combinations in sequences grows with increased vocabulary size. It also implies that more
diverse training data improves ICL performance. This is further implicitly supported by our theory,
which suggests increasing the training sample size as much as possible to ensure sample diversity.
Furthermore, we conduct an interesting experiment in Figure 6(g). When the pre-training data
contains random transitions, the model observes all token transitions, yet ICL fails. This suggests
that the pre-trained models cannot extract information when data distributions do not match the topic,
thus failing to achieve ICL.

D.3                  E XPERIMENTS ON R EAL - WORLD L ANGUAGE DATASETS .

We further perform experiments on real-world language datasets, inspired by (Min et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2023).

Datasets, Model and Hyperparameter Settings. In the pre-training phase, we consider a mixture
of a series of language tasks, mainly including 20 datasets. Classified by task types, including
sentiment analysis (glue-sst2, poem sentiment, yelp polarity and emotion), linguistic analysis (glue-
cola, blimp), text classification (ag news, dbpedia 14, ethos), question answering (tweet qa) and
commonsense reasoning (swag). Different datasets are considered as different topics (reflected in
K from our framework). In ICL phase, we test ICL performance with different datasets. All the
datasets are obtained from Hugging Face. We train the GPT2-large model with a batch size of 16 and
a learning rate of 1e-4 for total 30,000 iterations. Notably, we adopt a large portion of the code from


                                                                                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wang et al. (2023). All experiments are conducted using four 24GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090
and 40GB A100 GPUs.
In the following, we empirically explore the separate effects of the number of topics (K), num-
ber of sequences per topic (N ) and sequence length (T ). By detailing K ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20},
N ∈ {28 , 210 , 212 , 214 }, T ∈ {48, 64, 128, 256}, we arrange groups of comparative experiments
to verify that increasing K, N, T individually improves the model’s generalization performance as
demonstrated in our Theorems. Additionally, we observe the impact of optimization process and
prior model initialization.

Observation (1): Separate Effects of K, N and T . In Figure 7(a), we investigate the impact of
varying the number of topics K. Specifically, varying K ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20}, keeping fixed N = 214
sequences per topic and sequence length T = 256. The results show that for ICL test prompts
from different datasets, increasing K consistently improves ICL accuracy, as expected from our
theoretical analysis. In Figure 7(b), we examine the effect of varying N ∈ {28 , 210 , 212 , 214 }, with
fixed K = 20, T = 256. We observe that increasing N leads to better performance in ICL phases,
reinforcing the idea that more sequences per topic enhances model generalization and further benefits
ICL. Similarly, in Figure 7(c), we explore the impact of varying T ∈ {48, 64, 128, 256} while
keeping fixed K = 20 and N = 214 . Increasing T also brings better ICL performance.

Observation (2): Optimization Process. Through continuous optimization trajectory analysis, our
generalization bounds are also optimization-dependent. Thus beyond the influence of training data,
we investigate whether optimization properties align with our theory. In Figure 7(d), we present four
different training processes where N ∈ {28 , 210 , 212 , 214 } is varied, with fixed K = 20 and T = 256.
This setting mirrors Figure 7(b) where we have demonstrated that increasing N leads to better
generalization performance. Furthermore, we observe that larger N also brings faster convergence
during training. This aligns with our Theorems that with a smaller number of training iterations T ′ to
converge, i.e., the model trains faster, and further generalizes better. Similarly, Figure 7(e) takes the
same configuration with Figure 7(c), which also exhibits the connection between optimization and
generalization that ‘trains faster, generalize better’.

Observation (3): Prior Model Initialization. Based on our generalization analysis with a data-
dependent prior, we propose that leveraging prior model initialization could accelerate model training.
Specifically, consider the following setup: our training data consists of K = 20 pre-training topics,
N = 214 training sequences per topic and sequence length T = 256.

       • Step 1: Train the GPT2-small model for 15,000 steps using K = 5 pre-training topics,
         N = 214 training sequences per topic and sequence length T = 256.
       • Step 2: Transfer the weights from GPT2-small model to the corresponding weight matrices
         of GPT2-large, ensuring dimension compatibility. Initialize the weights randomly for the
         additional transformer layers in GPT2-large.
       • Step 3: Train the GPT2-large model for an additional 30,000 steps using the full pre-training
         data (K = 20, N = 214 , T = 256)

According to our experimental results, the random initialization regime with all pre-training data
requires nearly 7 hours on four A100 GPUs to complete 30,000 steps. However, under the prior
model initialization regime, where a smaller model is used for warmup and serves as the prior model
initialization for the larger model, training the GPT2-large model takes only 4 hours for 30,000
steps on four A100 GPUs under the same setting of K, N, T (with 0.5 hours needed for training the
GPT2-small model for 15,000 steps).
Furthermore, as shown in the optimization loss curve in Figure 7(f), the prior model initialization not
only accelerates training but also stablizes the training process (especially at the early stage), leading
to comparable or even improved model performance. This approach demonstrates how effectively
leveraging prior knowledge can contribute to the training process and performance, supporting the
KL term in our generalization bounds and presenting more practical insights.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    P RACTICAL I MPLICATIONS

We first provide guidance for the quantitative selection of K, N and T based on the upper bound of
expected loss described by theoretical results.

Increase the Number of Pre-training Topics. For the ICL ability of LLMs, it relies on examples
within a given prompt to adjust its behavior, so more topics (or tasks) provide richer information
and learning opportunities. As the number of tasks increases, the model is able to learn from a
broader range of contexts, thereby enhancing its generalization ability. This is different from general
multi-task learning that it aims to learn multiple tasks simultaneously and if the tasks are too different
or unrelated, it may lead to task interference, thereby reducing overall performance (i.e., under
multitask learning, having more topics does not necessarily lead to better model generalization
performance). Instead, our defined topics satisfy the assumption of topic distribution, implying a
correlation between pre-training and ICL topics. This also leads to our conclusion that ‘more topics
lead to better model generalization performance’, which differs from general multi-task learning.
Furthermore, when increasing the number of topics, our goal is to cover as many different types
of topics as possible, to guarantee the diversity of topics, which will enrich the model’s learning
experience and help the model better understand new contexts with unseen topics. It potentially
explains why one can improve ICL performance by selecting appropriate kind of ‘few-shot’ examples
or exemplars to optimize performance (i.e. retrieving shots best suited to the topic/task).

Expand the Scale of Pre-training Sequences. Using a large amount of training sequences per
topic can provide more topic information, which helps the model better understand the language
patterns for this topic. This guarantees the ability to perform well on the new sequences with a seen
topic. This opinion is similar to the classical machine learning problem, where more training data
helps the model perform excellently on the test data.

Increase Sequence Length or Prompt Length. Training the model to process longer sequences
can enable it to better understand the context and details of lengthy texts, especially for topics or
tasks that require an in-depth understanding of long articles, such as text summarization and extended
question answering. We hold that longer sequence length help the model maintain coherence and
completeness of information when dealing with complex problems.
Furthermore, in our PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds, the key term DKL (µ ∥ ν) surely offers
possibilities to quantify the information contained in the model and data, thereby providing practical
guidance for model training, training data selection and deduplication.

Practical Guidance for Model Training - Prior Model Initialization. Typically, randomly
initialized parameters follow uniform or standard normal distributions, which lack any specific
information about the data. In contrast, during pre-training, we begin with a small-scale subset of
data to train a prior model. The parameters of this prior model can then serve as an informative
starting point for longer and more sufficient training with greatly-large-scale pre-training data. When
using a data-dependent prior rather than random initializations, this results in a smaller DKL (µ ∥ ν),
which in our theorems represents the distance between model posterior µ and prior ν, contributing
to a better generalization. Furthermore, a lower DKL (µ ∥ ν) also enhances the optimization, by
detailing this term with continuous optimization trajectory analysis. Specifically for example in
Theorem 4.6, when with topic-dependent prior νJ , DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) ≈ σ 2 C( Nparam    1
                                                                                        , T ′ )/K ′ , where
                                        T′
        1
C( Nparam   , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS (1 − e− exp(8βS) ). A smaller DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) means that this favorable
initialization brings a stable training (with reduced gradient norm σ) and avoids exploring the entire
parameter space (with fewer optimization iterations T ′ ). This aligns with our understanding that data
patterns guide the model toward appropriate directions during training, reducing the likelihood of
encountering unsuitable local minima or saddle points.
In total, using a data-dependent and topic-dependent prior for model initialization can significantly
improve training stability, model convergence, and generalization. This approach is particularly
useful in multi-task learning, where it helps establish relevant priors for each task/topic in advance.
Although employing more strategies to choose the subset K ′ can further refine the prior, excessive
refinement may introduce new computational costs and efficiency trade-offs. We emphasize that even


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


without careful data selection for prior model learning, a data-dependent prior generally outperforms
random initialization. Particularly, when random initialization does not yield good performance, a
data-dependent prior model may provide a new opportunity.

Practical Guidance for Training Data Selection and Deduplication. It is well-known that the
vast amount of data obtained from the internet serves as input for compressing world knowledge
into LLMs (Delétang et al., 2023). The data quality among redundant data determines the upper
limit of the performance of LLMs. Therefore, considering a data-dependent pre-training and ICL
generalization framework has immense potential for guiding data. In our theory, to explicitly show
the impact of data, we adopt a data-dependent and topic-dependent prior νJ and further detail
DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) with optimization analysis. We have discussed this in detail before: in ‘Practical
Guidance for Model Training’ part, we emphasize the advantages of prior model initialization over
random initialization in model training. Here, we aim to further explore its guidance for training data
from the perspective of compression.
Specifically, we select a subset of size K ′ from the K pre-training topics to estimate a prior distribu-
tion. If a smaller K ′ can estimate a prior that is very close to the posterior distribution, it indicates
that the information from the K topics can actually be compressed into a smaller subset of K ′
topics. This reflects the compressibility of the data, and can thus backward guide pre-training data
to further undergo data selection and deduplication, such as through topic clustering, data diversity,
or information gain metrics (e.g., DKL (ν(D) ∥ ν(Di )), if this value is small, the data block Di is
considered redundant and can be reduced in weight or removed to decrease the model’s reliance
on redundant information.) The reprocessed pretraining data may exclude some noise interference,
further improving model performance, saving computational resources, and facilitating training for
new models.

F     C OMPLETE T HEOREMS : ICL E MERGES FROM G ENERALIZATION OF
      P RE - TRAINED LLM S
In Section 4, we have introduced Theorem 4.3 and 4.6. Here, in the following Section F.1, we divide
Theorem 4.3 into two parts: Theorem F.1 and Theorem F.3. Similarly, in the following Section F.2,
we divide Theorem 4.6 into two parts: Theorem F.5 and Theorem F.7.

F.1   G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES : T HE F IRST-L EVEL E XPECTATION

Under finite (K) pre-training topics, we consider the first-level expectation where infinite se-
quences per topic are utilized. It describes comprehensive learning for each pre-training topic
in the ideal case so that the pre-trained model can perform excellently on the seen topics in ICL
phase. For this first-level
                    h       expected loss L(θ, Wpre ) with twoipartial expectation, it’s represented
      PK
as K k=1 EE k,n DKL P(· | Etk,n , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ) (details see in Equation 13). The
    1

                t
following Theorem will give the upper bound of L(θ, Wpre ).
In the following Theorem, we first give an general result that KL distance between posterior µ and
prior ν is kept in the upper bound of the first-level expected loss. Here, the prior is a general prior
distribution rather than a data-dependent prior.
Theorem F.1 (Generalization Bound of the First-Level Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM
Pθ be the empirical solution of Equation 1, and P(· | w) denotes the true data distribution under
topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1, for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ, the first-level
expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ, Wpre ) (see in Equation
4 or Equation 13), satisfies,
                                (r              s                                          )
                                    log 1/δ           1                         1
          Eµ [L(θ, Wpre )] = O               +              DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log       − ϵopt ,
                                     KN T          KN T                         δ

where ϵopt is the optimization error (see in Equation 3). µ and ν are the posterior and prior
distribution of model parameters θ, respectively. K, N and T denote the number of topics, the
number of sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the optimization process of
Equation 1.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark F.2. Theorem F.1 reveals that when considering the first-level expectation over sequences,
                                 1
the expected loss achieves √KN      T
                                      rate. This indicates that an increase in the number of training
topics (K), the number of sequences per topic (N ), and the sequence length (T ) leads to a reduction
in the first-level expected loss, aligning with both intuitive understanding and empirical evidence.
Note that the length of different sequences Tk,n vary from each other which implies the potential
for sampling imbalanced sequences from various topics. Moreover, the number of sequences Nk
per topic can also be different. If sequences under a specific theme are notably short, balancing can
be achieved by sampling a greater number of these sequences, i.e. increasing Nk , ensuring that the
product of Nk Tk,n for all themes maintains a level of equilibrium. This approach ensures that the
final representation of N T conveys an averaged meaning. If certain themes yield fewer sequences,
it indicates a lower probability of occurrence for those themes. Under the framework of theme
distribution (as defined by the second level expectation), the contribution of such themes (smaller
Nk Tk,n ) to N T won’t be dominant. In conclusion, themes with higher occurrence probabilities are
predominant and more sequences can be more readily sampled. Even if these sequences are shorter,
we can compensate by sampling more sequences to achieve an average level N T which corresponds
to our result.

In the next Theorem, we carefully consider a data-dependent prior (Li et al., 2019), replacing
DKL (µ ∥ ν) with DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) in Theorem F.1 and further deriving a more detailed upper bound.

Data-Dependent Prior. We employ the following method for generating a data-dependent prior
(Li et al., 2019). Let J include N ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [N ] without replacement and I is
[N ] \ J, splitting pre-training sequences under fixed topic wk into two parts EIk and EJk . Under all
pre-training topics, we have EI = {EIk }K                       k K
                                            k=1 and EJ = {EJ }k=1 . The prior distribution of model
parameters θ depends on the subset EJ , which is denoted by νJ and the posterior distribution of
θ depends on EI denoted by µ. Thus, a parallel training process with EJ are conducted, and after
that, a data-dependent prior νJ will be obtained. We emphasize that extracting a portion of training
data to learn the prior distribution of model parameters has significant implications. Specifically, this
approach allows the prior to adapt to specific features and trends in the data, enhancing the model’s
ability to capture and learn from these nuances. In addition, even if we sacrifice a portion of the
training data, the prior will lead to a posterior distribution that is better aligned with the actual data
distribution. In high-dimensional spaces, a data-dependent prior provides a more informed starting
point.
Theorem F.3 (Data-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound of the First-Level
Expected Loss). Under the conditions maintained in Theorem F.1 and Assumption 4.2, when con-
sidering data-dependent prior µJ , for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ, the first-level
expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ, Wpre ) (see in Equation
4 or Equation 13), satisfies,
                         (s                     s                                                     )
                                  log 1/δ                 1                                 1
 Eµ [L(θ, Wpre )] = O                        +                        DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) + log       − ϵopt ,
                              K(N − N ′ )T         K(N − N ′ )T                             δ
then detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ), L(θ, Wpre ) further satisfies,
            s                    v                                                          
                                                                 1
                                                                    , T ′)
                                                      " 2                          #
                                                        L C( Nparam
                                  u
                    log 1/δ      u         1                                    1           
         O                     +  t                                        + log     − ϵ opt   ,     (17)
             K(N − N ′ )T            K(N − N ′ )T             N′                δ           

                                            T′

           1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) . ϵopt is the optimization error (see in Equation 3).
K, N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic and the sequence
length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′ denotes the total training iterations.
Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.
Remark F.4. The PAC-Bayesian generalization bound of the first-level expected loss can be bounded
by the KL divergence between the distribution of the model obtained by the real training process
and data-dependent prior, i.e. DKL (µ ∥ νJ ). Analyzing the continuous Langevin dynamic of
model parameters θ, Fokker-Planck Equation is used to describe the KL distance between two
probability density function of two optimization processes, furthermore, referring to the proof
of Lemma G.5 in Li et al. (2019), we demonstrate that the integral of the gradient difference of


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          2                                                   L2 C( N 1
                                                                                                     param
                                                                                                          ,T ′ )
  ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2 . Consequently, we bound DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) with               N′       ,
                                                    ′                    ′
which is related to optimization algorithm. As T increases, C(β, T ) increases, i.e., the generalization
error increases. This reflects the influence of total training iterations T ′ on testing loss, corresponding
to the classical viewpoint ‘train faster, generalize better’ (Hardt et al., 2016; Lei & Ying, 2020; Zhang
et al., 2022). In addition, the constant L related to optimization reflects that the upper bound of
the gradient of AR-NTP loss also impacts     qthe generalization performance. Observing the derived
                                                   log 1/δ             1
upper bound, we notice that the last term, K(N        −N ′ )T ∼
                                                                 √          ′
                                                                               , provides similar insights to
                                                                  K(N −N )T
√ 1   in Theorem F.1. In total, by detailing the KL divergence, we establish a more refined bound
 KN T
which is data-dependent and optimization-dependent.
In summary, the proof of Theorem 4.3 is provided in Appendix G.2.1 and Appendix G.2.2.

F.2   G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES AND T OPICS : T WO -L EVEL E XPECTATION

Up to now, we have analyzed the first-level expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per
topic. In this ideal case, the pre-trained LLM can perform excellently on the new test prompt under
seen topics in ICL phase. In this section, we use similar techniques to further consider the second
level expectation with infinite topics, so that the pre-trained LLM could perform well on unseen
topics under the topic distribution assumption. At this moment, ICL emerges from the generalization
of sequences and topics.
We first give a general result in Theorem F.5 with DKL (ρ(θ) ∥ π(θ)), which extends beyond Theorem
F.3 by incorporating infinite topics.
Theorem F.5 (Data-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound of the Two-Level
Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM Pθ be the empirical solution of Equation 1, and P(· | w)
is the true data distribution under topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.5, for any 0 < δ < 1,
with probability at least 1 − δ, the two-level expected loss (population loss) with infinite topics and
infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ) (see in Equation 5), satisfies,
                             s
                                   1                       1                        ′
            Eµ [L(θ)] = O               DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log      + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T ) ,
                                 KTp                       δ
where U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) denotes the right hand of equality 6 or equality 17. µ and ν are the
posterior and prior distribution of model parameters θ, respectively. K, N (N ′ ) and T denote
the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the
optimization process of Equation 1.
Remark F.6. The term U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) comes from Theorem F.3 whose analysis can refer
to Remark F.4. As for the first term in the result, with order O{ √ 1 }, it illustrates the impact of
                                                                         KTp
training with a finite number of topics on the model’s predictive ability for unseen topics in ICL. In
addition with larger prompt length, ICL emerges much easier from the generalization of pre-trained
LLMs.
Next, we propose topic-dependent prior whose core idea comes from data-dependent prior (Li et al.,
2019), i.e., a portion of K topics will be used for calculating model prior and other topics will be used
for obtaining posterior. DKL (ρ ∥ π) in Theorem F.5 will be replaced by DKL (ρ ∥ πJ ) and further
derives a more detailed upper bound. Since then, we can provide data-dependent, topic-dependent
and optimization algorithm-dependent generalization error bound of the two-level expected loss.

Topic-Dependent Prior. We employ the following method for generating a topic-dependent prior,
similar to data-dependent prior (Li et al., 2019). We split topics into two parts and let J include
K ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [K] without replacement and let I be [K] \ J, then the total
sequences are divided into E I = {E k }k∈Wpre,I and E J = {E k }k∈Wpre,J . Assume that the posterior
distribution of model parameters θ depends on E I denoted by ρ and the prior distribution of θ depends
on the topic subset E J , which is denoted by πJ . A parallel training process is performed with E J
based on the same LLM architecture, and after that, a topic-dependent prior πJ will be obtained.
Theorem F.7 (Data-Dependent, Topic-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound
of the Two-Level Expected Loss). Under the conditions maintained in Theorem F.5 and Assumption


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.5, when further considering topic-dependent prior, for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least
1 − δ, the two-level expected loss (population loss) with infinite topics and infinite sequences per
topic, denoted by L(θ) (see in Equation 5), satisfies,
                      s
                                1                              1                        ′
       Eµ [L(θ)] = O                     DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) + log       + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T ) ,
                          (K − K ′ )Tp                         δ

then detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ), L(θ) further satisfies,
                s                            1
                                    σ 2 C( Nparam , T ′)
                                                                 !
                           1                                   1                      ′
            O                                            + log     + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T ) ,
                     (K − K ′ )T           K′                  δ
                                               T′

             1
where C( Nparam  , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) , U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) denotes the right hand of
equality 6 or equality 38. µ and νJ are the posterior and topic-dependent prior distribution of
model parameters θ, respectively. K(K ′ ), N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of
sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′
denotes the total training iterations. Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.
Remark F.8. In Theorem F.7, we establish a comprehensive upper bound of population loss combin-
ing the results in Theorem F.1, F.3 and F.5.

In summary, the proof of Theorem 4.6 is provided in Appendix G.3.1 and Appendix G.3.2.

G     P ROOF OF T HEOREMS
G.1    U SEFUL D EFINITIONS , L EMMAS AND P ROPOSITIONS

Definition G.1 (Entropy). For random variable θ, which takes value in Θ and its probability distribu-
tion is µ, the entropy of random variable θ is
                                    X
                          H(θ) = −      µ(θ) log µ(θ) = Eθ∼µ [− log µ(θ)] .
                                    θ∈Θ

Definition G.2 (Kullback–Leibler Divergence). The Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between two
probability distributions µ and ν is defined by

                                                         µ(θ)
                                 DKL (µ ∥ ν) = Eθ∼µ log         .
                                                         ν(θ)
Lemma G.3 (Donsker–Varadhan representation in Belghazi et al. (2018) Theorem 1). The KL
divergence between probability distribution µ and ν obeys the following dual representation:
                       DKL (µ ∥ ν) = sup Eµ T − log(Eν [eT ]) ,

                                          T :A→R

where the compact set A ⊆ Rd is the support of distribution µ and ν, and the supremum is calculated
across all functions T for which both expectations are finite.

Let F be any class of functions T : A → R satisfying the integrability constraints of the lemma.
Then for any defined function T , it’s straightforward to get the lower-bound of the KL divergence
between µ and ν
                               DKL (µ ∥ ν) ≥ Eµ T − log(Eν [eT ]),


which would be used in the proof of Theorem F.1.
Definition G.4 (Total Variation Distance in Levin & Peres (2017)). The total variation (TV) distance
between two probability distributions µ and ν on events set B is defined by
                                 DTV (µ, ν) = max |µ(B) − ν(B)| .
                                                B∈B


This definition is explicitly probabilistic: It quantifies the divergence between µ and ν as the maximum
disparity in the probabilities assigned to a single event B by the two distributions.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition G.5 (Total Variation Distance in Levin & Peres (2017)). Let µ and ν be two probability
distributions on A. Then
                                              1X
                               DTV (µ, ν) =         |µ(a) − ν(a)| .
                                              2
                                                  a∈A


Proof. Let A be any event and event B be B = {a : µ(a) ≥ ν(a)}. Since A = A ∩ (B ∪ B c ) =
(A ∩ B) ∪ (A ∩ B c ), then we have
                              µ(A) − ν(A) ≤ µ(A ∩ B) − ν(A ∩ B)
Since including more elements of B cannot decrease the difference in probability, we have
                              µ(A ∩ B) − ν(A ∩ B) ≤ µ(B) − ν(B)
Combine the above two inequality, we have
                                   µ(A) − ν(A) ≤ µ(B) − ν(B)
Similarly,
                                  ν(A) − µ(A) ≤ ν(B c ) − µ(B c ).
Thus
                            1                                     1X
             DTV (µ, ν) =     [µ(B) − ν(B) + ν(B c ) − µ(B c )] =    |µ(a) − ν(a)| .
                            2                                     2
                                                                      a∈A



Lemma G.6 (Lemma 22 in Agarwal et al. (2020)). For any two conditional probability distribution
µ and ν, we have

                                  2                          1     µ(y|x)
              DTV (µ(·|x), ν(·|x)) ≤ −2 log Ey∼µ(·|x) exp − log               .
                                                             2      ν(y|x)

This lemma provides an upper bound on the total variation distance, which is related to the expectation
of the logarithmic ratio of two conditional probability distributions. It would be used in the proof of
Theorem F.1.
Lemma G.7 (Upper Bound of KL divergence). For any two conditional probability distribution µ
and ν, if µ(a)
          ν(a) ≤ C, we have

                                                2C log C
                         DKL (µ(a) ∥ ν(a)) ≤             DTV (µ(a), ν(a)).
                                                 C −1

This lemma provides the relationship between KL divergence and TV distance.

Proof. Let f (t) = log t, g(t) = | 1t − 1|. According to the definition of KL divergence and TV
distance (see in G.2 and G.5), we have

                                      µ(a)                µ(a)
    DKL (µ(a) ∥ ν(a)) = Ea∼µ log             = Ea∼µ f
                                      ν(a)                ν(a)

                         1 X                    1 X             ν(a)      1          µ(a)
    DTV (µ(a), ν(a)) =         |µ(a) − ν(a)| =       µ(a) 1 −          = Ea∼µ g
                         2 a                    2 a             µ(a)      2          ν(a)

For 0 < t ≤ C(t ̸= 1) , we have
                                  f (t)               log t         t log t
                            sup         =    sup      1      = sup
                       0<t≤C,t̸=1 g(t)              |
                                          0<t≤C,t̸=1 t  − 1|  1<t≤C t − 1

Based on the derivative chain rule, we have that if 1 < t ≤ C, tt−1
                                                                log t
                                                                      ≤ CC−1
                                                                         log C
                                                                               . Thus, we conclude
that
                                               2C log C
                        DKL (µ(a) ∥ ν(a)) ≤              DTV (µ(a), ν(a)).
                                                C −1



                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition G.8 (Fokker-Planck Equation in Mou et al. (2018)). Let πt be the probability density
function of distribution µt , then Fokker-Planck Equation describes the evolution of πt :

                             ∂πt  1
                                 = ∆πt − ∇ · (πt ∇LE (θt−1 , Wpre ))
                             ∂t   β

where ∇ is gradient operator and ∆ is Laplace operator.
Definition G.9 (Gradient Langevin Dynamics and Continuous Langevin Dynamic Li et al. (2019)).
LLMs perform Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as optimization algorithm to update parameters θ
in order to get the minimum θ̂. SGD can be viewed as gradient descent addition with gradient noise
between full batch gradient and single/mini-batch gradient (Wang & Mao, 2022). The full batch
gradient with θt−1 can be denoted as ∇LE (θt−1 , Wpre ), and assume that the gradient noise follows
an isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0, Iβd ), thus the training dynamic of LLMs can be defined as
                                                               r
                                                                   ηt
                         θt ← θt−1 − ηt ∇LE (θt−1 , Wpre ) +          N (0, Id ),                   (18)
                                                                   β

which is called Gradient Langevin Dynamics (GLD). When the step size ηt in GLD (see in equation
18) approaches zero, the Continuous Langevin Dynamics (CLD) is defined by the following Stochastic
Differential Equation (SDE),
                                                    p
                       dθt = −∇LE (θt−1 , Wpre )dt + β −1 dBt , θ0 ∼ µ0                      (19)

where Bt is the standard brown emotion on Rd .
Lemma G.10 (Log-Sobolev Inequality (LSI) for Continuous Langevin Dynamic (CLD) in Li et al.
(2019) Lemma 16). Under Equation 19, let qt be the probability density function of parameter θt
in CLD and the initial state obeys θ0 ∼ N (0, Iβd ). Let p be any probability density function which
is absolutely continuous with respect to qt . Assume that the optimization objective LE (θ, Wpre ) is
C-bounded, then we have
                                                    Z                   2
                                      exp(8βS)                    p(θ)
                      DKL (p ∥ qt ) ≤                     ∇ log            p(θ)dθ.
                                         2β          Rd           qt (θ) 2

Many existing LSIs primarily focus on characterizing the stationary distribution of the Markov
process. Contrastly, as shown in this lemma, we try to establish a LSI for µt , which denotes the
parameter distribution at each time step t > 0. It would be used in the proof of Theorem F.3 and F.7
which explores the upper bound of KL divergence carefully to get data-dependent and topic-dependent
generalization bound. According to Fokker-Planck Equation in Definition G.8, the KL divergence
between two probability density function can be built so that Lemma G.10 can be applied naturally.
Lemma G.11 (McDiarmid’s Inequality Variants for Markov Chains in Paulin (2015) Theorem 2.1).
Consider a Markov chain X = (X1 , · · · , XN ), which is not necessarily time homogeneous, taking
values in a Polish state space Λ = Λ1 × · · · × ΛN , with mixing time τ (ϵ) (for 0 ≤ ϵ ≤ 1). Let
                                2                                                   PN
τmin := inf 0≤ϵ<1 τ (ϵ) · 2−ϵ
                           1−ϵ    , c ∈ RN
                                         + . If f : Λ → R satisfies f (x) − f (y) ≤  i=1 ci 1[xi ̸= yi ],
Then for any λ ∈ R, we have
                               h                             i λ2 · ∥c∥22 · τmin
                        log EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≤                       .
                                                                       8
                                                                            PN
Proposition G.12 (Refer to Zhang et al. (2023b)). Define f (X) = N1 i=1 f (Xi ) where X =
(X1 , · · · , XN ) is a Markov chain. With the condition in Lemma G.11, if |f (Xi )| ≤ C and f ∈ F,
given a prior distribution ν on F, with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                s
                                                  C 2 · τmin

                                                                                 2
                      Eµ [EX [f (X)] − f (X)] ≤               DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log
                                                  2N log 2                       δ

                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                PN
Proof. With the assumption |f (Xi )| ≤ C, we have ci = 2CN in f (x) − f (y) ≤     i=1 ci 1[xi ̸= yi ].
Then using Lemma G.11,
                        h                              i λ2 C 2 · τmin
                  log EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≤
                                                                2N
                                                                  λ2 C 2 · τmin
                   h h
                                                      ii
                Eν EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))          ≤ exp
                                                                      2N
                                                                  2 2
                    h h                               ii          λ C · τmin
                EX Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))          ≤ exp                                  (20)
                                                                      2N
According to Markov inequality P (X ≥ t) ≤ E[X]   t   for random variable X and any t > 0, we have
                                                        h h                               ii
       h                                  i      EX Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))
   P Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≥ t ≤                                                        (21)
                                                                         t
then substitute inequality 20 into 21,
                                                                         2 2
                         h                              i       exp λ C2N·τmin
                    P Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≥ t ≤                                       (22)
                                                                           t
        q
Let λ = 2N       log 2        2
            C 2 ·τmin and t = δ for any 0 < δ < 1, inequality 22 can be transformed into
                               h
                                                                i 2
                           P Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≥              ≤δ
                                                                    δ
According to Lemma G.3,
                                 DKL (µ ∥ ν) ≥ Eµ T − log(Eν [eT ])


Let T = λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)), then with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                        h                        i
     Eµ [λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))] ≤ DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log Eν exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))

                                   1                       2
        Eµ [EX [f (X)] − f (X)] ≤     DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log
                                   λ                       δ
                                  s
                                     C 2 · τmin

                                                                      2
        Eµ [EX [f (X)] − f (X)] ≤                DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log
                                     2N log 2                         δ


Lemma G.13 (McDiarmid’s Inequality Variants in Luo et al. (2022)). Consider a function f :
       ′
[N ]N → R+ that is order-independent, where |f (J) − f (J ′ )| ≤ c holds for any adjacent sets
              ′
J, J ′ ∈ [N ]N such that there is only one different elements in the two sets. Let J consist of N ′
indices sampled uniformly without replacement from [N ]. Then, for any t ≥ 0,
                                                                 −2t2

                           P (|f (J) − EJ [f (J)]| ≥ t) ≤ exp
                                                                 N ′ c2
                                         N
Proposition G.14. Define f (X) = N1 i=1 f (Xi ) where X = (X1 , · · · , XN ) is a Markov chain.
                                       P
With the condition in Lemma G.11 and if |f (Xi )| ≤ C, then with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                   s
                                                      2C 2 · τmin log 1δ
                            EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≤
                                                              N
                                                                              PN
Proof. With the assumption |f (Xi )| ≤ C, we have ci = 2C
                                                        N in f (x) − f (y) ≤    i=1 ci 1[xi ̸= yi ].
Then using Lemma G.11,
                       h                              i λ2 C 2 · τmin
                 log EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≤
                                                              2N
                                                                λ2 C 2 · τmin
                       h
                                                      i
                     EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X)) ≤ exp                                       (23)
                                                                    2N


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        λX
According to Chernoff bound P (X ≥ t) ≤ E[eeλt
                                               ]
                                                 for random variable X and any λ > 0, we have
                                                 h                            i
                                            EX exp λ(EX [f (X)] − f (X))
               P (EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≥ t) ≤                                               (24)
                                                          exp (λt)
then substitute inequality 23 into 24,
                                                          2 2
                                                         λ C ·τmin
                                                  exp       2N

                                                                                       λ2 C 2 · τmin

              P (EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≥ t) ≤                                = exp                      − λt           (25)
                                                        exp (λt)                           2N
Let λ = C 2N t
           ·τmin , inequality 25 can be transformed into

                                                                                −N t2

                                  P (EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≥ t) ≤ exp
                                                                              2C 2 · τmin
          q
              2C 2 ·τmin log δ1
Let t =              N            for any 0 < δ < 1,
                                                            s                      
                                                                 2C 2 · τmin log 1δ
                              P EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≥                               ≤δ
                                                                         N

Finally, with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                               s
                                                                   2C 2 · τmin log 1δ
                                     EX [f (X)] − f (X) ≤
                                                                           N



G.2     G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES : T HE F IRST-L EVEL E XPECTATION

G.2.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.1
Theorem (Generalization Bound of the First-Level Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM
Pθ be the empirical solution of Equation 1, and P(· | w) denotes the true data distribution under
topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1, for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ, the first-level
expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ, Wpre ) (see in Equation
4 or Equation 13), satisfies,
                              (r               s                                         )
                                    log 1/δ         1                         1
         Eµ [L(θ, Wpre )] = O                +             DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log      − ϵopt ,
                                     KN T        KN T                         δ

where ϵopt is the optimization error (see in Equation 3). µ and ν are the posterior and prior
distribution of model parameters θ, respectively. K, N and T denote the number of topics, the
number of sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the optimization process of
Equation 1.

Proof sketch. Before the formal proof, we introduce the processing route to obtain the generaliza-
tion error bound with handing the prompt token-dependency issue. First, we elaborate on the con-
struction of ghost sequences Ẽk , which are constructed auto-regressively depending on the original se-
quence Ek thus tokens in ghost sequences are independent. Additionally, we define the function T =
                                                                    PN PT             P(xk,n |Etk,n ,wk )
g(θ, wk ) − log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k , where g(θ, wk ) = 12 n=1 t=1 log P (xt+1

                                                                                          k,n
                                                                                              |E k,n ,w )
                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                     θ   t+1    t    k
It can be observed that this function links the original sequence Ek (with dependent tokens), with
the ghost sequences Ẽk (with independent tokens). Substituting them into the Donsker-Varadhan
Inequality facilitates establishing a connection between ‘data’ and the KL distance between ‘model
prior’ and
           ‘model posterior  based on training data’. Furthermore, regarding the coupling term
log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k in the function T , we handle this part using the lemma provided in
Agarwal et al. (2020), where this part is further transformed into a distribution measure of Total


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Variance distance (TV distance). As we mentioned in Section 4, the primary optimization objective
‘negative logarithm likelihood’ naturally leads to ‘KL divergence’, thereby formalizing the expression
 of population loss. Therefore, it’s necessary to introduce a relationship between TV distance and KL
 divergence (See in Lemma G.7), for obtaining our generalization bound. Overall, the processing
 route can be summarized as: ‘original sequences Ek → ghost sequences Ẽk → Donsker-Varadhan
 Inequality → TV distance → KL divergence → the upper bound of population loss based on KL
 divergence’.

Proof. As we introduced before, all the pre-training sequences set is E = {E k,n }K,N
                                                                                  k,n=1 , each
                                                        T     −1
sequence is denoted as E k,n = {(Etk,n , xk,n    k,n
                                          t+1 )}t=1  where xk,n          k,n
                                                            t+1 ∼ P(· | Et , wk ). To decouple
the dependence between tokens, we construct tangent/ghost sequences Ẽ = {Ẽ k,n }K,N
                                                                                  k,n=1 and each
                                        T   −1
sequence is Ẽ k,n = {(Ẽtk,n , x̃k,n    k,n
                                  t+1 )}t=1  where x̃k,n
                                                     t+1 is generated depending on the partial original
             k,n
sequences Et . The construction process of tangent/ghost sequences can be understood simply
as duplicate sequences generated based on the original sequences. This proprietary term has been
previously utilized in Agarwal et al. (2020); de la Peña et al. (1999); Kwapien & Woyczynski
(1991). Therefore, by introducing the ghost sequences into our analysis, this will help decouple the
token-dependency in auto-regressive sampling of sequences.
Notice that the following proof is first established under a fixed topic wk .
According to Donsker-Varadhan Inequality (Lemma G.3), let F be any class of functions T :
Ω → R satisfying the integrability constraints of the lemma. Then for any defined function T , it’s
straightforward to get the lower-bound of the KL divergence between µ and ν
                               DKL (µ ∥ ν) ≥ Eµ T − log(Eν [eT ]),


Under fixed topic wk , the posterior distribution of model parameter θ is depending on E k (see in
Section 3.1) denoted by µ and the prior distribution of θ is denoted by ν. Then, a simple deformation
of Lemma G.3 leads to
                                Eµ [T ] − DKL (µ ∥ ν) ≤ log Eν [exp(T )]
                          exp (Eµ [T ] − DKL (µ ∥ ν)) ≤ Eν [exp(T )]
Taking expectation over data distribution E k ∼ P(· | wk ), we have

                      EE k exp {Eµ [T ] − DKL (µ ∥ ν)} ≤ EE k Eν [exp(T )]                                  (26)

Let T = g(θ, wk ) − log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k where
                                               N    T
                                         1 XX               P(xk,n       k,n
                                                                  t+1 |Et , wk )
                              g(θ, wk ) =             log
                                         2 n=1 t=1         Pθ (xk,n       k,n
                                                                   t+1 |Et , wk )
Then for the right hand of inequality 26, we have
            EE k Eν [exp(T )] =EE k Eν exp g(θ, wk ) − log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k


                              =Eν EE k exp g(θ, wk ) − log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k


                                                exp (g(θ, wk ))
                              =Eν EE k                                        =1
                                         EẼ k [exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k ]
Similarly to Agarwal et al. (2020), the last equality follows that the                 token in tangent       se-
quence Ẽ k is independent
                                conditional
                                              on    E  k
                                                         ,  so    we    have
                                                                              E Ẽ k  exp(g(θ, w k )) | E k
                                                                                                               =
                                                      k,n    k,n
                         QN QT            1      P(x̃ t+1 |E t   ,w k )
Ex̃k,n ∼P(·|E k,n ,wk )
   t+1       t            n=1  t=1 exp 2 log P (x̃k,n |E k,n ,w )
                                                    θ                  k
                                                                           . Thus, inequality 26 can be trans-
                                                            t+1    t

formed to
                                 EE k exp {Eµ [T ] − DKL (µ ∥ ν)} ≤ 1                                       (27)

With Markov Inequality P[X ≥ a] ≤ E[X]
                                     a , we get the following high probability representation with
probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                      E[eX ]   1                  1
    let X = Eµ [T ] − DKL (µ ∥ ν) ⇒ P[eX ≥ ea ] ≤            ≤ a ⇒ P(X ≤ log ) ≥ 1 − δ
                                                        ea    e                   δ
                                                     k
                                                                              1
    Eµ [g(θ, wk )] − Eµ log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E      ≤ DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log                 (28)
                                                                              δ


                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For inequality 28, we mainly deal with the left hand in this Theorem and make more detailed analysis
of KL divergence in Theorem F.3 to get data-dependent and optimization algorithm-dependent
PAC-Bayesian generalization bound.
                 Eµ [g(θ, wk )] − Eµ log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk )) | E k

                     " N T                                #
                      1 XX            P(xk,n     k,n
                                          t+1 |Et , wk )
                ≥Eµ              log                        −
                      2 n=1 t=1      Pθ (xk,n     k,n
                                           t+1 |St , wk )
                     "N T               "                                       !      ##
                      XX                           1     Pθ (x̃k,n    k,n
                                                               t+1 |Et , wk )
                 Eµ            log EẼ k exp − log            k,n    k,n
                                                                                  | Ek          (29)
                      n=1 t=1
                                                   2     P(x̃ t+1 |E t   , wk )

Using Lemma G.6, the second term in the right hand can be transformed to the total variation distance
(TV distance) of distribution Pθ and P.
           Eµ [g(θ, wk )] − Eµ log EẼ k exp(g(θ, wk ))) | E k

               " N T                                                          #
                 1 XX              P(xk,n        k,n             k,n   k,n
                                        t+1 |Et , wk ) Pθ̂ (xt+1 |Et , wk )
         ≥Eµ                log                                                                       (30)
                 2 n=1 t=1        Pθ̂ (xk,n       k,n            k,n   k,n
                                         t+1 |Et , wk ) Pθ (xt+1 |Et , wk )
                  " N T                                                         #
                    1 XX                              k,n             k,n    2
            + Eµ                DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
                    2 n=1 t=1
               N   T                                         N X T
                                                                        "                           #
           1 XX             P(xk,n
                                 t+1  |E  k,n
                                          t   , w  k )    1 X              P   (x k,n
                                                                                  t+1 |Et
                                                                                         k,n
                                                                                             , wk )
         =             log                              +            Eµ log θ̂ k,n
           2 n=1 t=1       Pθ̂ (xk,n
                                  t+1  |E  k,n
                                           t   , w  k )   2 n=1 t=1        P θ (x t+1 |Et
                                                                                         k,n
                                                                                             , wk )
                  " N T                                                         #
                    1 XX                                                     2
            + Eµ                DTV Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ), P(· | Etk,n , wk )
                    2 n=1 t=1
               N   T
                           "                                #
           1 XX                   Pθ̂ (xk,n       k,n
                                         t+1 |Et , wk )
         ≥             Eµ log
           2 n=1 t=1              Pθ (xk,n        k,n
                                         t+1 |Et , wk )
                  " N T                                                         #
                    1 XX                              k,n             k,n    2
            + Eµ                DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )                                (31)
                    2 n=1 t=1

where θ̂ is the minimum of empirical loss 1. Thus, substitute inequality 31 into 28,
     " N T                                                    #
        1 XX                     k,n             k,n        2
  Eµ               DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
        2 n=1 t=1
                                N    T
                                          "                          #
                            1 XX                Pθ̂ (xk,n   k,n
                                                      t+1 |Et , wk )                       1
                         +             Eµ log         k,n   k,n
                                                                       ≤ DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log           (32)
                            2 n=1 t=1           Pθ (xt+1 |Et , wk )                        δ
The result of inequality 32 is analysised under a fixed topic wk , then combining all wk ∈ Wpre and
taking average
      "         K N      T
                                                                        #
          1 XXX                            k,n              k,n       2
   Eµ                       DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
        KN T
               k=1 n=1 t=1
                                                     K N      T
                                                                     "                         #
                                                                          Pθ̂ (xk,n   k,n
                                                                                t+1 |Et , wk )

           2                          1        1 XXX
      ≤           DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log       −                     Eµ log                           (33)
        KN T                          δ      KN T
                                                    k=1 n=1 t=1           Pθ (xk,n    k,n
                                                                                t+1 |Et , wk )
                                             |                        {z                       }
                                                                       ϵopt

where the second term in the right hand is denoted as ϵopt measuring the logarithmic distribution
distance between the ideal minimum θ̂ and the trained model θ with empirical loss. Specially, we
defer the analysis of optimization error to future work. Here, we assume that the results of the actual
models obtained closely approximates the ideal minimum for empirical loss, implying that ϵopt is a


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


very small value so that this item will be kept in the upper bounds of the first-level expected loss and
two-level expected loss. Thus,
                   "           K N     T
                                                                                      #
                        1 XXX                             k,n             k,n
                Eµ                        DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
                     KN T
                             k=1 n=1 t=1
                v "                                                                        #
                u                 K N     T
                u          1 XXX                             k,n              k,n        2
              ≤ Eµ
                t                            DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
                        KN T
                                 k=1 n=1 t=1
                s
                  2 DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log 1δ

              ≤                               − ϵopt                                                (34)
                             KN T

                                        P(·|E k,n ,w )
Using Assumption 4.1, assume log P (·|Etk,n ,wk ) is upper bounded by C. Thus using Proposition
                                       θ t     k
G.14, with probability at least 1 − δ,
                 K   N    T
          1 XXX                h                                              i
  Eµ                     EE k,n DTV Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ), P(· | Etk,n , wk )
        KN T               t
             k=1 n=1 t=1
                                                                            s
               K X N X T
                                                                                2C 2 · τmin log 1δ

           1   X
                          DTV Pθ (· | Etk,n , wk ), P(· | Etk,n , wk ) ≤

        −                                                                                            (35)
          KN T    n=1 t=1
                                                                                     KN T
                  k=1


Finally, according to Equation 14, 13 and 1, the generalization error bound of the first-level expected
loss is genseq = L(θ, Wpre ) − LE (θ, Wpre ). Combining inequality 34, 35 and Lemma G.7, L(θ, Wpre )
can be bounded by
            "         K N     T
                                                                                     #
                1 XXX                   h
                                                        k,n               k,n      i
        Eµ                       EE k,n DKL P(· | Et , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | Et , wk )
              KN T                  t
                    k=1 n=1 t=1
                       "         K N      T
                                                                                                  #
         2C log C           1 XXX                    h
                                                                    k,n              k,n        i
      ≤           · Eµ                        EE k,n DTV Pθ (· | Et , wk ), P(· | Et , wk )
          C −1           KN T                   t
                                k=1 n=1 t=1
                  s                        s                                   
                                       1                             1

                          2
         2C log C  2C · τmin log δ            2 DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log δ
      ≤                                   +                              − ϵopt 
          C −1               KN T                        KN T
           s            s                                 
            log 1           DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log δ 1         
                    δ
      =O               +                            − ϵopt                                          (36)
            KN T                  KN T                    

Naturally, to simplify, for given any prefix sequence P , we have
                         "      K
                                                                           #
                            1 X
                     Eµ            EP DKL P(· | P, wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | P, wk )
                           K
                               k=1
                        s              s                                        
                         log 1              1

                                                                      1
                                                                                 
                                   δ
                   =O                +             DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log      − ϵopt                     (37)
                         KN T            KN T                        δ          


G.2.2      P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.3
Theorem (Data-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound of the First-Level
Expected Loss). Under the conditions maintained in Theorem F.1 and Assumption 4.2, when con-
sidering data-dependent prior µJ , for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ, the first-level


                                                     36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expected loss with K topics and infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ, Wpre ) (see in Equation
4 or Equation 13), satisfies,
                       (s                     s                                                   )
                               log 1/δ                 1                               1
 Eµ [L(θ, Wpre )] = O                       +                     DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) + log       − ϵopt ,
                             K(N − N ′ )T       K(N − N ′ )T                           δ

then detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ), L(θ, Wpre ) further satisfies,
            s                    v                                                           
                                                                 1       ′)
                                                      " 2                           #
                                                        L  C(        , T
                                  u
                    log 1/δ      u         1                 Nparam              1           
         O                     +  t                                         + log     − ϵ opt   ,           (38)
             K(N − N ′ )T            K(N − N ′ )T             N′                 δ           

                                            T′

           1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) . ϵopt is the optimization error (see in Equation 3).
K, N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic and the sequence
length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′ denotes the total training iterations.
Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.

Proof sketch of the use of continous mathematical analysis techniques. We analyse the training
dynamic of transformer via Continuous Langevin Dynamics (CLD) which is the continous form of
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (GLD). To bound the KL divergence of two distribution, we transform
the problem into measuring the KL divergence of pdfs. We first derive the derivative of KL divergence
w.r.t. time t. This derivative can be decomposed into two parts, corresponding to the time derivatives
of the two pdfs, which can be described by the Fokker-Planck Equation. Next, using Log-Sobolev
Inequality, we bound the logorithm distance of two pdfs. By solvin the SDE, we obtain an upper
bound for the KL divergence. Finally, referring to the proof of Lemma G.5 in Li et al. (2019), we
                                                                                                     2
demonstrate that the integral of the gradient difference of ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2 .
Consequently, we get data-dependent and optimization-dependent generalization bound.

Proof. In this Theorem, we analysis KL divergence to get data-dependent and optimization algorithm-
dependent generalization bound. First, we analyse the training dynamic of transformer via Continuous
Langevin Dynamics (CLD),
                                                        p
                     dθt = −∇LEI (θt−1 , Wpre )dt + β −1 dBt , θ0 ∼ µ0

                           1
                                     PK PN −N ′ PT                 P(xk,n     k,n
                                                                        t+1 |Et   ,wk )
where LEI (θ, Wpre ) = K(N −N ′ )T      k=1     n=1        t=1 log Pθ (xk,n |E k,n ,wk ) , and Bt is the standard
                                                                           t+1   t
brown emotion.
Split pre-training sequences under fixed topic wk into two parts EIk and EJk (where J is a random
sequence including N ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [N ] without replacement and I is [N ] \ J).
Under pre-training topics, we have EI = {EIk }K                     k K
                                                  k=1 and EJ = {EJ }k=1 . Assume that the prior
                                                                 k
distribution of model parameters θ is depending on the subset EJ , which is denoted by νJ and the
posterior distribution of θ is depending on EIk denoted by µ.
Let Θ = (θt )t≥0 and Θ′ = (θt′ )t≥0 be the trajectory trained on sequences EIk and EJk for fixed topic
wk , which are the parallel training process based on the same model architecture. Let µ and νJ be the
distribution of Θ and Θ′ respectively, pt and qt be the pdf of Θ and Θ′ and the total steps of iteration
is T ′ . DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) is equal to DKL (pT ′ ∥ qT ′ ). To bound DKL (pT ′ ∥ qT ′ ), we first apply Leibniz’s
rule and the chain rule on it:
                                           Z
                    d                   d               pt
                       DKL (pt ||qt ) =         pt log dθ
                   dt                   dt Rd           qt
                                                                      dp          dq
                                                                qt dtt qt − pt dtt
                                        Z
                                              dpt       pt
                                      =     (      log + pt ·       ·        2       )dθ
                                          Rd dt         qt      pt         qt
                                        Z                     Z
                                             dpt       pt          pt dqt
                                      =           log dθ −                dθ,
                                          Rd dt        qt      Rd qt pt
                                        |        {z        } |      {z     }
                                               (A)                   (B)


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last equality follows from that dp       d
                                         R t          R
                                           dt dθ = dt   pt dθ = 0, since pt is a probability measure.
                                     ∂pt  1
By Fokker-Planck Equation for pt , ∂t = β ∆pt + ∇ · (pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre )).
Then we bound term A,
                          Z
                                       dpt     pt
                   A :=                    log          dθ
                              Rd       dt      qt
                          Z
                               1                                         pt
                      =          ∆pt + ∇ · (pt LEI (θ, Wpre )) log dθ
                          Rd   β                                         qt
                            Z                     Z
                        1                pt                                         pt
                      =         ∆pt log dθ +             ∇ · (pt LEI (θ, Wpre )) log dθ
                        β Rd             qt          R d                            qt
                                           Z
                        1            pt                 pt
                      =      ∇pt log    −       ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dθ
                        β            qt      Rd         qt
                                                           Z
                                                    pt                  pt
                        + pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre ) log        −        ⟨∇ log , pt LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩dθ
                                                    qt         d        qt
                             Z                           Z R
                        −1              pt                            pt
                      =         ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dθ −            ⟨∇ log , pt LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩dθ
                         β Rd           qt                 Rd         qt
Bound term B,
       Z
              pt dqt
  B :=                   dw
         Rd   qt dt
      Z
            pt 1
    =              ∆qt + ∇ · (qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )) dw
        Rd qt    β
          Z                   Z
       1       pt                  pt
    =             ∆qt dw +            ∇ · (qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre ))dw
       β Rd qt                  Rd qt
                      Z                                                Z
       1 pt                  pt                pt                             pt
    =         ∇qt −        ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw +         qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre ) −      ⟨∇ , qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩dw
       β qt             Rd   qt                qt                        Rd   qt
            Z                     Z
       −1          pt                     pt
    =          ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw −         ⟨∇ , qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩dw
        β Rd       qt              Rd     qt
In summary, the deviation of DKL (pt ||qt ) can be bounded,
             d
               DKL (pt ||qt )
             dt Z                                Z
             −1                 pt                             pt
           =          ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dw −              ⟨∇ log , pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩dw
              β Rd              qt                 Rd          qt
                    Z                       Z
                1           pt                         pt
             +          ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw +            ⟨∇ , qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩dw
                β Rd        qt                Rd       qt
                 Z
             −1                    pt               pt
           =             ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩ − ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩ dw
              β Rd                 qt               qt
                Z
                                 pt                                pt
             −          ⟨∇ log , pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩ − ⟨∇ , qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩ dw
                  Rd             qt                                qt
                 Z
             −1            ∇pt       ∇qt              ∇pt       pt ∇qt
           =             ⟨       −       , ∇pt ⟩ − ⟨         −          , ∇q t ⟩   dw
              β Rd          pt        qt                qt        qt2
                Z
                                 pt                            pt          pt
             −          ⟨∇ log , pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩ − ⟨∇ log , qt ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩ dw
                   d             qt                            qt          qt
                 ZR                            Z
             −1                     pt 2                         pt
           =           pt ∇ log          dw +        pt ⟨∇ log , ∇LEI (θ, Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θ, Wpre )⟩dw
              β Rd                  qt 2         Rd              qt
                                                                                      √         2       2
Since for any constant c ̸= 0, vector α and β, we have the inequality ⟨ √αc , β c⟩ ≤ ∥α∥     2c
                                                                                                  + c∥β∥
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                          , then we can
transform the last equality into
                               Z                                Z
    d                     −1                  pt 2           β                                                  2
       DKL (pt ||qt ) ≤             pt ∇ log         dw    +          pt ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2 dw
    dt                    2β Rd               qt 2            2 Rd
According to Lemma G.10 (Log-Sobolev Inequality for CLD) and Assumption 4.1, then |LE (θ, Wpre )| ≤ S
                                                 2
and θ0 ∼ N (0, β1 Id ), we have Rd pt ∇ log pqtt dθ ≥ exp(8βS)
                                                         2β
                               R
                                                               DKL (pt ||qt ). Transform the first term in the
                                                             2



                                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


right hand with the LSI inequality,
        d                         1                     β    h
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                       i
           DKL (pt ||qt ) ≤ −           DKL (pt ||qt ) + Eθt ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2
        dt                    exp(8βS)                  2
                                        h                                        i
                                                                               2
Let ϕ(t) = DKL (pt ||qt ), δ(t) = β2 Eθt ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2 , α = exp(8βS)
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                , then we get
the following difference equation:

                                                       ϕ′ (t) = −αϕ(t) + δ(t), ϕ(0) = 0

Solve the equation:
                            Z T′
                        β                                                                                                                       1
                                         eα (t − T ′ )Eθt ∥∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre )∥22 dt, α =

DKL (pT ′ ∥ qT ′ ) ≤                                                                                                                                 .
                        2    0                                                                                                              exp(8βS)

Furthermore, in order to get the upper bound of integral in the right hand, we first define that
                        v       "Z ′                                                             #
                        u           T            h                                           i
                                                                                           2
                        u                     ′)
               G(J) = Eθt
                        t              eα(t−T      ∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) 2 dt
                                              0



Let J and J ′ be two neighboring collections, we first prove that G(J) − G(J ′ ) is small. Let Xt =
∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ), Yt = ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ ′ (θt , Wpre ). Then,
                       "Z ′                             #
                                     T                  ′
          G(J ′ )2 =Eθt                   eα(t−T ) ∥Xt + Yt ∥22 dt
                                 0
                            "Z ′
                                                                                                                   T′
                                                                                          #               "Z                                    #
                              T
                                            α(t−T ′ )                                                                   α(t−T ′ )

                   =Eθt                   e                     Xt⊤ Xt + Yt⊤ Yt          dt + 2Eθt                      e           Xt⊤ Yt dt
                                 0                                                                             0
                            "Z ′                                       #
                              T                 ′
                                          eα(t−T ) ∥Xt ∥22 + ∥Yt ∥22 dt

                   ≤Eθt
                                 0
                           v    "Z ′                     #v     "Z ′                     #
                           u      T
                                                          u       T
                           u                ′)      2
                                                          u                 ′)      2
                        + 2 Eθt
                           t         eα(t−T    ∥Xt ∥2 dt  t Eθt      eα(t−T    ∥Yt ∥2 dt
                                                  0                                               0
                     v
                      u    "Z ′                      # vu    "Z ′                      #2
                      u      T                          u      T
                   = tEθt      eα(t−T ′ ) ∥Xt ∥22 dt + tEθt      eα(t−T ′ ) ∥Yt ∥22 dt 
                                              0                                                       0

                            v
                             u    "Z ′                  #2
                             u      T
                                             ′       2
                   = G(J) + tEθt      eα(t−T ) ∥Yt ∥ dt                            2
                                                            0



For any fixed J and θt , under Assumption 4.2 that ∇LE k,n (θt , Wpre ) ≤ L, then
                                                                                 t

                 Z T′                                           Z T′                                                            ′
                                     ′                                       ′      4L2        4L2 (1 − e−αT )
                        eα(t−T ) ∥Yt ∥22 dt ≤                          eα(t−T )         2 dt =
                  0                                               0
                                                                                      ′
                                                                                  (KN )          (KN ′ )2 α
Then,
                                                                                         r
                                                                      2L
                                                                       ′                     1 − e−αT
                                                      G(J) − G(J ) ≤
                                                                     KN ′                        α
Applying Lemma G.13 of concentration inequality and there are N ′ indexes in J or J ′ ,
                                                                 
                                                         2
                                                                                −K 2 N ′ αϵ2

                                                    −2ϵ
          PJ [G(J) − EJ [G(J)] ≥ ϵ] ≤ exp                −αT ′ )
                                                                   = exp
                                                    2
                                              N ′ 4L (1−e                    2L2 (1 − e−αT ′ )
                                                                             (KN ′ )2 α

We also have,
                                                                                                   −K 2 N ′ αϵ2

                            PJ G(J)2 ≥ (EJ [G(J)] + ϵ)2 ≤ exp

                                                                                                 2L2 (1 − e−αT ′ )


                                                                           39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then referring to Li et al. (2019), we can easily get the upper bound of variance of ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre ) which is
                                                      2
EJ ∥∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre )∥22 ≤ 4L

                                                   N′
                                                        , thus
                               v   "Z ′                                                       #
                               u     T
                               u                ′)
                                                                                          2
                 EJ [G(J)] = EJ Eθ
                               t        e α(t−T      ∥∇LE (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LE (θt , Wpre )∥ dt
                                                   t                                    I                      J              2
                                                           0
                              v    "Z ′                                                          #
                              u      T
                              u                ′)
                                                                                            2
                             ≤ Eθt
                              t         eα(t−T    EJ ∥∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre )∥2 dt
                                                       0
                                  s
                                   Z T′
                                                                   4L2
                             ≤                     eα(t−T ′ )
                                           0                       N′
                                               r
                                2L                 1 − e−αT ′
                             = √
                                 N′                    α
                                                               q                    ′ 1
                                                                    2L2 (1−e−αT ) log δ

                 −K 2 N ′ αϵ2
Let exp         2L2 (1−e−αT )
                              ′       = δ, then ϵ =                       K2N ′α
                                                                                        . It follows that with probability at least 1 − δ

                                                              r                        s                            2
                                       2L
                                       2                           1 − e−αT ′               2L2 (1 − e−αT ′ ) log 1δ
                             G(J) ≤  √                                       +                                      
                                        N′                             α                           K2N ′α

Then,
                                           T′
                                  "Z                                                                                      #
                                                   α           ′
                                                                        ∥∇LEI (θt , Wpre ) − ∇LEJ (θt , Wpre )∥22 dt

                            Eθt                 e (t − T )
                                       0
                                r               s                           2
                             2L    1 − e −αT ′      2L2 (1 − e−αT ′ ) log 1δ
                         ≤√                   +                             
                              N′       α                    K2N ′α
                                  s         2
                                                           ′
                          4L2        log 1δ    (1 − e−αT )
                         = ′ 1+              
                          N           2K 2           α
                               s        2
                          4L2    log 1δ                    ′

                         = ′ 1+           e8βS 1 − exp − T
                          N       2K 2                   e8βS

We bound the KL-divergence.
                                                                         s          2
                                                                                                              T′
                                                                              log 1δ    2L2 βe8βS (1 − exp(− e8βS ))
                          DKL (pT ′ || qT ′ ) ≤ 1 +                                                                                 (39)
                                                                              2K 2                   N′
                                                                         s          2
                                                                              log 1δ    4L2 C( Nparam
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                      , T ′)
                                                           = 1 +                                                                    (40)
                                                                              2K 2             N′

                                                                    ′

                                                                T
                                                           − exp(8βS)
           1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS                  1−e                         .

As introduced before, the prior distribution of model parameters θ is depending on the subset EJk , which is
denoted by νJ and the posterior distribution of θ is depending on EIk denoted by µ. Then Theorem F.1 can be
transformed to (modify N to N − N ′ )
        "      K
                                                           #
            1 X
   Eµ             EP DKL P(· | P, wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | P, wk )
            K
              k=1
                                              s                    s                               
                                                        log 1δ       DKL (µ ∥ νJ ) + log 1δ        
                                        =O                      ′
                                                                  +                 ′
                                                                                             − ϵopt                                   (41)
                                               K(N − N )T              K(N − N )T                  



                                                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, with inequality 41 and 39, we get data-dependent and optimization algorithm-dependent PAC-Bayesian
generalization error bound of the first-level expected loss.

         "K
                                                      #
       1 X
    Eµ       EP DKL P(· | P, wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | P, wk )
       K
         k=1
                       v                                                                                
       s                u                  "                    !2     2 C( 1 , T ′ )
                                                                                               #
                                                                   4L
                                                   r                                                    
            log 1/δ              1                     log 1/δ                               1
                                                                                                        
                                                                            Nparam
                        u
  =O                ′
                      + t                      1 +                                     + log     − ϵ opt
      K(N − N )T
                         K(N − N ′ )T                   K2                N′                δ           
                                                                                                         
     s                 v                                                            
                                                      1
                                                          , T ′)
                                                                          !
                                             L2 C( Nparam
                        u
            log 1/δ              1                                      1
                       u                                                            
  =O                  + t                                        + log      −  ϵ opt                     (42)
      K(N − N ′ )T       K(N − N ′ )T              N′                  δ            


                                                  ′

                                               T
                                          − exp(8βS)
           1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS       1−e                .



G.3      G ENERALIZATION OF S EQUENCES AND T OPICS : T WO -L EVEL E XPECTATION

G.3.1        P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.5

Theorem (Data-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Bound of the Two-Level
Expected Loss). Let the auto-regressive LLM Pθ be the empirical solution of Equation 1, and P(· | w)
is the true data distribution under topic w. Under Assumptions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.5, for any 0 < δ < 1,
with probability at least 1 − δ, the two-level expected loss (population loss) with infinite topics and
infinite sequences per topic, denoted by L(θ) (see in Equation 5), satisfies,

                               s
                                         1                       1
              Eµ [L(θ)] = O                    DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log     + U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) ,
                                        KTp                      δ

where U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) denotes the right hand of equality 6 or equality 38. µ and ν are the
posterior and prior distribution of model parameters θ, respectively. K, N (N ′ ) and T denote
the number of topics, the number of sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the
optimization process of Equation 1.



Proof. In this part, since we have gotten the generalization error bound when considering infinite
sequences in Theorem F.1 and Theorem F.3. Our analysis is based on that there will be a sufficient
number of sequences for each topic to enable thorough learning so that in the ideal case, the well-
pretrained model can perform excellently on the seen topics. We try to get the upper bound of the
two-level expected loss (population loss) so that the pre-trained model can also perform well on the
unseen topics under the assumption of topic distribution.
For an ICL prompt prompt, we also establish auto-regressive loss based on the prefix sequence
promptt . Then according to Theorem 4.6, for topic w, we first have
                                                                                          
                        K X Tp
                    1  X
              Eµ              Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , wk ) 
                   KTp
                       k=1 t=1
                   s                     v                                                        
                                                                     1
                                                                          , T ′)
                                                                                         !
                                                            L2 C( Nparam
                                          u
                          log 1/δ               1                                      1
                                         u                                                        
              =O                       +  t                                      + log     − ϵ opt
                    K(N − N ′ )T           K(N − N ′ )T           N′                  δ           

              = O U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T )

                                                                                                        (43)


                                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             P(·|E k,n ,w )
Using Proposition G.12 and Assumption 4.1 of log P (·|Etk,n ,wk ) is upper bounded by C, thus with
                                                       θ    t    k
probability at least 1 − δ, we consider the generalization of topic so that ICL emerges,
               Tp
           1 X
  Eµ              Ew Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , w) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , w)
           Tp t=1
                            K Tp
                       1 XX
                    −               Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , wk )
                      KTp
                          k=1 t=1
                      s                                            (s                                  )
                         C 2 · τmin                      2                 1                        1
                    ≤                  DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log     =O                   DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log        (44)
                        2KTp log 2                       δ               KTp                        δ

Finally, we measure the generalization error of an auto-regressive pre-trained LLM, after which the
ability of ICL will emerge with good generalization. It can be denoted as gentopic = L(θ)−L(θ, Wpre ),
then the two-level expected loss (population loss) L(θ) can be bounded by
                                                                            
             Tp
          1  X
   Eµ          Ew Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , w) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , w) 
         Tp t=1
                                 (s                                                           )
                                       1                         1                       ′
                           =O               DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log        + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T )  (45)
                                     KTp                         δ

where U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) is the right hand of inequality 6.



G.3.2        P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.7
Theorem (Data-Dependent, Topic-Dependent and Optimization-Dependent Generalization Error
Bound of the Two-Level Expected Loss.). Under the conditions maintained in Theorem F.5 and
Assumption 4.5, when further considering topic-dependent prior, for any 0 < δ < 1, with probability
at least 1 − δ, the two-level expected loss (population loss) with infinite topics and infinite sequences
per topic, denoted by L(θ) (see in Equation 5), satisfies,
                        s
                                 1                               1                           ′
       Eµ [L(θ)] = O                        D KL (µ ∥ νJ ) + log      +  U (W  pre , K, N, N   , T )  ,
                           (K − K ′ )Tp                          δ

then detailing the term DKL (µ ∥ νJ ), L(θ) further satisfies,
                s                           1
                                   σ 2 C( Nparam , T ′)
                                                                !
                          1                                   1                       ′
            O                                           + log     + U (Wpre , K, N, N   , T )  ,
                    (K − K ′ )T           K′                  δ
                                              T′

             1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS 1 − e− exp(8βS) , U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T ) denotes the right hand of
equality 6 or equality 17. µ and νJ are the posterior and topic-dependent prior distribution of
model parameters θ, respectively. K(K ′ ), N (N ′ ) and T denote the number of topics, the number of
sequences per topic and the sequence length utilized in the optimization process of Equation 1. T ′
denotes the total training iterations. Nparam denotes the number of model parameters.

Proof. In this Theorem, we try to give a detail analysis of DKL (µ ∥ ν) to get data-dependent,
topic-dependent and optimization-dependent generalization bound. Similarly, we analyze the training
dynamic of transformer via Gradient Langevin Dynamics (GLD)
                               θt ← θt−1 − ηt ∇L(θt−1 , Wpre,I ) + σt N (0, Id ).
when the step size approaches zero,
                                                               p
                           dθt = −∇L(θt−1 , Wpre,I )dt +        β −1 dBt ,       θ0 ∼ µ0


                                                        42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          1
                                      PK−K ′ PT                      P(xk,n     k,n
                                                                          t+1 |Et   ,wk )
where ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) = (K−K ′ )T         k=1         t=1 EEtk,n [log Pθ (xk,n |E k,n ,wk ) ], and Bt is the stan-
                                                                          t+1   t
dard brown emotion.
Split pre-training topics into two parts Wpre,I and Wpre,J (where J is a random sequence including
K ′ indexes uniformly sampled from [K] without replacement and I is [K] \ J). Then the total
sequences are divided into E I = {E k }k∈Wpre,I and E J = {E k }k∈Wpre,J . Assume that the prior
distribution of model parameters θ is depending on the topic subset E J , which is denoted by νJ and
the posterior distribution of θ is depending on E I denoted by µ.
Let Θ
    e = (θt )t≥0 and Θe ′ = (θ′ )t≥0 be the trajectory trained on Wpre,I and Wpre,J (the total sequences
                              t
are divided into E = {E k }k∈Wpre,I and E J = {E k }k∈Wpre,J ). Let µ and νJ be the distribution
                    I

of Θ
   e and Θe ′ respectively, pt and qt be the pdf of Θ    e and Θe ′ and the total steps of iteration is T ′ .
DKL (ρ ∥ πJ ) is equal to DKL (pT ′ ∥ qT ′ ). To bound DKL (pT ′ ||qT ′ ), we first apply Leibniz’s rule
and the chain rule on it:
                                         Z
                 d                   d                pt
                    DKL (pt ||qt ) =           pt log dθ
                 dt                  dt Rd            qt
                                                                    dp         dq
                                                              qt dtt qt − pt dtt
                                     Z
                                             dpt     pt
                                   =       (      log + pt ·      ·                )dθ
                                         d   dt      qt       pt          qt2
                                     ZR                     Z                 Z
                                            dpt      pt          pt dqt            dpt
                                   =             log dθ −               dθ +           dθ
                                             dt      q t         q   p         R dt
                                                            ZR t t
                                         d                    d                  d
                                     ZR
                                            dpt      pt          pt dqt
                                   =             log dθ −               dθ,
                                       R d   dt      q t     R qt pt
                                                              d
                                     |          {z       } |      {z     }
                                               (A)                  (B)
                                           R dpt  d
                                                             R
where the last equality follows from that dt dθ = dt pt dθ = 0, since pt is a probability measure.
                                     ∂pt  1
By Fokker-Planck Equation for pt , ∂t = β ∆pt + ∇ · (pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )).
Then we bound term A,
                    Z
                           dpt      pt
             A :=              log        dθ
                      Rd   dt       qt
                    Z
                           1                                           pt
                 =           ∆pt + ∇ · (pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )) log dθ
                      Rd   β                                           qt
                        Z                      Z
                    1                 pt                                           pt
                 =           ∆pt log dθ +             ∇ · (pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )) log dθ
                    β Rd              qt           Rd                              qt
                                        Z
                    1            pt                 pt
                 =       ∇pt log −           ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dθ
                    β            qt       Rd         qt
                                                       Z
                                                pt                  pt
                    + pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) log −                ⟨∇ log , pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )⟩dθ
                                                qt         d        qt
                                                      Z R
                    −1
                         Z
                                     pt                            pt
                 =          ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dθ −             ⟨∇ log , pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )⟩dθ
                     β Rd            qt                 Rd         qt
Bound term B,
     Z
            pt dqt
B :=                  dw
       Rd   qt dt
    Z
          pt 1
  =              ∆qt + ∇ · (qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )) dw
      Rd qt    β
        Z                   Z
     1       pt                   pt
  =             ∆qt dw +              ∇ · (qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ))dw
     β Rd qt                   Rd q t
                    Z                                                     Z
     1 pt                  pt                   pt                              pt
  =         ∇qt −        ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw +            qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) −        ⟨∇ , qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩dw
     β qt            Rd     qt                  qt                         Rd   qt
     −1
         Z                       Z
                 pt                        pt
  =          ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw −           ⟨∇ , qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩dw
      β Rd q t                     Rd      qt

                                                      43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In summary, the deviation of DKL (pt ||qt ) can be bounded,

         d
           DKL (pt ∥ qt )
         dt Z
         −1
                                            Z
                           pt                           pt
       =          ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩dw −            ⟨∇ log , pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )⟩dw
          β Rd             qt                 d         qt
               Z                        Z R
            1           pt                       pt
         +          ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩dw +           ⟨∇ , qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩dw
           β Rd qt                       Rd      qt
             Z
         −1                   pt              pt
       =             ⟨∇ log , ∇pt ⟩ − ⟨∇ , ∇qt ⟩ dw
          β Rd                qt              qt
           Z
                            pt                              pt
         −          ⟨∇ log , pt ∇LEI (θ, Wpre )⟩ − ⟨∇ , qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩ dw
              Rd            qt                              qt
             Z
         −1            ∇pt      ∇qt             ∇pt     pt ∇qt
       =             ⟨      −       , ∇pt ⟩ − ⟨      −         , ∇qt ⟩ dw
          β Rd          pt       qt               qt       qt2
           Z
                            pt                         pt        pt
         −          ⟨∇ log , pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I )⟩ − ⟨∇ log , qt ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩ dw
                d           qt                         qt         qt
             ZR
         −1
                                           Z
                               pt 2                       pt
       =           pt ∇ log         dw +       pt ⟨∇ log , ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )⟩dw
          β Rd                 qt 2         Rd            qt

                                                                                                     2         2
Since for any constant c ̸= 0, vector α and β, we have the inequality ⟨ √αc , √βc ⟩ ≤ ∥α∥
                                                                                       2c +
                                                                                            c∥β∥
                                                                                              2 , then
we can transform the last equality into

                    −1
                              Z                                       Z
d                                             pt          2      β                                                 2
   DKL (pt ∥ qt ) ≤                  pt ∇ log             2
                                                            dw +            pt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) 2 dw
dt                  2β            Rd          qt                 2     Rd


                                                          2
                                                            2β
According to Lemma G.10, we have Rd pt ∇ log pqtt dw ≥ exp(8βS)
                                       R
                                                                DKL (pt ||qt ), then transform
                                                          2
the first term in the right hand of the above inequality,

   d                         1                    β   h
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         i
      DKL (pt ||qt ) ≤ −          DKL (pt ||qt ) + Eθt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) 2
   dt                    exp(8βS)                 2

                                        h                                  i
                                                                         2
Let ϕ(t) = DKL (pt ||qt ), δ(t) = β2 Eθt ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) 2 , α = exp(8βS)
                                                                                     1
                                                                                          , then
we get the following difference equation:

                                              ϕ′ (t) = −αϕ(t) + δ(t), ϕ(0) = 0

Solve the equation:

                             Z T′
                         β                                h
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                i             1
  DKL (p   T′   || q ) ≤
                  T′                   eα (t − T ′ )Eθt       ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) 2 dt, α =            .
                         2    0                                                                           exp(8βS)


We first define that

                        v   "Z ′                                                   #
                        u     T            h                                  i
                                                                            2
                        u
                  G(J) = Eθ
                        t                ′
                                 e (t − T ) ∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J )
                                  α                                             dt
                                   t                                                            2
                                          0



                                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let J and J ′ be two neighboring collections, we first prove that G(J) − G(J ′ ) is small. Let Xt =
∇L(θ, Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ), Yt = ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ) − ∇L(θ, Wpre,J ′ ). Then,
                       "Z ′                           #
                                  T                    ′
          G(J ′ )2 =Eθt                   eα(t−T ) ∥Xt + Yt ∥22 dt
                              0
                             "Z ′
                                                                                                                    T′
                                                                                          #                "Z                                    #
                               T
                                              α(t−T ′ )                                                                  α(t−T ′ )

                   =Eθt                   e                    Xt⊤ Xt + Yt⊤ Yt          dt + 2Eθt                        e           Xt⊤ Yt dt
                              0                                                                                 0

                                  T′
                             "Z                                                          #
                                              α(t−T ′ )
                                                           ∥Xt ∥22 + ∥Yt ∥22 dt

                   ≤Eθt                   e
                              0
                            v    "Z ′                    #v     "Z ′                    #
                            u      T
                                                          u       T
                            u               ′       2
                                                          u                ′       2
                         + 2 Eθt
                            t         eα(t−T ) ∥Xt ∥2 dt  t Eθt      eα(t−T ) ∥Yt ∥2 dt
                                                  0                                                0
                     v
                      u    "Z ′                      # vu    "Z ′                      #2
                      u      T                          u      T
                   = tEθt      eα(t−T ′ ) ∥Xt ∥22 dt + tEθt      eα(t−T ′ ) ∥Yt ∥22 dt 
                                              0                                                        0

                            v
                             u    "Z ′                  #2
                             u      T
                                             ′       2
                   = G(J) + tEθt      eα(t−T ) ∥Yt ∥ dt                           2
                                                           0


For any fixed J and θt , using the Assumption 4.5 that ∥∇L(θt , wk )∥ ≤ σ, then
                   Z T′                                          Z T′                                                         ′
                                          ′                                     ′   4σ 2       4σ 2 (1 − e−αT )
                           eα(t−T ) ∥Yt ∥22 dt ≤                        eα(t−T )        2 dt =
                     0                                             0                K ′              K′2α
Then,
                                                                                    r
                                                                               2σ        1 − e−αT ′
                                                      G(J) − G(J ′ ) ≤
                                                                               K′            α
Applying lemma of concentration inequality and there are K ′ indexes in J or J ′ ,
                                                                   
                                                          2
                                                                                     −K ′ αϵ2

                                                      −2ϵ
           PJ [G(J) − EJ [G(J)] ≥ ϵ] ≤ exp                 −αT ′ )
                                                                     = exp
                                                      2
                                                K ′ 4σ (1−e                     2σ 2 (1 − e−αT ′ )
                                                                                K′2α

We also have,
                                                                                                      −K ′ αϵ2

                                               2                           2
                           PJ G(J) ≥ (EJ [G(J)] + ϵ)                            ≤ exp
                                                                                                  2σ (1 − e−αT ′ )
                                                                                                    2


then
                          v    "Z ′                                                         #
                          u      T
                          u                                                            2
            EJ [G(J)] = EJ Eθt
                          t         eα (t − T ′ ) ∥∇L(θt , Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θt , Wpre,J )∥2 dt
                                                       0
                           v   "Z ′                                                          #
                           u     T
                           u
                                    eα (t − T ′ )EJ ∥∇L(θt , Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θt , Wpre,J )∥2 dt

                         ≤ tEθ        t                                                                                                2
                                                  0
                             s
                              Z T′
                                                           4σ 2
                         ≤                    eα(t−T ′ )
                                  0                        K′
                               r
                          2σ      1 − e−αT ′
                     = √
                           K′         α
                                        q                ′
              ′
                                                             1
                                          4σ 2 (1−e−αT ) log δ
                αϵ2
Let exp 2σ2−K
           (1−e −αT ′
                      )
                          = δ, then ϵ =           2K ′ α
                                                               . It follows that with probability at least 1 − δ

                                                          r                    s                                 2
                                     2σ                         1 − e−αT ′              4σ 2 (1 − e−αT ′ ) log 1δ
                          G(J)2 ≤  √                                      +                                      
                                      K′                            α                            2K ′ α


                                                                          45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then,
                                       T′
                                  "Z                                                                              #
                                                α       ′
                                                                ∥∇L(θt , Wpre,I ) − ∇L(θt , Wpre,J )∥22 dt

                            Eθt                e (t − T )
                                   0
                                       r                         s                             2
                           2σ                  1 − e−αT ′             4σ 2 (1 − e−αT ′ ) log 1δ
                        ≤√                               +                                     
                            K′                     α                           2K ′ α
                                               r !2          ′
                         4σ 2                  1    (1 − e−αT )
                        = ′            1 + log
                         K                     δ         α
                                          r      !2
                            4σ 2                                    T′

                                               1     8βS
                        =              1 + log      e     1 − exp − 8βS
                            K′                 δ                   e
We bound the KL-divergence.
                                                 !2                                    ′                          !2
                                                      2σ 2 βe8βS (1 − exp(− e8βS
                                                                             T                                         4σ 2 C( Nparam
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                      , T ′)
                        r                                                                                r
                                           1                                     ))                           1
DKL (pT ′ || qT ′ ) ≤       1+         log                                          =               1+    log
                                           δ                        K′                                        δ                K′
                                                                                                                                       (46)
                                                 −   T′
                    ′
where C( Nparam , T ) = β2 e8βS
             1
                                            1 − e exp(8βS) .

As introduced before, the prior distribution of model parameters θ is depending on the subset E J , which is
denoted by νJ and the posterior distribution of θ is depending on E I denoted by µ. Then Theorem F.5 can be
slightly changed.
                                                                                     
                   Tp
               1  X
          Eµ           Ew Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , w) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , w) 
               Tp t=1
          s
                  C 2 · τmin                              2
        ≤                            DKL  (µ ∥ ν)  +  log                                                  (47)
            2(K − K ′ )Tp log 2                           δ
                                      ′ Tp
                                                                                                         
                                  K−K
                         1         X X
          + Eµ                              Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , wk ) 
                  (K − K ′ )Tp
                                   k=1 t=1
            (s                                                                        )
                        1                               1                      ′
        =O                         DKL (µ ∥ ν) + log        + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T )                      (48)
                 (K − K ′ )Tp                           δ

Finally, with inequality 46 and 48, we get data-dependent, topic-dependent and optimization-dependent PAC-
Bayesian generalization bound of the two-level expected loss, i.e., L(θ) is bounded by
                                                                                
               Tp
           1  X
    Eµ           Ew Epromptt DKL P(· | promptt , wk ) ∥ Pθ (· | promptt , wk ) 
           Tp t=1
                                                                !2
                                                                     4σ 2 C( Nparam
                                                                               1
                                                                                    , T ′)
           (s                          "            r                                                #                          )
                     1                                    1                                        1                      ′
     =O                                        1+     log                                    + log     + U (Wpre , K, N, N , T )
                 (K − K ′ )Tp                             δ             K′                         δ
                                           σ 2 C( Nparam
                                                    1
                                                         , T ′)
           (s                                                           !                                   )
                     1                                                1
     =O                                                         + log      + U (Wpre , K, N, N ′ , T )                                 (49)
                 (K − K ′ )Tp                     K′                  δ
                                                            ′

                                                         T
                                                    − exp(8βS)
           1
where C( Nparam , T ′ ) = β2 e8βS              1−e                    .


                                                                          46
