Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I NTERPRETING THE S ECOND -O RDER E FFECTS
OF N EURONS IN CLIP

 Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, Jacob Steinhardt
 UC Berkeley
 {yossi_gandelsman,aaefros,jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

           We interpret the function of individual neurons in CLIP by automatically describing
           them using text. Analyzing the direct effects (i.e. the flow from a neuron through
           the residual stream to the output) or the indirect effects (overall contribution) fails
           to capture the neurons’ function in CLIP. Therefore, we present the “second-order
           lens”, analyzing the effect flowing from a neuron through the later attention heads,
           directly to the output. We find that these effects are highly selective: for each
           neuron, the effect is significant for < 2% of the images. Moreover, each effect can
           be approximated by a single direction in the text-image space of CLIP. We describe
           neurons by decomposing these directions into sparse sets of text representations.
           The sets reveal polysemantic behavior—each neuron corresponds to multiple,
           often unrelated, concepts (e.g. ships and cars). Exploiting this neuron polysemy,
           we mass-produce “semantic” adversarial examples by generating images with
           concepts spuriously correlated to the incorrect class. Additionally, we use the
           second-order effects for zero-shot segmentation, outperforming previous methods.
           Our results indicate that an automated interpretation of neurons can be used for
           model deception and for introducing new model capabilities1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

Automated interpretability of the roles of components in neural networks enables the discovery of
model limitations and interventions to overcome them. Recently, such a technique was applied
for interpreting the attention heads in CLIP (Gandelsman et al., 2024), a widely used class of
image representation models (Radford et al., 2021). However, this approach has only scratched the
surface, failing to explain a major set of CLIP’s components—neurons. Here we will introduce a
new interpretability lens for studying the neurons and use the gained understanding for zero-shot
segmentation and mass-production of semantic adversarial examples.
Interpreting the neurons in CLIP is a harder task than interpreting the attention heads. First, there are
more neurons than individual heads, which requires a more automated approach. Second, their direct
effect on the output—the flow from the neuron, through the residual stream directly to the output—is
negligible (Gandelsman et al., 2024). Third, most information is stored redundantly—many neurons
encode the same concept, so just ablating a neuron (i.e. examining indirect effects) does not reveal
much since other neurons make up for it.
The limitations presented above mean that we can neither look at the direct effect nor the indirect
effect to analyze a single neuron. To address this, we introduce a “second-order lens” for investigating
the second-order effect of a neuron—its total contribution to the output, flowing via all the consecutive
attention heads (see Figure 1).
We start by analyzing the empirical behavior of second-order effects of neurons. We find that these
effects have high significance in the late layers. Additionally, each neuron is highly selective: its
second-order effect is significant for only a small set (about 2%) of the images. Finally, this effect
can be approximated by a single direction in the joint text-image representation space of CLIP
(Section 3.3).

    1
        Project page: https://yossigandelsman.github.io/clip_neurons/.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                  Second order effects of CLIP’s neurons
                       MLP 0                MLP L-1                             MLP L

     MSA 0                                                       MSA L

                                                                                              P
 Text-based sparse neuron
                                         Automatic generation of adversarial examples
      decomposition
        1. dog                       “A cat lounging in the                                   CLIP’s
        2. elephant                  sun, with a group of                                   prediction:
        3. value      Language       elephants in the         Text-to-Image
        4. cabbage      Model        background and a             Model                      dog: 65%
        ...                          value sign in the
                                                                                             cat: 35%
        32. sun                      foreground”

Figure 1: Second order effects of CLIP’s neurons. Top: We analyze the second-order effects
of neurons in CLIP-ViT (flow in pink). Bottom-left: Each second-order effect of a neuron can
be decomposed to a sparse set of word directions in the joint text-image space. Bottom-right: co-
appearing words in these sets can be used for mass-generation of semantic adversarial images.


As each direction that corresponds to a neuron lives in a joint representation space, it can be
decomposed as a sparse sum of text representations that describes the neurons’ functionality (see
Figure 1). These text representations show that neurons are polysemantic (Elhage et al., 2022)—
each neuron corresponds to multiple semantic concepts. To verify that the neuron decompositions
are meaningful, we show that these concepts correctly track which inputs activate a given neuron
(Section 4).
The polysemantic behavior of neurons allows us to find concepts that inadvertently overlap in
the network, due to being represented by the same neuron. We use these spurious cues for mass
production of “semantic” adversarial examples that will fool CLIP (see bottom of Figure 1). We
apply this technique to automatically produce adversarial images for a variety of classification tasks.
Our qualitative and quantitative analysis shows that incorporating spuriously overlapping concepts in
an image deceives CLIP with a significant success rate (Section 5.1).
The text representations that describes the neurons’ functionality enable an additional application—
zero-shot segmentation. Mining for text representations of class names, we can identify class-relevant
neurons with the second-order lens. Averaging the activation patterns of such neurons, we generate
attribution heatmaps. Binarizing them yields a strong zero-shot image segmenter that outperforms
recent work (Chefer et al., 2021; Gandelsman et al., 2024).
In summary, we present an automated interpretability approach for CLIP’s neurons by modeling
their second-order effects and spanning them with text descriptions. We use these descriptions to
automatically understand neuron roles and apply this to two applications. This shows that a scalable
understanding of internal mechanisms both uncovers errors and elicits new capabilities from models.

2   R ELATED WORK
Contrastive vision-language models. Models like ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021), and its variants (Zhai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) produce image representations from pre-
training on images and their captions. They demonstrated impressive zero-shot capabilities for
various downstream tasks, including OCR, geo-localization, and classification (Wortsman, 2023).
These models’ representations are also used for segmentation (Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022), image
generation (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) and 3D understanding (Kerr et al., 2023). We
aim to reveal the roles of neurons in such models.
Mechanistic interpretability of vision models. Mechanistic interpretability aims to reverse engineer
the computation process in neural networks. In computer vision, this approach was applied to model
individual network components (Shah et al., 2024) and to extract intermediate mechanisms like curve
detectors (Olah et al., 2020), object segmenters (Bau et al., 2019; 2020), high-frequency boundary
detectors (Schubert et al., 2021), and multimodal concepts detectors (Goh et al., 2021). More closely
to us, a few works made use of the intrinsic language-image space of CLIP to interpret the direct effect
of attention heads and the output representation in CLIP with automatic text descriptions (Gandelsman


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2024; Bhalla et al., 2024). We go beyond the output and direct effects of individual layers to
interpret intermediate neurons in CLIP.
Neurons interpretability. The role of individual neurons (post-non-linearity single channel acti-
vations) is broadly studied in computer vision models (Bau et al., 2019; 2020; Goh et al., 2021)
and language models (Radford et al., 2017; Geva et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022). (Dravid et al.,
2023; Gurnee et al., 2024) demonstrate that neurons can learn universal mechanisms across different
models in both domains. Elhage et al. (2022) show that neurons can be polysemantic (i.e. activated
on multiple concepts) and exploit this property for generation of L2 adversarial examples. Some
work seeks to extract neurons’ concepts by learning sparse dictionaries (Bricken et al., 2023; Raja-
manoharan et al., 2024). Other methods use large language models to automatically describe neurons
based on which examples they activate on (Bills et al., 2023; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023; Hernandez
et al., 2022; Shaham et al., 2024). In contrast, we focus on the contribution of neurons to the output
representation.

3     S ECOND - ORDER EFFECTS OF NEURONS
We start by presenting the CLIP-ViT architecture. Then, we derive the second-order effect of neurons
and present their benefits over first-order and the indirect effects. Finally, we empirically characterize
the second-order effects, setting the stage for automatically interpreting them via text in Section 4.

3.1   CLIP-VIT P RELIMINARIES

Contrastive pre-training. CLIP is trained via a contrastive loss to produce image representations
from weak text supervision. The model includes an image encoder Mimage and a text encoder Mtext
that map images and text descriptions to a shared latent space Rd . The two encoders are trained
together to maximize the cosine similarity between the output representations Mimage (I) and Mtext (t)
for matching input text-image pairs (t, I):
                   sim(I, t) = ⟨Mimage (I), Mtext (t)⟩/(||Mimage (I)||2 ||Mtext (t)||2 ).              (1)

Using CLIP for zero-shot classification. Given a set of classes, each name of a class ci (e.g.
the class “dog”) is mapped to a fixed template template(ci ) (e.g. “A photo of a {class}”), and
encoded via the text encoder Mtext (template(ci )). The classification prediction for a given
image I is the class ci whose text representation is most similar to the image representation:
arg maxci sim(I, template(ci )).
CLIP-ViT architecture. The CLIP-ViT image encoder consists of a Vision Transformer followed
by a linear projection2 . The vision transformer (ViT) is applied to the input image I ∈ RH×W ×3 to
                                                                                            ′
obtain a d′ -dimensional representation ViT(I). Denoting the projection matrix by P ∈ Rd×d :
                                        Mimage (I) = P (ViT(I)).                                       (2)
The input I to ViT is first split into K non-overlapping image patches that are encoded into K
d′ -dimensional image tokens. An additional learned token, named the class token, is included and
used later as the output token. As shown in Figure 1, the tokens are processed simultaneously by
applying L alternating residual layers of multi-head self-attention (MSA) and MLP blocks.
MLP neurons in CLIP. The MLP layers are applied separately on each image token and the class
                                                                            ′
token. They consist of an input linear layer, parametrized by Winl ∈ RN ×d , followed by a GELU
                                                                     ′
                                                             l
non-linearity σ and an output linear layer, parametrized by Wout ∈ Rd ×N . Here l is the layer number
and N is the width (number of neurons) of the MLP. We next analyze the contributions of each
individual neuron n ∈ {1, ..., N } for each layer.

3.2   A NALYZING THE NEURON EFFECTS ON THE OUTPUT

Individual neurons have different types of contributions to the output—the first-order (direct) effects,
second-order effects, and (higher-order) indirect effects. We introduce them and explain the limita-
   2
     Throughout the paper, we ignore layer-normalization terms to simplify derivations. We address layers-
normalization in detail in Appendix A.6.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    First order                 MSA l’
                                                                                      60
    Second order
                                W
                                    l’,1
                                           Head 1


                                                                       Accuracy (%)
                                VO


                                                                                      50    baseline
                                W
                                l’,2
     MLP l                      VO
                                           Head 2
                                                                                            w/o all neurons
                                                                                      40    w/o large norms
                                W
                                l’,H
                                           Head H                                           w/o small norms
          w   l,n               VO                  Projection
                                                                                            rec. from PC #1
                                                                                      30
                                                        P                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                                                                    Layer index
Figure 2: First/Second-order effects. The first                      Figure 3: Mean-ablation of second order ef-
order is the flow coming from a neuron to the                        fects (ViT-B-32). We evaluate the performance
projection layer and the output (blue). The sec-                     on ImageNet validation set. Second-order effects
ond order goes from a single neuron through all                      concentrate in late layers, significant for only a
the consecutive attention heads, to the projection                   part of the images, and can be approximated by
layer, and to the output (pink).                                     one direction in the output space.


tions of the direct and indirect effects before continuing to characterize the second-order effects in
Section 3.3.
First-order effects (logit lens (nostalgebraist, 2020)). The first-order effect is the direct contribution
of a component to the residual stream, multiplied by the projection layer (see blue flow in Figure 2).
For an individual neuron n in layer l, let pl,n
                                             i (I) ∈ R denote its post-GELU activation on the i-th
token of the input image I. Then the contribution el,n i  of the n-th neuron to the i-th token in the
residual stream is:
                                          el,n     l,n
                                           i = pi (I)w
                                                          l,n
                                                                                                        (3)
                    ′
where wl,n ∈ Rd is the the n-th column of Wout     l
                                                      . As the output representation is the class token
(indexed 0) multiplied by P , the first-order effect for neuron n on the output is P el,n
                                                                                      0 .

As observed by Gandelsman et al. (2024), the first-order effects of MLP layers are close to constants
in CLIP and most of the first-order contributions are from the late attention layers. We therefore focus
on the second-order effects: the flow of information from the neurons through the attention layers.
Second-order effects. The contribution el,n i to the residual stream directly affects the input to later
layers. We focus on the flow of el,n
                                   i   through  subsequent MSAs and then to the output (pink flow in
Figure 2). We call this interpretability lens the “second-order lens”, in analogy to the “logit lens”.
Following Elhage et al. (2021), the output of an MSA layer MSAl that corresponds to the class token
is a weighted sum of its K + 1 input tokens [z0 , ..., zK ]:
                          h                      i    XH X  K
                           MSAl ([z0 , ..., zK ]) =           al,h   l,h
                                                               i (I)WV O zi                      (4)
                                                             0
                                                                     h=1 i=0
                        ′   ′
where WVl,hO ∈ Rd ×d   are transition matrices (the OV matrices) and al,h
                                                                      i (I) ∈ R are the attention
                                                PK l,h
weights from the class token to the i-th token ( i=0 ai = 1).
To obtain the second-order effect of a neuron n at layer l, ϕln (I), we compute the additive contribution
of the neuron through all the later MSAs and project it to the output space via P . Plugging in
Equation (3) as the contribution to zi in Equation (4) and summing over layers, the second order
effect of neuron n is then:
                                  L    H X K
                                                          l′ ,h             l′ ,h l,n
                                X     X
                    ϕln (I) =                    pl,n
                                                  i   (I)ai     (I)     P WVO    w                     (5)
                              l′ =l+1 h=1 i=0 |         {z          } |      {z       }
                                                         attention-weighted activations input-independent
Indirect effects. An alternative approach is to analyze the indirect effect of a neuron by measuring the
change in output representation when intervening on a neuron’s output. Specifically, the intervention
is done by replacing the activation pl,n
                                      i of the neuron for each token with a pre-computed per-token
mean. However, as was shown by McGrath et al. (2023), models often learn “self-repair” mechanisms
that can obscure the individual roles of neurons. We illustrate these issues in the next section.


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        60
                                                                        55


                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                        50
                                       variance                                                  Baseline (rec. from PC #1)
  effect type
                   accuracy after
                                      explained                         45                       Most common words (10k)
                   mean-ablation                                                                 Most common words (30k)
                                      by first PC                       40                       IN Class Descriptions
  indirect              52.3             11.0                                22   23        24         25      26        27
  second-order          29.6             48.2                                          Descriptions per Neuron

Table 1: Comparison to indirect effect. We              Figure 4: Accuracy for neuron reconstructed
compare the second-order effects and the indi-          from sparse text representations (ViT-B-32,
rect effects by mean-ablating layer 9 in ViT-B-32       layer 9). We evaluate the sparse text decompo-
on ImageNet validation set.                             sitions for different initial description pools and
                                                        description set sizes.



3.3   C HARACTERIZING THE SECOND - ORDER EFFECTS

We analyze the empirical behavior of the second-order effects of neurons ϕln derived in the previous
section. We find that only neurons from the late MLP layers have a significant second-order effect
and that each individual neuron has a significant effect for less than 2% of the images. Finally, we
show that ϕln can be approximated by one linear direction in the output space. These findings will
help motivate our algorithm for describing output spaces of neurons with text in Section 4.
Experimental setting. To evaluate the second-order effects and their contributions to the output
representation, we measure the downstream performance on the ImageNet classification task (Deng
et al., 2009) after ablating these effects for each neuron. Specifically, we apply mean-ablation (Nanda
et al., 2023), replacing the additive contributions of individual ϕln (I)’s to the representation with the
mean computed across a dataset D. In our experiments, we mean-ablate all the neurons in a layer
simultaneously and evaluate the downstream classification performance before and after ablation.
Components with larger effects should result in larger accuracy drops.
We take D to be ∼ 5000 images from the ImageNet training set. We report zero-shot classification
accuracy on the ImageNet validation set. Our model is OpenAI’s ViT-B-32 CLIP, which has 12
layers. We present additional results for ViT-L-14 and for ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021) in
Appendix A.1 and Figure 10.
Second-order effects concentrate in moderately late layers. We evaluate the contributions of all
the ϕln across different layers and observe that the neurons with the most significant second-order
effects appear relatively late in the model. The results for different layers in ViT-B-32 CLIP model are
presented in Figure 3 (“w/o all neurons”). As shown, mean-ablating layers 8-10 leads to the largest
drop in performance. These layers appear right before the MSA layers with the most significant direct
effects, as shown in Gandelsman et al. (2024) (layers 9-11; see Appendix A.2). The same trend is
preserved for a larger model size as well (see Appendix A.1).
The second-order effect is sparse. We find that the second-order effect of each individual neuron
is significant only for less than 2% of the images across the validation set. We repeat the same
experiment as before, but this time we only mean-ablate ϕln (I) for a subset of images, while keeping
the original effects for other images. For most of the images, except the subset of images in which
ϕln (I) has a large norm, we can mean-ablate ϕln (I) without changing the accuracy significantly, as
shown in Figure 3 (“w/o small norm”). Differently, mean-ablating the contributions for the 100
images with the largest ϕln (I) norms results in a significant drop in performance (“w/o large norm”).
The same trend is shown for images from ImageNet-R in Figure 10.
The second-order effect is approximately rank 1. While the second-order effect for a given neuron
can write to different directions in the joint representation space for each image, we find that ϕln (I)
can be approximated by one direction rnl ∈ Rd in this space, multiplied by a coefficient xln (I)
that depends on the image. We use the set Snl , which contains the largest second-order effects in
norm from D, and set rnl to be the first principle component computed from Snl . We approximate


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Neuron    ImageNet class descriptions                                          Common words (30k)
              +“Picture with falling snowflakes”                                   +“snowy”
              +“Picture portraying a person [...] in extreme weather conditions”   +“frost”
     #4
              -“Picture with a bucket in a construction site”                      +“closings”
              +“Photograph taken during a holiday service”                         +“advent”
              +“Image with a traditional wooden sled”                              +“woodworking”
              +“Image with a wooden cutting board”                                 -“swelling”
     #391
              +“Picture showcasing beach accessories”                              +“cedar”
              -“Photograph with a syringe and a surgical mask”                     +“heirloom”
              +“Photo with a lime garnish”                                         +“refreshments”
              +“Image with candies in glass containers”                            +“gelatin”
    #2137
              -“Picture featuring lifeboat equipment”                              +“sour”
              +“Close-up photo of a melting popsicle”                              +“cosmopolitan”
              +“Photo that features a stretch limousine”                           +“motorhome”
              +“Image capturing a suit with pinstripes”                            +“yacht”
    #2914
              +“Caricature with a celebrity endorsing the brand”                   +“cirrus”
              +“Image showcasing a Bullmastiff’s prominent neck folds”             +“cabriolet”

Table 2: Examples of sparse decompositions (ViT-B-32, layer 9). We present the top-4 texts
corresponding to the sparse decomposition of each neuron and the signs of the decomposition
coefficients, for two initial pools (m = 128). See Table 5 for more neurons.


ϕln (I) with xln (I)rnl + bln , where bln ∈ Rd is the bias computed by averaging ϕln (I) across D, and
xln (I) ∈ R is the norm of the projection of ϕln (I) onto rnl .
To verify that this approximation recovers ϕln (I) we replace each ϕln (I) for each neuron and image
in the validation set with the approximation. We then evaluate the downstream classification per-
formance. As shown in Figure 3 (“reconstruction from PC #1”), for each layer l, this replacement
results in a negligible drop in performance from the baseline, that uses the full representation. The
same behavior is observed for ViT-L model and for a different initial set of images in the Appendix.
Comparison to indirect effect. We compare the second-order effect to the indirect effect and
present the variance explained by the first principle component for each of them and the drop in
performance when simultaneously mean-ablating all the effects from one layer. As shown in Table 1,
Mean-ablating the indirect effects results in a smaller drop in performance due to self-repair behavior.
Moreover, the first principle component explains significantly less of the variance in the indirect
effect, than in the second-order effect. This demonstrates two advantages of the second-order effects—
uncovering neuron functionality that is obfuscated by self-repair, and one-dimensional behavior that
can be easily modeled and decomposed, as we will show in the next section.


4    S PARSE DECOMPOSITION OF NEURONS

We aim to interpret each neuron by associating its second-order effect with text. We build on the
previous observation that each second-order effect of a neuron ϕln is associated with a vector direction
rnl . Since rnl lies in a shared image-text space, we can decompose it to a sparse set of text directions.
We use a sparse coding method (Pati et al., 1993) to mine for a small set of texts for each neuron, out
of a large pool of descriptions. We evaluate the found texts across different initial pools with different
set sizes.
Decomposing a neuron into a sparse set of descriptions. Given the first principal component of the
second-order effect of each neuron, rnl , we will decompose it as a sparse sum of text directions tj :
            PM
rnl ≈ r̂nl = j=1 γjl,n Mtext (tj ). To do this, we start from a large pool T of M text descriptions (e.g.
the most common words in English). We apply a sparse coding algorithm to approximate rnl as the
sum above, where only m of the γjl,n ’s are non-zero, for some m ≪ M .
Experimental settings. We verify that the reconstructed r̂nl from the text representations captures
the variation in the image representation, as measured by zero-shot accuracy on ImageNet. We simul-


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neuron
  #4



Neuron
 #391



Neuron
#2137



Neuron
#2914


Figure 5: Images with largest second-order effect norm per neuron. We present the top images
from 10% of ImageNet validation set for the neurons in Table 2. Note that neurons are polysemantic -
they have large second-order effects on images that show multiple concepts (e.g. cars and boats). See
top-50 images in Figure 13.


taneously replace the neurons’ second-order contributions in a single layer with the approximation
xln (I)r̂nl + bln .
To obtain sparse decomposition for each neuron, we use scikit-learn’s implementation of orthogonal
matching pursuit (Pati et al., 1993). We consider two strategies for constructing the pool of text
descriptions T . The first type is single words - the 10k and 30k most common words in English. The
second type is image descriptions - we prompt ChatGPT-3.5 to produce descriptions of images that
include an object of a specific class. Repeating this process for all the ImageNet (IN) classes results
in ∼28k unique image descriptions. We then evaluate the reconstruction of rnl for different m’s and
pools.
Effect of sparse set size m and different pools. We experiment with m ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}
and the three text pools, and present the accuracy on 10% of ImageNet validation set in Figure 4. We
approach the original classification accuracy with 128 text descriptions per neuron reconstruction
r̂nl . Using full descriptions outperforms using single words for the text pool, but the gap vanishes for
larger m.
Qualitative results. We present the images with the largest second-order norms in Figure 5, and
the corresponding top-4 text descriptions in Table 2. As shown, the found descriptions match the
objects in the top 10 images. Moreover, some individual neurons correspond to multiple concepts
(e.g. writing both toward “yacht” and a type of a car - “cabriolet”). This property is even more
apparent if more nearest neighbors are presented (see Figure 13 for the top 50 nearest neighbors).
This corroborates with previous literature on neurons’ polysemantic behavior (Elhage et al., 2022) -
single neurons behave as a superposition of multiple interpretable features. This property will allow
us to generate adversarial images in Section 5.1.


5     A PPLICATIONS

5.1   AUTOMATIC GENERATION OF ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES

The sparse decomposition of rnl ’s allows us to find overlapping concepts that neurons are writing
to. We use these spurious cues to generate semantic adversarial images. Our pipeline, shown in
Figure 1, mines for spurious words that correlate with the incorrect class in CLIP (e.g. “elephant”,
that correlates with “dog”), combines them into image descriptions that include the correct class
name (“cat”), and generates adversarial images by providing these descriptions to a text-to-image
model. We explain the steps in the pipeline and provide quantitative and qualitative results.
Finding relevant spurious cues in neurons. Given two classes c1 and c2 , we first select neurons
that contribute the most toward the classification direction v = Mtext (c2 ) − Mtext (c1 ), then mine
their sparse decompositions for spurious cues. Specifically, we extract the set of neurons N whose


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 horse       automobile           dog         deer               frog       bird            truck          ship         ship       automobile


 A horse is driven by a       A dog is running through a    A poodle wearing a ring      A duo of trainers are run-     A ship sailing through a
 trucker on a road with a     fishery, chasing after a      and holding a frog,          ning alongside a truck, with   quartet of cyclists on a
 sign saying "Emissions" in   squirrel and a rabbit, with   standing next to a sign      a pirate flag waving in the    Brooklyn road, with a hus-
 the background.              a scenic view of the          saying "Thanksgiving" in a   background, and a sea of       band and wife driving a mo-
                              surrounding forests.          festive atmosphere.          people cheering them on.       torcycle in the background.


Figure 6: Adversarial images generated by our method. For each binary classification task, we
present the generated images, the input text to the text-to-image model (words from W v are bold),
and an attribution map (Gandelsman et al., 2024) for the classification (areas that contribute to the
incorrect class score are red). See additional results in Figure 15.


directions are most similar to v: N = top-kn∈N |⟨v, rnl ⟩|. Utilizing the sparse decomposition from
before, we compute a contribution score wj for each phrase j in the pool T :
                                            X l,n
                                     wjv =      γj ⟨v, rnl ⟩.                                    (6)
                                                                 n∈N

This looks at the weight that each neuron in N assigns to j in its sparse decomposition, weighted by
how important that neuron is for classification. A phrase with a high contribution score has significant
weight in one or more important neurons, and so is a potential spurious cue. The top phrases, sorted
by the contribution score are collected into a set of phrase candidates Wv .
Generating “semantic” adversarial examples. We use text and image generative models to create
examples with the object c2 that are classified as c1 . First, we generate image descriptions with a
large language model (LLM) by providing it phrases from the set W v and the class name c1 and
prompting it to generate image descriptions that include elements from both. We prompt the model
to exclude anything related to c2 from the descriptions and use visually distinctive words from Wv .
The resulting descriptions are fed into a text-to-image model to generate the adversarial images. Note
that the adversarial images lie on the manifold of generated images, differently from non-semantic
adversarial attacks that modify individual pixels.
Experimental settings. We generate adversarial images for classifying between pairs of classes from
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009). We use the 30k most common words as our pool T . We choose the
top 100 neurons from layers 8-10 for N , and the top 25 words according to their contribution scores
for prompting the LLM. We prompt LLaMA3 (Touvron et al., 2023) to generate 50 descriptions for
each classification task (see prompt in Appendix A.7). We then filter out descriptions that include the
class name and choose 10 random descriptions. We generate 10 images for each description with
DeepFloyd IF text-to-image model (StabilityAI, 2023). This results in 100 images per experiment.
We repeat the experiment 3 times and manually remove images that include c2 objects or do not
include c1 objects.
We report three additional baselines. First, we repeat the same process with 100 random neurons
instead of the set N . Second, we repeat the same generation process with sparse text decompositions
computed from the first principle components of the indirect effects instead of the second-order effect.
Third, we do not rely on the neuron decompositions, and instead prompt the language model with the
words from M for which their text representations are the most similar to v. Both for our pipeline and
the baselines, we automatically filter out synonyms of c2 from the phrases provided to the language
model according to their sentence similarity to c2 (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019).


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Indirect      Similar        Second
                 Task                     Random
                                                            effect       words           order
                 horse → automobile       1.0 (±1.4)       2.8 (±3.7)    1.0 (±1.4)     5.3 (±1.9)
                 dog → deer               0.3 (±0.5)       6.3 (±4.8)    3.3 (±0.9)    22.7 (±0.5)
                 bird → frog              0.3 (±0.5)       1.0 (±1.4)    5.0 (±2.9)     8.0 (±4.5)
                 ship → truck             0.0 (±0.0)       0.0 (±0.0)    0.0 (±0.0)     5.7 (±0.9)
                 ship → automobile        1.3 (±1.9)       0.0 (±0.0)    1.3 (±0.9)     7.0 (±4.5)
Table 3: Accuracy of adversarial images. We report how many generated images out of 100, fooled
the binary classifier (standard deviation in parentheses).

                                                             Pix. Acc. ↑ mIoU ↑ mAP ↑
                 Partial-LRP (Voita et al., 2019)                 55.0          35.5       66.9
                 Rollout (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020)                  61.8          42.6       74.0
                 LRP (Binder et al., 2016)                        62.9          35.8       68.5
                 GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)                 67.3          39.3       61.9
                 Chefer et al. (2021)                             68.9          49.1       79.7
                 Raw-attention                                    69.6          49.8       80.0
                 TextSpan (Gandelsman et al., 2024)               76.5          58.1       84.1
                 Ours                                             78.1          59.0       84.9
Table 4: Segmentation performance on ImageNet-segmentation. Our zero-shot segmentation is
more accurate than previous methods across all metrics.


Quantitative results. The classification accuracy results for the adversarial images are presented
in Table 3. The success rate of our adversarial images is significantly higher than the indirect effect
baseline, the similar words baseline, and the random baseline, which succeeds only accidentally. For
the task of generating “ship” images the will be missclassified as “truck”, no other baseline manged
to generate any adversarial images, while ours generated 5.7 images on average.
Qualitative results. Figure 6 includes generated adversarial examples and the descriptions that were
used in their generation. The presented attribution heatmaps (Gandelsman et al., 2024) show that the
found spurious objects from Wv contribute the most to the misclassification, while the object from
the correct class (e.g. a horse in the left-most image) contributes the least. We provide more results
for additional classification tasks (e.g. “stop-sign v.s. yield”) in Figure 15.
We show that understanding internal components in models can be grounded by exploiting them for
adversarial attacks. Our attack is optimization-free and is not compute-intensive. Hence, it can be
used for measuring interpretability techniques, with better understanding leading to improved attacks.

5.2   Z ERO - SHOT SEGMENTATION

Finally, we use our understanding of neurons for zero-shot segmentation. Each neuron corresponds
to an attribution map, by looking at its activations pl,n
                                                      i (I) on each image patch. Ensembling all
the neurons that contribute towards a concept results in an aggregated attribution map that can be
binarized to generate reliable segmentations.
Specifically, to generate a segmentation map for an image I, we find a set of neurons with the largest
absolute value of the dot product with the encoded class name ci we aim to segment: |⟨rnl , Mtext (ci )⟩|.
We then average their spatial activation maps pl,n
                                                i (I), standardize the average activations into [0, 1],
and binarize the values into foreground/background segments by applying a threshold of 0.5.
Segmentation results. We provide results on ImageNet-Segmentation (Guillaumin et al., 2014),
which includes foreground/background segmentation maps of ImageNet objects. We use activation
maps from the top 200 neurons of layers 8-10. Table 4 presents a quantitative comparison to previous
explainability methods. Our method outperforms other zero-shot segmentation methods across all
standard evaluation metrics. We provide qualitative results before thresholding in Figure 7. While the
first-order effects (“TextSpan”) highlight individual discriminative object parts, our heatmaps capture
more parts of the full object.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Input image


             TextSpan


             Ours


Figure 7: Qualitative results on ImageNet-Segmentation (ViT-B-32). Our heatmaps capture more
object parts than the first-order token decomposition of Gandelsman et al. (2024).


6    L IMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
We analyzed the second-order effects of neurons on the CLIP representation and used our understand-
ing to perform zero-shot segmentation and generate adversarial images. We present mechanisms that
we did not analyze in our investigation and conclude with a discussion of broader impact and future
directions.
Neuron-attention maps mechanisms. We investigated how the neurons flow through individual
consecutive attention values, and ignored the effect of neurons on consecutive queries and keys in
the attention mechanism. Investigating these effects will allow us to find neurons that modify the
attention map patterns. We leave it for future work.
Neuron-neuron mechanisms. We did not analyze the mutual effects between neurons in the same
layer or across different layers. Returning to our adversarial “frog/bird” attack example, a neuron
that writes toward “dog” may not be activated if a different neuron writes simultaneously toward
“frog”, thus reducing our attack efficiency. While we can still generate multiple adversarial images,
we believe that understanding dependencies between neurons can improve it further.
Future work and broader impact. The mass production of adversarial images can be harmful to
systems that rely on neural networks (e.g., the adversarial attack that causes misclassification between
“yield” and “stop sign” in Figure 15). Automatic extraction of such cases allows the defender to be
prepared for them and, possibly, fine-tune the model on the generated images to avoid such attacks.
We plan to investigate this approach to improve CLIP’s robustness in future work.
Currently, our attack pipeline relies on a few independent components, each of which has failure
modes. For example, the language model can fail to generate a coherent sentence that includes
many phrases from Wv , and can omit the class name c2 or accidentally include the class name c1 .
Additionally, the text-to-image model can fail to generate an image that follows the exact description
and can drop crucial elements from the description. We believe that future improvements in the
language and vision models will increase the success rate of our attack, and plan to continue to
develop and improve it in the future.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Alexander Pan for helpful feedback on the manuscript.
YG is supported by the Google Fellowship. AE is supported in part by DoD, including DARPA’s
MCS and ONR MURI, as well as funding from SAP. JS is supported by the NSF Awards No. 1804794
& 2031899.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying attention flow in transformers. In Proceedings of
  the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4190–4197, Online,
  July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.385. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.385.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, William T. Freeman,
  and Antonio Torralba. Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial
  networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2019.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907375117. URL https:
 //www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/08/31/1907375117.
Usha Bhalla, Alex Oesterling, Suraj Srinivas, Flavio P. Calmon, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Interpret-
  ing clip with sparse linear concept embeddings (splice), 2024.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in language mod-
  els. https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/neuron-explainer/
  paper/index.html, 2023.
Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech
  Samek. Layer-wise relevance propagation for neural networks with local renormalization layers.
  Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning - ICANN 2016, 9887:63–71, 2016. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-319-44781-0_8.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina
  Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and
  Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary
  learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 782–791, June 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Amil Dravid, Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Assaf Shocher. Rosetta neurons: Mining
 the common units in a model zoo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1934–1943, October 2023.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of superposi-
  tion. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/
  2022/toy_model/index.html.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpreting CLIP’s image representation
  via text-based decomposition. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5Ca9sSzuDp.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories, 2021.

Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata †, Chelsea Voss †, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert,
  Alec Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. Distill, 2021. doi:
 10.23915/distill.00030. https://distill.pub/2021/multimodal-neurons.

Matthieu Guillaumin, Daniel Küttel, and Vittorio Ferrari. Imagenet auto-annotation with segmentation
 propagation. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 110(3):328–348, dec 2014. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10.1007/
 s11263-014-0713-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-014-0713-9.

Wes Gurnee, Theo Horsley, Zifan Carl Guo, Tara Rezaei Kheirkhah, Qinyi Sun, Will Hathaway, Neel
 Nanda, and Dimitris Bertsimas. Universal neurons in gpt2 language models, 2024.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. ICCV,
  2021.

Evan Hernandez, Sarah Schwettmann, David Bau, Teona Bagashvili, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob
  Andreas. Natural language descriptions of deep visual features. CoRR, abs/2201.11114, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11114.

Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc V. Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231879586.

Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Language
  embedded radiance fields, 2023.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images, 2009.

Yanghao Li, Haoqi Fan, Ronghang Hu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Kaiming He. Scaling language-
  image pre-training via masking, 2023.

Timo Lüddecke and Alexander Ecker. Image segmentation using text and image prompts. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 7086–7096, June 2022.

Thomas McGrath, Matthew Rahtz, Janos Kramar, Vladimir Mikulik, and Shane Legg. The hydra
  effect: Emergent self-repair in language model computations, 2023.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associ-
  ations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022. arXiv:2202.05262.

Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023.

nostalgebraist. interpreting gpt: the logit lens, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/
  posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.

Tuomas Oikarinen and Tsui-Wei Weng. Clip-dissect: Automatic description of neuron representations
  in deep vision networks, 2023.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yagyensh C. Pati, Ramin Rezaiifar, and Perinkulam S. Krishnaprasad. Orthogonal matching pursuit:
  recursive function approximation with applications to wavelet decomposition. Proceedings of
  27th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, pp. 40–44 vol.1, 1993. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16513805.

Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
  sentiment, 2017.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html.

Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Tom Lieberum, Vikrant Varma, János
  Kramár, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Improving dictionary learning with gated sparse autoen-
  coders, 2024.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. CoRR, abs/2102.12092, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.12092.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.
  10084.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Ludwig Schubert, Chelsea Voss, Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, and Chris Olah. High-low frequency
  detectors. Distill, 2021. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.005. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/frequency-
  edges.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia
  Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models.
  In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.

Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
  tion. In ICCV, pp. 618–626. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. ISBN 978-1-5386-1032-9. URL http:
  //dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iccv/iccv2017.html#SelvarajuCDVPB17.

Harshay Shah, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Decomposing and editing predictions by
  modeling model computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11534, 2024.

Tamar Rott Shaham, Sarah Schwettmann, Franklin Wang, Achyuta Rajaram, Evan Hernandez, Jacob
  Andreas, and Antonio Torralba. A multimodal automated interpretability agent, 2024.

StabilityAI. DeepFloyd-IF. https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
  self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5797–5808, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1580. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1580.
Mitchell Wortsman. Reaching 80% zero-shot accuracy with openclip: Vit-g/14 trained on laion-2b,
 2023. URL https://laion.ai/blog/giant-openclip/.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training, 2023.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    S ECOND ORDER ABLATIONS FOR V I T-L

We repeat the same experiments from Section 3.3 for ViT-L-14, trained on LAION dataset (Schuh-
mann et al., 2022). For this model, we only use 10% of ImageNet validation set. Here, the maximal
drop in performance when ablating the second order is relatively smaller and is spread across more
layers. Nevertheless, the same properties presented and discussed in Section 3.3 hold for this model.

A.2    F IRST ORDER ABLATIONS

For the two models discussed above, ViT-B-32 and ViT-L-14, we provide the mean-ablation results
for the first-order effects of MSA layers, as computed in Gandelsman et al. (2024). For each model,
we present the performance before and after accumulative mean-ablation of all the first-order effects
of MSA layers. As shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12, the neurons with the significant second-order
effects appear right before the layers with the significant first-order effects.

A.3    A DDITIONAL ADVERSARIAL IMAGES

We present additional semantic adversarial results, generated by our method for ViT-B-32, in Fig-
ure 15. We demonstrate a wide variety of tasks, including additional pairs from CIFAR-10 dataset,
and adversarial attacks related to traffic signs (e.g. misclassification between a stop sign and a yield
sign or a crossroad). For each image, we provide the text used for generating it, and highlight the
spurious cues words from the sparse decompositions.

A.4    A DDITIONAL SPARSE DECOMPOSITION RESULTS

We provide additional examples of sparse decompositions of neurons in Table 5 and the images with
the top norms for the second-order effects of the same neurons in Figure 14. As shown, the found
descriptions match the objects in the top 10 images.

A.5    C ONCEPT DISCOVERY IN IMAGES
We present an additional application - concept discovery in images. We aim to discover concepts
in image I, by aggregating phrases that correspond to the neurons that are activated on I. Here,
we start from the set of activated neurons N (for which ||ϕln (I)||2 is above the 98th percentile
of norms computed across ImageNet images). Similarly to the contribution score described in
Section 5.1, we compute an image-contribution score wjI for each phrase j according to its combined
weight in the decompositions of neurons in N . Formally, wjI is the overall sum of weights that
each neuron in N assigns to j in its decomposition, weighted by the neuron second-order norms:
wjI = n∈N γjl,n ||ϕln (I)||2 . The phrases with the highest image-contribution score are picked to
      P
describe the image concepts.

                                         0.39 ducks                0.69 violin
                                         0.20 chickens             0.49 guitar
                                         0.19 eagle                0.40 chords
                                         0.16 clover               0.32 faceted
                                         0.16 carmel               0.32 cranes
                                         0.16 park                 0.27 elixir
                                         0.14 hollister            0.25 sweetwater
                                         0.14 golfing              0.24 additives
                                         0.14 goose                0.24 cello
                                         0.13 wynn                 0.23 parlor

                                         1.29 primates             0.90 bridge
                                         0.66 chimp                0.36 fog
                                         0.63 alejandro            0.26 staten
                                         0.58 zoology              0.23 tektronix
                                         0.58 kong                 0.23 nel
                                         0.47 bolivia              0.21 postmaster
                                         0.4 inverter              0.21 bridges
                                         0.39 ears                 0.20 yugioh
                                         0.37 motif                0.20 continually
                                         0.36 chests               0.20 lisbon


Figure 8: Concept discovery in images (ViT-B-32). We include top-10 words discovered by
aggregating words in sparse decompositions of activated neurons.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qualitative results. We present qualitative results for neurons and the top-10 discovered concepts
from layer 9 of ViT-B-32 in Figure 8, when using the most common words as the pool. The number
of neurons activated on these images, |N |, is between 29 and 59, less than 2% of the neurons in the
layer. Nevertheless, the top words extracted from these neurons relate semantically to the objects in
the image and their locations. Surprisingly, the top word for each of the images appears only in one
or two of the neuron sparse decompositions and is not spread across many activated neurons.
We acknowledge that while this application discovers meaningful concepts that correspond to the
input images, there are other approaches for extract these concepts (e.g. sparsely decomposing the
image representation, as shown in Bhalla et al. (2024)).

A.6    D ERIVATIONS WITH L AYER N ORMALIZATION

In many implementations of CLIP, there is a layer normalization between the Vision Transformer and
the projection layer P . In this case, the representation is:
                                     Mimage (I) = P (LN (ViT(I)))                                      (7)
where the LN is the layer normalization. Specifically, LN can be written as:

                              x−µ                    γ               µγ
              LN (x) = γ ∗ √           +β = √               ∗x − √           −β ,                      (8)
                               σ2 + ϵ              σ2 + ϵ           σ2 + ϵ
                                               |    {z    }     |       {z     }
                                                        =A                    =B
               ′                                                                                         ′
where x ∈ Rd is the input token, µl , σl ∈ R are the mean and standard deviation, and γ, β ∈ Rd
are learned vectors. To include A and B in the second-order effect of a neuron flow, we replace the
                                                   ′
                                                     ,h l′ ,n
input-independent component in Equation (5), P WVl O   w , with:
                                                   ′      B
                                        P (A ∗ WVl O
                                                   ,h l,n
                                                     w +     )                                   (9)
                                                           c
Where c is a normalization constant that splits B equally across all the neurons that can additively
contribute to it.
Except for the layer normalization before the projection layer, the input to the MSA layers that comes
from the residual stream also flows through a layer normalization. Thus, if the input to the MSA layer
in layer l is the list of tokens [z0l , ...zK
                                            l
                                              ], the output that corresponds to the class token is:
                       h                         i  H X
                                                    X K
                           MSAl ([z0 , ..., zK ]) =     al,h   l,h   l
                                                         i (I)WV O LN (zi ),                          (10)
                                              0
                                                  h=1 i=0

where LN l is the normalization layer at layer l, that can be parameterized similarly to Equation (8)
                 ′
by Al , B l ∈ Rd . We modify the definition of the second-order effect accordingly:
                 L   H XK                                                        ′
                                                                                         !!
    l
                 X  X         l,n     l′ ,h

                                                             l′ ,h l    l,n   Bl      B
   ϕn (I) =                  pi (I)ai (I)        P A ∗ WV O (A ∗ w + l′ ) +                 , (11)
               ′       i=0
                                                                              c        c
              l =l+1 h=1
        ′                                                ′
where cl is is a normalization coefficient that splits B l equally across all the neurons before layer l′ .
In all of our experiments, we use this modification. Most of the elements in the modification add
constant biases. Therefore, they can be ignored in our experiments as in many of the experiments
constant biases do not change the results. For example, in our mean-ablation experiment, we subtract
the mean, computed across a dataset.

A.7    P ROMPTS

We provide the prompt that was used for generating sentences given the set of words Wv , as presented
in Section 5.1, in Table 6. This prompt is given to LLAMA3 model (Touvron et al., 2023).
Additionally, we provide the prompt that was used for generating the pool of ImageNet class
descriptions, presented in Section 4. We prompt ChatGPT (GPT 3.5) with the prompt template
provided in Table 7.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              75.0
                                                                                         50                                              baseline
                              72.5                                                                                                       w/o all neurons


                                                                          Accuracy (%)
                                                                                         40                                              w/o large norms
               Accuracy (%)
                              70.0
                              67.5      baseline                                                                                         w/o small norms
                                        w/o all neurons                                  30                                              rec. from PC #1
                              65.0      w/o large norms
                                        w/o small norms
                              62.5      rec. from PC #1                                  20
                                     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                              8             9                10
                                              Layer index                                                 Layer index

     Figure 9: ViT-L-14 second-order ablations.                           Figure 10: Mean-ablation of second order ef-
                                                                          fects on ImageNet-R (ViT-B-32, layers 8-10).
                                                                          We repeat the evaluation in Figure 3 on ImageNet-
                                                                          R. The performance of different ablations follows
                                                                          the same trends as that of ImageNet.


               60
               50                                                                           60
Accuracy (%)


                                                                             Accuracy (%)
               40
                                                                                            40
               30
               20                                                                           20
               10                    baseline                                                        baseline
                                     attentions mean-ablation                                        attentions mean-ablation
                0                                                                           0
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                        Layer index                                                       Layer index

Figure 11: ViT-B-32 first-order MSAs ablation. Figure 12: ViT-L-14 first-order MSAs ablation.


      Neuron                         ImageNet class descriptions                                                        Common words (30k)
                                     +“Image with a wiry, weather-resistant coat”                                       +“tents”
                                     +“Image showcasing a compact and lightweight sleeping bag”                         +“svalbard”
          #600
                                     +“Picture of a camper towing bicycles”                                             +“miles”
                                     +“Image with a Border Terrier jumping”                                             -“mountainous”
                                     -“Photograph taken during a race”                                                  +“runners”
                                     -“Silhouette of a running dog”                                                     +“races”
           #974
                                     -“Picture taken in a fishing competition”                                          -“dolphin”
                                     +“Silhouette of hammerhead shark with other ocean creatures”                       +“expiration”
                                     +“Chair with a foot pedal control”                                                 +“bus”
                                     -“Picture that captures the breed’s intelligence”                                  -“filings”
        #1517
                                     -“Image with snow-capped mountains as scenery”                                     -“percussion”
                                     +“Image with graffiti on a train”                                                  +“wheelchairs”
             +“Image depicting a sustainable living option”                   -“genres”
             +“Photo taken in a train yard”                                   +“governance”
  #2002
             -“Image featuring snow-covered rooftops”                         +“‘gravel”
             +“Rescue equipment”                                              +“conserve”
Table 5: Additional examples of sparse decomposition results. For each neuron, we present the
top-4 texts corresponding to the sparse decomposition with m = 128 and the signs of the coefficients
in the decomposition.


                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Top 5    Top 10   Top 15    Top 20   Top 25   Top 30    Top 35   Top 40   Top 45    Top 50

Neuron
  #4



Neuron
 #391



Neuron
#2137



Neuron
#2914


Figure 13: Images with largest second-order effect norm per neuron. We present the top images
from 10% of ImageNet validation set, for the neurons in Table 2. Notice that additional concepts that
are not captured by the top-4 descriptions in Table 2 are starting to appear.


A.8   C OMPUTE

As our method does not require additional training, the time of our experiments depends linearly on
the inference time of CLIP (and other generative models that were used for the adversarial images
generation), and on the number of images we use for the experiments (∼5000 in our case). All our
experiments were run on one A100 GPU. The most time-consuming experiment—computing the
per-layer mean-ablation results for ViT-L-14—took 5 days.


Neuron
 #600


Neuron
 #974


Neuron
#1517


Neuron
#2002


Figure 14: Images with largest second-order effect norm per neuron. We present the top images
from 10% of ImageNet validation set, for the neurons in Table 5.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         stop sign                      stop sign                         stop sign
     dog          deer              dog          deer                       yield                          yield                             yield


A dog is walking with a pat-   A dog is running through a        A group of people wandered      A stop sign stands in front of   A stop sign stands in front of
terned leash through a         forest, chasing after a           through a market filled with    a building with a sign that      a building with a sign that
forest with rabbits and        squirrel, with a helicopter       cans, eggs, and perfumes,       says "Yu's Banking Ser-          says "Yu's Banking Ser-
squirrels, with a symmetri-    flying overhead and a pat-        with a stop sign in the dis-    vices".                          vices".
cal patterned tree in the      terned stream in the dis-         tance.
background.                    tance.
                                                                                                    cat       vacuum                cat        vacuum
      dog         cat               frog          bird                frog         bird                   cleaner                          cleaner


A dog is sitting on a moon-    A writer sitting on a winged      A frog riding on the back of    A cat is playing with a          A cat is brushing its fur with
light, looking at a group of   pony, holding a poodle and        an elephant, with auras of      hockey stick near a shovel       a blunt comb, surrounded
owls perched on a nearby       wearing a yuri-themed hat,        purple and orange sur-          and a venous injection kit.      by drops of ethanol and a
branch.                        with a frog on its shoulder.      rounding them.                                                   dvr recording in the corner.

      dog         cat               bird         frog                bird          frog              bird         frog                 bird         cat


A dog is sitting on a moon-    A bird sits on a turtle's back,   A bird perched on a green       A bird perched on a pug's        A tank driving through a
light, looking at a group of   as it swims in a pool filled      fence, with a turtle swimming   back, with a green emerald       jungle, bird soaring above
owls perched on a nearby       with reptiles and butter-         in the nearby pond and a fred   in its beak and a tues flag
branch.                        flies.                            fisherman in the distance.      waving in the wind.

                                      stop sign                         stop sign                       stop sign                         stop sign
    bird        horse                   crossroad                         crossroad                       crossroad                         crossroad


A bird feeding from a hand     A stop sign stands tall in a      A stop sign marks the end of    A stop sign is placed on a       A stop sign is painted on a
while elephants bathe in a     gorge, surrounded by blocks       a journey, with a grandson      block of wood, with a chick-     rock, with a chicken
river.                         of colorful rocks, with a         and his grandfather sitting     en sitting on top, and a         perched on top, and a path-
                               chicken perched on top, and       on a bench, surrounded by       crossword puzzle laid out        way leading to a distant
                               a pathway leading to a dis-       perfumes and blocks.            below.                           journey.
                               tant marathon finish line.


Figure 15: Additional adversarial examples generated by our method. We provide the sentence
that was given to the text-to-image model to generate it. Words from W v are highlighted in bold.


                                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are a capable instruction-following AI agent.
 I want to generate an image by providing image descriptions as input to a text-to-image model.
 The image descriptions should be short. Each of them must include the word "{class_1}".
 They must not include the word "{class_2}", any synonym of it, or a plural version!
 The image descriptions should include as many words as possible from the next list and almost no
 other words:
 {list}
 Do not use names of people or places from the list unless they are famous and there is something
 visually distinctive about them. In each of the image descriptions mention as many objects and
 animals as possible from the list above. If you want to mention the place in which the image is taken
 or a name of a person, describe it with visually distinctive words. For example, if "Paris" is in the list,
 instead of saying "... in Paris", say "... with the Eiffel Tower in the background" or "... next to a sign
 saying ’Paris’". Don’t mention words that are too similar to "{class_2}", even if they are in the list
 above. For example, if the word was "tree" you should not mention "trees", "bush" or "eucalyptus".
 Only use words that you know what they mean.
 Generate a list of 50 image descriptions.

            Table 6: The language model prompt for generating image descriptions.


 Provide 40 image characteristics that are true for almost all the images of {class}. Be as general as
 possible and give short descriptions presenting one characteristic at a time that can describe almost
 all the possible images of this category. Don’t mention the category name itself (which is “{class}”).
 Here are some possible phrases: “Image with texture of ...”, “Picture taken in the geographical
 location of...”, "Photo that is taken outdoors”, “Caricature with text”, “Image with the artistic style
 of...”, “Image with one/two/three objects”, “Illustration with the color palette ...”, “Photo taken from
 above/below”, “Photograph taken during ... season”. Just give the short titles, don’t explain why, and
 don’t combine two different concepts (with “or” or “and”).

Table 7: The prompt for generating the pool of class descriptions. We prompt the model with all
the ImageNet classes.


                                                   20
