Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT B IOLOGICAL DATA ACQUISITION
THROUGH I NFERENCE S ET D ESIGN

 Ihor Neporozhnii∗ 1, 2 Julien Roy∗1 Emmanuel Bengio1 Jason Hartford1,3
 1
  Valence Labs 2 University of Toronto 3 University of Manchester
 ihor.neporozhnii@mail.utoronto.ca & julien.roy@valencelabs.com



                                                 A BSTRACT

              In drug discovery, highly automated high-throughput laboratories are used to
              screen a large number of compounds in search of effective drugs. These experi-
              ments are expensive, so one might hope to reduce their cost by only experimenting
              on a subset of the compounds, and predicting the outcomes of the remaining ex-
              periments. In this work, we model this scenario as a sequential subset selection
              problem: we aim to select the smallest set of candidates in order to achieve some
              desired level of accuracy for the system as a whole. Our key observation is that, if
              there is heterogeneity in the difficulty of the prediction problem across the input
              space, selectively obtaining the labels for the hardest examples in the acquisition
              pool will leave only the relatively easy examples to remain in the inference set,
              leading to better overall system performance. We call this mechanism inference
              set design, and propose the use of a confidence-based active learning solution to
              prune out these challenging examples. Our algorithm includes an explicit stop-
              ping criterion that interrupts the acquisition loop when it is sufficiently confident
              that the system has reached the target performance. Our empirical studies on im-
              age and molecular datasets, as well as a real-world large-scale biological assay,
              show that active learning for inference set design leads to significant reduction in
              experimental cost while retaining high system performance.


1        I NTRODUCTION

High-throughput screening (HTS) laboratories have enabled scientists to efficiently perform whole-
genome CRISPR knockouts and screen large compound libraries to discover effective therapeutics
(Mayr & Bojanic, 2009; Wildey et al., 2017; Blay et al., 2020; Tom et al., 2024; Fay et al., 2023).
However, conducting such experiments on every compound or gene in these vast design spaces
remains resource-intensive. With typical screening libraries holding on the order of 105 to 106
compounds (Hughes et al., 2011) and the number of possible small molecules estimated at 1060
(Bohacek et al., 1996), the disparity between our screening capabilities and all which we could ex-
plore is staggering. Reducing experimental costs without compromising the quality of the generated
data would allow to greatly accelerate biological and pharmaceutical research.
At any stage of a screening procedure, to reduce experimental costs, we can train a machine learning
model on the data that has already been collected, and then use that model to predict experimental
outcomes for the remainder of the experiments (Naik et al., 2013; Reker & Schneider, 2015; Dara
et al., 2022). This procedure generates a hybrid screen of the target library, with some outcomes
experimentally observed and others obtained from model predictions. However this approach entails
interrelated questions: Which subset of the library should we use to maximize the accuracy of the
predictions? How do we select this subset without access to all experimental outcomes? How do we
ensure that we acquire a large enough collection to meet our accuracy goal?
This setting is similar to an active learning problem in that we want to select examples that maximize
prediction accuracy, but instead of aiming to minimize generalization error on the entire data space,
we focus solely on prediction on one particular set of experiments. The fact that this library is finite
introduces an important difference: here the learner can influence the set of examples on which it
     ∗
         Denotes equal contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is evaluated by strategically selecting the examples to be acquired. Since it is often the case that
some experiments outcomes are inherently harder to predict than others, either due to their complex
properties (Bengio et al., 2009), because of the partial observability of the system (Saleh et al., 2021;
Krenn et al., 2020) or due to noise in the labeling function (Frénay & Verleysen, 2013; Lukasik et al.,
2020), the learner can select these harder examples into the training set early on to avoid having to
predict their outcomes at a later stage. Conversely, if a group of examples can be reliably predicted
by the model, we can save experimental costs by not including them in the training set. We call this
mechanism through which a learner can influence its own evaluation set: inference set design.
In this work, we propose an active learning-based solution to hybrid screening. Our approach uses
the model’s confidence to guide the selection of experiments and leverages the mechanism of in-
ference set design to improve the system’s performance on the target set. Our algorithm includes a
practical stopping criterion that terminates the acquisition of additional labels once a lower bound
on a target accuracy is exceeded, and we show that this bound provides probabilistic guarantee on
the performance of the algorithm as long as the model is weakly calibrated. To validate our method,
we conduct a series of empirical studies on image and molecular datasets, as well as a real-world
case study in drug discovery. The results demonstrate that inference set design significantly reduces
experimental costs while improving overall system performance. Importantly, this is true even when
the generalization benefits of active learning-based acquisition functions are marginal compared to
random search. This has important practical implications for active learning: if a problem is a hybrid
screen—in the sense that one only needs good performance on a fixed, finite set of experiments—
then evaluating generalization error dramatically understates the benefits of active learning. By
combining simple active learning acquisition functions with an appropriate stopping criterion, we
show that it is possible to make large scale screening far more efficient.

2     M ETHODS
In this section, we present the problem of efficiently evaluating a large, finite set of experimental
designs, such as screening a compound library. We formalize it as a subset selection problem, and
show that it can be solved using an active learning strategy. Active learning is effective in this setting
because it essentially selects its own inference set; we call this mechanism, inference set design.
We propose a stopping criterion to monitor the model’s performance and trigger termination of the
acquisition process and show that this algorithm allows to reach provably high levels of performance
on a target set of samples. A pseudo-code is available in Appendix B.

2.1    R EDUCING E XPERIMENTAL C OSTS VIA H YBRID S CREENS AND I NFERENCE S ET D ESIGN

We are motivated by the problem of efficient data acquisition of compound libraries for drug discov-
ery applications. Each “experimental readout” (or label) y requires us to run an experiment, which
                                                                                                 Ntarget
has some associated cost. We assume that we have a predefined target set Xtarget = {xi }i=1              of
experimental designs for which we want to acquire a readout, where Ntarget represents the number of
samples we wish to obtain labels or predictions for. For example, in drug discovery, a common set of
experimental designs, Xtarget , would be a library of thousands or even millions of compounds, each
required to be tested on several cell types and at different concentrations. For each xi ∈ Xtarget , the
associated experimental readout, yi , would correspond to the drug’s effect on the corresponding cell
type. One way to reduce the acquisition costs of screening the entire target set is to train a predictive
model p̂(x) on the observation set – the subset of the target set, Xobs ⊆ Xtarget , for which we already
have observed the labels y. We can then use this model’s predictions in place of the real labels on
the remaining samples. Because experiments are typically run in multiple rounds, at each round t,
the target set Xtarget can be partitioned into two mutually exclusive subsets:
                           t
    • The observation set Xobs , which contains the union of all experimental designs that have already
                                                 t
      been tested and for which the readouts, Yobs  , have been observed. We denote their pairing the
      observation dataset Dobs := (X , Y)obs := {(xi , yi )}N
                            t              t
                                                            i=1 . At each step t, a constant number of
                                                              obs

      Nb samples are acquired and added to the observation set, causing this set to grow over time.
                             t               t
    • The inference set Xinf   := Xtarget \ Xobs , which consists of the remaining experimental designs
      in the target set that have not yet been tested. This set shrinks over time as samples are selected
      from it for acquisition and transferred into the observation set.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



        Observation Set
        (initially empty)
                                                                   Inference Set
                                                                      (60% accuracy)
                                                                                             Set up
                                                                                             Initially, all the samples are
                                                                                             unlabeled in the Inference Set.

                                                                                             System accuracy: 60%

                                                                                             The agent is tasked to select
                                                                                             samples for labeling.


                                                                                                   easy examples

                                                                                                   difficult examples
        Observation Set                                            Inference Set
        (labeled examples: 100% accuracy)                                (50% accuracy)

                                                                                            Random Agent
                                                                                            Randomly selects examples
                                                                                            to be labeled and transferred
                                                                                            to the observation set.

                                                                                            System accuracy: 80%


        Observation Set                                            Inference Set
        (labeled examples: 100% accuracy)                             (100% accuracy)

                                                                                            Active Agent
                                                                                            Actively selects the most
                                                                                            difficult samples to be acquired
                                                                                            and removed from the inference set.

                                                                                            System accuracy: 100%


Figure 1: Hybrid screen employing active learning as an inference set design strategy. The
goal is to produce a “hybrid dataset”, composed of the labels collected in the observation set and
the predictions of the model made on the inference set. The system’s performance is reported as
the “system accuracy”, measured as a combination of observed labels on the observation set and of
predictions made on the inference set. As samples are acquired and added to the observation set,
the contribution of the accuracy of the prediction model gradually decreases. The aim of the active
agent is to select informative examples while pruning out the most difficult ones in order to reach
very high system accuracy without having to acquire all the samples.


Once acquisition is stopped, at timestep t = τ , the output of the system is a hybrid dataset, i.e.
the combination (X , Y)τobs ∪ (X , Ŷ)τinf of both the labeled pairs from the observation set and the
predicted pairs from the inference set. We call this procedure a hybrid screen, as it provides a hybrid
set of labels for the entire target set – some measured, some predicted. The system’s performance
at each step t is evaluated based on its accuracy µtsys across the entire target set, which consists of
perfectly accurate labels y from the observation set and the inferred labels ŷ for the inference set:1
                                1       X
                    µtsys :=                           t
                                              1(xi ∈ Xobs                         t
                                                          ) + 1(ŷi = yi | xi ∈ Xinf )               (1)
                             |Xtarget |
                                                  xi ∈Xtarget

 In this formulation, acquiring all the labels would yield 100% accuracy, but at significant expense.
We instead seek a system that reaches an accuracy of at least γ, while incurring minimal experimen-
tal costs. This can be formulated as the following combinatorial optimization problem,
                                               min          |Xobs | such that        µt=τ
                                                                                      sys > γ                                     (2)
                                            Xobs ⊆Xtarget

where |Xobs | denotes the number of samples in the observation set. A natural approach is to treat this
as an active learning problem. Like standard active learning, we can sequentially select subsets of
data for labeling and the system accuracy will benefit from any improvements in generalization that
arise from better selection of training examples. However, this setting has an important difference:
we only ever evaluate p̂ on Xinf , and this set is under the control of the learner because any example
that is selected for labeling is removed from the inference set. As a result, by choosing acquisition
functions that select harder training examples first, we make the test-time task of the learner easier, as
   1
       Equation 1 assumes a classification problem, but we also explore continuous outcomes y in Appendix E.1.


                                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the harder examples are effectively pruned out of the inference set. We call this approach inference
set design – by selective label acquisition, the agent actively designs the composition of the inference
set such that it can excel on it. This mechanism is illustrated in Figure 1.
The data selection heuristics for inference set design are similar to standard active learning, but
there are two important differences between the settings. Firstly, if we evaluate performance under
the standard active learning objective—generalization error measured on a held-out test set—we
risk dramatically understating the performance improvement that result from inference set design.
Instead, evaluating on the target set of interest allows to capture dramatical improvements over a
random sampler even when only marginal improvements in generalization error can be observed.
Secondly, unlike active learning, inference set design requires an explicit stopping criterion in order
to decide when you have collected enough samples to meet the accuracy threshold, which we address
in the following section.

2.2   E MPIRICAL S TOPPING C RITERION

The key technical challenge of inference set design is deciding when to stop running new exper-
iments. In a deployment environment, the labels for the inference set will remain unavailable, so
we need to estimate the system performance from the collected data only. To avoid unnecessary
experimentation, inference set design algorithms must employ an efficient stopping criterion. We
address this by maintaining a probabilistic lower bound on the system accuracy, and stopping once
this bound exceeds the critical threshold, γ. A simple approach to maintaining such a bound is to
leverage the feedback from each round of experimentation.
We consider a multi-class classification problem. Formally, let K := {1, 2, . . . , K} be the set of K
labels and p̂(x) := (p̂1 (x), . . . , p̂K (x)) be the predicted probabilities for x that y = k for all k ∈ K.
We denote yi the true label for a sample xi , ŷi := arg maxk p̂k (xi ) the predicted class by the model
and v̂i := maxk p̂k (xi ) the predicted probability value for that class. We consider the use of the
commonly employed least-confidence acquisition function:

                        xselected := arg max 1 − v̂i , for i = 1, . . . , Nb                              (3)
                                    xi ∈Xinf \Xb

where Nb is the number of samples to be acquired, i.e. the acquisition batch-size. The samples xi ∈
Xb are selected one by one by applying the least-confidence criterion in Equation 3 iteratively to the
remaining samples in Xinf that have not yet been transferred to Xb . Because at every round we select
examples that the model regards as challenging, if the model maintains a correct calibration ordering,
the performance on a batch Xbt that we select at round t should lower bound the performance on the
entire inference set. We express this formally in the following lemma:
Lemma 1. Assuming that p̂’s top-predictions are weakly calibrated on the inference set, i.e. that for
                                  t−1
any two samples x1 and x2 in Dinf     , v̂1 ≥ v̂2 =⇒ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂1 ] ≥ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂2 ], then
                                                                 inf                            inf

the expected accuracy on a batch Dbt := {(xi , yi )}N                                       t−1
                                                    i=1 selected by least-confidence from Xinf is less
                                                      b


or equal than the expected accuracy on the remaining inference set: PDbt [Y = Ŷ ] ≤ PDinft [Y = Ŷ ].



See Appendix A.1 for more details and proof. Lemma 1 shows that although the samples in Xbt are
                                                           t
not independent and identically distributed samples from Xinf , we can safely use the performance on
  t                                               t
Db as a conservative proxy for performance on Dinf . We thus leverage the measured performance
on the acquired batch to estimate the performance on the remaining, unobserved inference set.
We can now use this conservative estimate to design an appropriate stopping criterion. Let µ̂tb :=
 1
   PNb                                                              t
Nb    i=1 1(yi = ŷi ) denote the measured accuracy on the batch Db at acquisition step t. A simple
stopping criterion could consist in picking an accuracy threshold γ for the desired system accuracy,
and to stop acquiring new samples once our system accuracy estimate µ̂tsys based on µ̂tb surpasses γ:
                                                                         t
                                                                       |Xobs | + µ̂tb |Xinf
                                                                                         t
                                                                                            |
                         τ = arg min µ̂tsys > γ     ,       µ̂tsys =                                     (4)
                              t∈1,...,T                                     |Xtarget |
where τ denotes the stopping time. Optionally, we could augment this criterion with a patience
hyperparameter to make it more robust to the stochasticity introduced by the finite sample size Nb .
A more principled approach however is to directly account for the statistical uncertainty around µ̂tb


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by using it to derive a bound αt on the true inference accuracy µtinf . Using standard concentration
inequalities (see detailed derivation in Appendix A.2) we have that,
                                                  (                                     )
                t                                            t          t       log 1δ
           P (µinf ≤ αt ) ≤ δ with αt = min a ∈ [0, µ̂b ] : KL(µ̂b ||a) ≤                        (5)
                                                                                  Nb

where KL(·||·) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence and δ is the failure probability of the bound.
We can thus use the lower-bound value αt in place of µ̂tb in Equation 4 to ensure achieving our
desired system accuracy threshold γ with probability at least 1 − δ.
To summarize, in this section, we presented a framework for hybrid screens leveraging active learn-
ing to perform inference set design by selectively acquiring labels for hard-to-predict examples,
thereby simplifying the inference set for easier prediction, and using a conservative stopping crite-
rion to ensure that the desired level of system accuracy is achieved at stopping time. The pseudo-
code for our algorithm is presented in Appendix B.

3    R ELATED W ORK

In this work, we apply Active Learning (AL) to the problem of hybrid screens for biological data
acquisition. Warmuth et al. (2003) were among the first to apply AL to the field of drug discovery,
with an acquisition function based on support vector machines for binding affinity predictors. AL
has since then been explored as a tool for problems such as virtual screening (Fujiwara et al., 2008),
cancer monitoring (Danziger et al., 2009), protein-protein interaction (Mohamed et al., 2010), com-
pound classification (Lang et al., 2016) and chemical space exploration (Smith et al., 2018).
These approaches seek to produce a better model than training on random samples would, and are
to be distinguished from bayesian optimization methods (Graff et al., 2021; Gorantla et al., 2024),
which also fall under the umbrella of “active learning” but instead use the model to seek specific
samples (e.g. with high binding affinity) and often focus on addressing the exploration-exploitation
dilemma which has been widely studied by bandit algorithms (Svensson et al., 2022). For hybrid
screens, we seek a model that can accurately predict the labels of all samples in the inference set,
without attempting to maximize the value of the readouts. Our setting, focusing on a fixed set of
data, is sometimes referred to as pool-based active learning (Wu, 2019; Zhan et al., 2021). Another
similar approach called transductive experimental design aims to select samples that improve the
predictions for a specific pre-defined test set (Yu et al., 2006; Hübotter et al., 2024). A key difference
is that most active learning work (including pool-based AL and transductive experimental design)
tends to focus evaluations on a held-out test set (Atlas et al., 1989; Cohn et al., 1994; Gal et al., 2017;
Margatina et al., 2021; Zhan et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024) or restrict the algorithm to
very limited acquisition budgets (e.g. only 10% of the data pool) (Yu et al., 2006; Wu, 2019), which
generally does not leave enough margin for mechanisms such as inference set design to dominate.
A closely related problem is that of core set selection (Plutowski & White, 1993; Bachem et al.,
2017; Guo et al., 2022), where the goal is to select the smallest set of samples from a pool of data
such that a model trained on this subset performs on par with a model trained on the entire pool.
The closest works to ours are that of Sener & Savarese (2017) and Li & Rangarajan (2019), which
make an explicit connection between active learning and core set selection and also seek to improve
performance on the unselected examples. In our work however, we focus on uncovering the key
mechanism in action, inference set design, and show empirical validations across a wide variety of
academic and real-life datasets.

4    E XPERIMENTS

In our experiments2 , we aim at highlighting the key role that inference set design plays in allow-
ing AL agents to reach high levels of performance on the inference set (Section 4.1), validating the
robustness of this mechanism on molecular datasets used for drug discovery (Section 4.2), apply-
ing this method to a challenging real-world case of compound library screening on a large scale
   2
     The code is available at https://github.com/ineporozhnii/inference_set_design. All
datasets to reproduce our results are publicly available, except one proprietary dataset for the results in Figure 8.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


phenotypic assays (Section 4.3) and empirically validating our theoretical assumption and stop-
ping criterion (Section 4.4). Unless specified otherwise, all curves show average metrics across 3
seeds and the shaded areas denote the standard error of the mean. Vertical lines denote the average
stopping time, with min and max intervals (left to right). For all modalities, we use vectorized rep-
resentations as input and our model p̂ is parameterized using a feed-forward deep neural network
with residual connections. Additional details regarding data pre-processing, network architectures
and hyperparameters are presented in Appendices C and D.


Figure 2: Performance of least-confidence (LC) and random acquisition functions on variations of
MNIST (columns) across 3 seeds. a) Original: MNIST with its naturally occurring easy and hard
examples. b) Partial Observability: MNIST where the bottom two thirds of the images have been
cropped out. c) Noisy labeling function: MNIST with shuffled labels for images of 6’s, 8’s, and 9’s.
The system seeks a target accuracy γ of 98%.



4.1   V ISUALIZING I NFERENCE S ET D ESIGN

To develop intuition for inference set design we first run experiments on the MNIST dataset. The
whole MNIST training set is used as the target set from which agents can acquire samples. The
MNIST test set is split 50-50 into a validation set used for early stopping and a test set used for
measuring model performance on held-out data inaccessible by agents. In many real-world applica-
tions, data used for training ML models contains samples that are inherently difficult, only partially
observed, or mislabeled. We investigate these three cases. Specifically, we simulate the challenge
of partial observability by removing the lower part of the image (Figure 2b) and simulate labeling
noise by shuffling labels for selected digits (see Figure 2c).


                                                  6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Test Set                                               Inference Set                               active, 0-9 labels shuffled
           100                                                        100
                                                                                                                                               0-7 labels shuffled
                                                                                                                                               0-5 labels shuffled
                                                                                                                                               0-3 labels shuffled
Accuracy (%)


                                                           Accuracy (%)
               80                                                         80
                                                                                                                                               0-1 labels shuffled
               60                                                         60
                                                                                                                                               0-0 labels shuffled

               40                                                         40
                                                                                                                                       random, 0-9 labels shuffled
                                                                                                                                             0-7 labels shuffled
               20                                                         20
                                                                                                                                             0-5 labels shuffled
                                                                                                                                             0-3 labels shuffled
                0                                                          0
                                                                                                                                             0-1 labels shuffled
                    0    17    33      50      67   83   100                   0    17    33        50                 67   83   100         0-0 labels shuffled
                        Percent of data acquired (%)                               Percent of data acquired (%)


  Figure 3: Performance of active and random agents on MNIST subject to an increasing number of
  shuffled labels. As the task becomes harder, the accuracy gap increases, but the stopping time τ is
  triggered later.


                                                                   100
  In these experiments we study the performance of an
  active agent using the least-confidence (LC) acquisition


                                                                                               Percent of mislabeled
                                                                                                samples acquired, %
                                                                    80
  function of Equation 3 and a random agent, selecting
  samples with uniform probability over the inference set.          60
  At every active learning step an agent acquires a batch
  of 1000 samples from the inference set, adds them to the          40
  training set, and retrains the model from scratch. Across
  these active learning steps, we monitor the accuracy on           20
  the inference set, the test set, the acquired batch, and the                                LC agent
                                                                     0
                                                                                              Random agent
  system accuracy as a whole (see Equation 1). We also
                                                                       0%   20%    40%    60%     80%   100%
  record which samples have been acquired at every acqui-                 Percent of data acquired, %
  sition step. In all three studied settings in Figure 2, we ob-
  serve the same phenomenon: the generalisation accuracy
  measured on the held-out test set quickly saturates for Figure 4: Percent of samples with
  both agents, but the active agent is able to obtain signif- shuffled labels acquired by each agent
  icant improvements on the inference set, and these gains throughout the acquisition steps.
  are also reflected in individual acquisition batches and on
  the system’s overall performance.
  The mechanism at play here stems from the active design of the inference set by the agent. We illus-
  trate this for the case of a noisy labeling function in Figure 4. By selectively acquiring the images
  it tends to mislabel, the active agent makes predicting the labels on the remaining samples in the
  inference set much easier. Since the majority of samples acquired by the active agent in the first 20
  steps represent these challenging examples, its accuracy on the acquired batch is significantly lower
  than a random agent’s (Figure 2c, 3rd row). However, once the process of removing mislabeled sam-
  ples from the inference set is complete, the active agent’s accuracy on the acquired batch drastically
  increases and surpasses the random agent. To further explore the tradeoff between task difficulty and
  efficiency gains, we run experiments with shuffled labels for increasingly larger subsets of digits (see
  Figure 3). The results show that with a higher number of such “noisy” samples, the gap between the
  active and random agents on the inference set increases. The active agent is able to achieve 100%
  accuracy on the inference set even with shuffled labels for 80% of the data. However, a more cor-
  rupted target set also necessitates more acquisition batches to prune out the difficult examples from
  the inference set, incurring smaller experimental budget reductions for highly challenging settings.

  4.2               A SSESSING THE ROBUSTNESS OF THE M ECHANISM

  In the previous section, we have shown that inference set design leads to significantly improved
  system performance compared to random sampling, even with highly corrupted datasets. In this
  section, we validate that these observations hold for a wildly different type of data – molecular
  datasets. We use the Quantum Machine 9 (QM9) (Ruddigkeit et al., 2012; Ramakrishnan et al.,
  2014). QM9 contains 134k small organic molecules and their quantum chemical properties com-
  puted with Density Functional Theory (DFT). For inputs, we convert the SMILES strings molecular
  representations into their Extended Connectivity Fingerprints (ECFPs). We predict the HOMO-


                                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



       a)


        b)                         System Performance                                                                                          Inference set
                  100                                                                              100
    Accuracy, %   90                                                                               90


                                                                                     Accuracy, %
                  80                                                                               80
                  70           LC agent             Diversity agent                                70
                               Savings: 53.6%
                  60           BALD agent           Original ordering                              60
                               Savings: 53.8%       SA-score ordering                                                                              LC agent        Diversity agent
                  50           Random agent                                                        50                                              BALD agent      Original ordering
                               Savings: 16.6%                                                                                                      Random agent    SA-score ordering
                  40                                                                               40
                        0%   20%        40%         60%          80%         100%                        0%                   20%               40%        60%     80%         100%
                               Percent of data acquired, %                                                                               Percent of data acquired, %
                                      Acquired batch                                                                                              Test set
                  100                                                                              100
                  90                                                                               90
    Accuracy, %


                                                                                     Accuracy, %
                  80                                                                               80
                  70                                                                               70
                  60                        LC agent             Diversity agent                   60                                              LC agent        Diversity agent
                  50                        BALD agent           Original ordering                 50                                              BALD agent      Original ordering
                                            Random agent         SA-score ordering                                                                 Random agent    SA-score ordering
                  40                                                                               40
                        0%   20%        40%         60%          80%         100%                        0%                   20%               40%        60%     80%         100%
                               Percent of data acquired, %                                                                               Percent of data acquired, %

Figure 5: Results on QM9. a) A sample of molecules from the QM9 dataset. b) Performance of
active agents (LC and BALD), heuristic orderings, and random sampler on QM9 across 3 seeds.


LUMO gap framed as a classification task by discretizing the values into two balanced classes using
median as a boundary condition to explore agents’ performance on classification task. Our main
active agent uses the least-confidence acquisition function. We also explore the use of the BALD
acquisition function (Gal et al., 2017). In addition to active and random agents, for both datasets, we
also evaluate the performance of heuristic-based acquisition orderings (original ordering, smallest
to largest molecules, ordered by SA-score, etc.) as well as a diversity sampling strategy (selecting
molecules with the largest Tanimoto distance to the acquired set).
The results on QM9 demonstrate that both LC and BALD
agents achieve much higher accuracy on the inference set
                                                              100
than the baselines. Furthermore, they reach near 100%
                                                                                                              Percent of 'hard to predict'


accuracy on both system and inference set after acquiring
                                                                                                                molecules acquired, %


                                                               80
only 30% of data (see Figure 5). Saturating performance
across all agents on the test set suggests once again that     60
the active agent is able to make gains by pruning out diffi-
cult examples from the inference set rather than by gener-     40
                                                                                         LC agent
alizing better. To confirm this hypothesis, we compiled a                                Diversity agent
                                                               20                        BALD agent
list of “hard to predict” molecules by training five models                              SA-score ordering
with different random seeds on a 5-fold cross-validation                                 Random agent
                                                                0                        Original ordering
split of the inference set, and flagged the molecules for         0%   20%    40%    60%       80%      100%
which at least 4 out 5 models made a mistake. The re-                Percent of data acquired, %
sulting “hard to predict” subset contains 4, 944 molecules
(approximately 5% of the inference set). We then tracked Figure 6: Percent of “hard” examples
the proportion of these samples that was acquired by each acquired by each agent throughout the
agent in the active learning experiments. Figure 6 shows acquisition loop on QM9.
that the active agents acquire molecules from the “hard to
predict” subset at a much higher rate than the baselines.
In addition to the classification results on QM9 presented here, we extend our method to a regression
task on the much larger Molecules3D dataset in Appendix E.1 and get to a similar conclusion.
Put together, these results on additional datasets spanning both classification and regression tasks
and including 3 different active acquisition functions confirm and extend the observations made on
MNIST in the previous section. They suggest that inference set design is an effective approach to
guide acquisition of molecular compounds, by significantly reducing the cost of acquiring a fixed
set of molecules and ensuring high system performance. In the next section, we apply this method
to real-world biological data.


                                                                                     8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         a) RxRx3 Perturbed Cell Miscroscopy image b) Compounds                                              RxRx3 Discretized Gene-Compound Relationships
                                                                              tacalcitol
                                                                     fluorometholone
                                                                              rifaximin
                                                                            Doxofylline
                                                                     Cyclobenzaprine
                                                                        Nitrofurantoin
                                                                           Cysteamine
                                                                             Diazoxide
                                                                           Zonisamide
                                                                            Raloxifene
                                                                         Flubendazole
                                                                          Epothilone B
                                                                           thalidomide
                                                                             arotinolol
                                                                             afobazole
                                                                       acetyl-l-leucine
                                                                            Clebopride
                                                                       Acetazolamide
                                                                           Metamizole
                                                                          Amiodarone


                                                                               RXRX3-71318
                                                                               RXRX3-75221
                                                                               RXRX3-59647
                                                                               RXRX3-35540
                                                                               RXRX3-11437
                                                                               RXRX3-82063
                                                                               RXRX3-40724
                                                                               RXRX3-95336
                                                                               RXRX3-25439
                                                                               RXRX3-28674
                                                                               RXRX3-25848
                                                                               RXRX3-89425
                                                                               RXRX3-14466
                                                                               RXRX3-10066
                                                                               RXRX3-64266
                                                                               RXRX3-78679
                                                                               RXRX3-77079
                                                                               RXRX3-63390
                                                                               RXRX3-54124
                                                                               RXRX3-29907
                                                                               RXRX3-18828
                                                                               RXRX3-74582
                                                                               RXRX3-85727
                                                                               RXRX3-70256
                                                                               RXRX3-26675
                                                                               RXRX3-79445
                                                                               RXRX3-65185
                                                                               RXRX3-39713
                                                                               RXRX3-82727
                                                                               RXRX3-99518
                                                                               RXRX3-10944
                                                                               RXRX3-31255
                                                                               RXRX3-86762
                                                                               RXRX3-24122
                                                                               RXRX3-34287
                                                                               RXRX3-77697
                                                                               RXRX3-96949
                                                                               GeX3-3152764
                                                                                  ne 512
                                                                               RXRX3-9970


                                                                                      s
                                                                                 R 6
                                                                               RXRX3-
                                                                               RX
 Figure 7: Visualisation of the RxRx3 dataset. a) A microscopy image of perturbed cells. b) A sample
 of biological map showing whether each pair of gene-based and compound-based perturbations is
 pheno-similar (in red) or not (in white).

                System Performance                            Inference set                            Acquired batch                        Test set
              100                                 100                                      100                                 100                                 LC agent
                                                                                                                                                                   Savings: 20.5%
              90                                  90                                       90                                  90                                  BALD agent
Accuracy, %


                                                                                                                                                                   Savings: 14.5%
              80                                  80                                       80                                  80                                  Random agent
              70                                  70                                       70                                  70
                                                                                                                                                                   Savings: 13.3%
                                                                                                                                                                   Ordered by id
              60                                  60                                       60                                  60                                  Diversity agent
                                                                                                                                                                   SA-score agent
              50                                  50                                       50                                  50
                     0%    20% 40% 60% 80% 100%          0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%                0%    20% 40% 60% 80% 100%          0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
                    Percent of data acquired, %         Percent of data acquired, %              Percent of data acquired, %         Percent of data acquired, %

 Figure 8: Performance on a pheno-similarity classification task on our proprietary phenomics
 dataset. The least-confidence agent is shown to be the most effective on this task and reaches the
 targeted system accuracy of 98% at around 80% of the acquisition procedure.



  4.3                     I NFERENCE S ET D ESIGN IN THE R EAL W ORLD

 Modern HTS platforms combined with genetic perturbation techniques facilitate large scale cell
 microscopy experiments that are designed to capture the effects of biological perturbations (Celik
 et al., 2022). In these experiments before taking microscopy images, cells undergo perturbation by
 either a CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knock-out or injection of a bioactive molecular compound at
 a given concentration. The obtained cell microscopy images are then processed and passed through
 a neural network to obtain embeddings that correspond to a specific perturbation. With data from
 such HTS pipeline it is possible to build “Maps of Biology” that contain organized information about
 known and new biological relationships. Each point on the map corresponds to the cosine similarity
 between perturbation embeddings and encodes whether two perturbations are related. Expanding
 maps of biology might uncover new biological relationships that in turn could guide the discovery
 of leads for new medicines. However, even with ultra-HTS platforms, experimentally acquiring
 microscopy images of all possible cell perturbations is unfeasible. We aim to apply inference set
 design to this problem with the goal of reducing costs associated with building maps of biology.
 For our experiments, we start by using the publicly available RxRx3 dataset (Fay et al., 2023) which
 contains the learned embeddings for 17, 063 CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knock-out perturbations,
 as well as 1, 674 FDA-approved compound perturbations at 8 concentrations each. We frame this as
 a classification problem and train our models to predict the discretized cosine similarity between the
 perturbation embeddings of any gene-compound pair. As preprocessing, for each gene-compound
 pairs, we select the compound-concentration perturbation that yields the largest cosine-similarity
 with the target gene. The cosine-similarities are discretized by computing a gene-specific threshold
 using the upper semi-interquartile range (SIQR) with a step-size of 2.5. Finally, we remove the
 genes that have an activity rate (across compounds) below 25%. The result is a 151 × 1, 674 matrix
 of labels encoding either pheno-similarity (y = 1) or an absence of relationship (y = 0) between a
 gene and a compound perturbation (see Figure 7b).


                                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For this prediction task, we treat all gene embeddings as known and focus only on the much larger
space of compound acquisition. To featurize compounds we use embeddings of the MolGPS model
(Sypetkowski et al., 2024). At every active learning step, agents acquire a batch of compounds
from the inference set and uncover their relationships with all genes in the dataset (entire row of
the matrix). The results on the RxRx3 dataset show only minor improvements over a random agent
(see Appendix E). We believe this is due to high complexity of biological relationships and limited
size of the inference set. Indeed, successfully learning to infer cellular similarity between gene and
compound perturbations from only a few hundred examples is highly unlikely. To push this analysis
further, we re-run the same experiment but on our proprietary phenomics dataset. It is similar to
RxRx3 but much larger. It contains cell perturbation embeddings for 102,855 compound and 5,580
gene perturbations, leading to a 2, 000 times larger relationship matrix. Using inference set design,
the active agent is now able to outperform the baselines on this task, as shown in Figure 8. These
experiments represent promising results for large scale applications of active learning to hybrid
screens for early drug discovery.

4.4   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF WEAK CALIBRATION AND STOPPING CRITERION

In this last experimental section, we validate the theoretical claims made in Section 2.2. The pro-
posed stopping criterion assumes weak calibration i.e. that the true accuracy of the model does not
need to be exactly equal to its confidence (perfect calibration), but that the correct ordering is con-
served. Figure 12 in Appendix F.1 shows that this assumption is empirically verified in all of our
experiments, supporting the claim that weak calibration can be achieved in practice. In Figure 13,
in Appendix F.2, we also empirically validate that the proposed stopping criterion making use of the
bound presented in Equation 5 does indeed cause the agent to stop acquiring new labels at a system
accuracy superior to the targeted threshold (see Equation 4).

5     D ISCUSSION
While active learning has undergone significant theoretical development and experimentation over
the past 30 years, its widespread adoption in the industry remains a challenge (Reker, 2019). Active
learning is often framed as a means to improve generalization performance on held-out test sets,
which is a goal made difficult by real-world challenges such as noisy labeling functions as well
as high diversity and partial observability of the input space. However, we believe that a shift in
perspective can help unlock the untapped potential of active learning. By focusing on optimizing
performance on a target set of samples and allowing the model to decide which examples to label
and which to predict, active learning can become a powerful tool for real-world applications.
We applied this perspective to the problem of hybrid screens in drug discovery, where the goal
is to acquire readouts for only a subset of compounds while making accurate predictions for the
remaining ones. Our approach makes use of a confidence-based acquisition function and leverages
the concept of inference set design, a strategy where the model selects the most challenging examples
for labeling, leaving easier cases for prediction. Our empirical results, across image and chemical
datasets, as well as a real world biological application, show that this approach leads to consistent
and significant improvements. Moreover, our results highlight that heuristic-based orderings, often
used in real-world data acquisition efforts, are highly suboptimal. They can lead to drastically
different results across tasks and datasets and often end up harming the performance by introducing
unjustified biases in the acquisition ordering. Importantly, this bias then prevents the experimenter
from using the performance on the acquisition batch as an indication of the performance on the
remaining examples in the inference set. A confidence-based agent also introduces a bias in sample
selection, but assuming weak calibration, this bias is directional and still allows the acquisition batch
to be used as a lower bound for the performance on the remaining examples (see Lemma 1). It then
compensates for the conservativeness of its stopping criterion by designing its own inference set,
leading to overall earlier stopping time and greater budget reductions.
An important limitation of our work is the assumption that observed labels are deterministic and
constitute perfect accuracy. Many real-world biological experiments however produce noisy obser-
vations. Combining the inference set design framework with aleatoric uncertainty modeling to better
address cases of weak supervision represents a promising direction for future work.



                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the entire team at Recursion and Valence Labs for participating in insightful
discussions and providing feedback on this work. We also wish to specifically thank Austin Tripp
for offering valuable input on this work as well as Oscar Mendez-Lucio and Peter McLean for their
precious support with data processing and for engaging in fruitful exchanges about predictive models
for phenomics.

R EFERENCES
Les Atlas, David Cohn, and Richard Ladner. Training connectionist networks with queries and
  selective sampling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2, 1989.
Olivier Bachem, Mario Lucic, and Andreas Krause. Practical coreset constructions for machine
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06476, 2017.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48, 2009.
Vincent Blay, Bhairavi Tolani, Sunita P. Ho, and Michelle R. Arkin. High-throughput screen-
  ing: today’s biochemical and cell-based approaches. Drug Discovery Today, 25(10):1807–
  1821, 2020. ISSN 1359-6446. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2020.07.024. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644620303056.
Regine S Bohacek, Colin McMartin, and Wayne C Guida. The art and practice of structure-based
  drug design: a molecular modeling perspective. Medicinal research reviews, 16(1):3–50, 1996.
Safiye Celik, Jan-Christian Hütter, Sandra Melo Carlos, Nathan H Lazar, Rahul Mohan, Conor
  Tillinghast, Tommaso Biancalani, Marta Fay, Berton A Earnshaw, and Imran S Haque. Biological
  cartography: Building and benchmarking representations of life. Biorxiv, pp. 2022–12, 2022.
Herman Chernoff. A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum of
  observations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 493–507, 1952.
David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Ladner. Improving generalization with active learning. Machine
  learning, 15:201–221, 1994.
Samuel A Danziger, Roberta Baronio, Lydia Ho, Linda Hall, Kirsty Salmon, G Wesley Hatfield,
  Peter Kaiser, and Richard H Lathrop. Predicting positive p53 cancer rescue regions using most
  informative positive (mip) active learning. PLoS computational biology, 5(9):e1000498, 2009.
Suresh Dara, Swetha Dhamercherla, Surender Singh Jadav, CH Madhu Babu, and Mohamed Jawed
  Ahsan. Machine learning in drug discovery: a review. Artificial intelligence review, 55(3):1947–
  1999, 2022.
Marta M Fay, Oren Kraus, Mason Victors, Lakshmanan Arumugam, Kamal Vuggumudi, John Ur-
 banik, Kyle Hansen, Safiye Celik, Nico Cernek, Ganesh Jagannathan, et al. Rxrx3: Phenomics
 map of biology. Biorxiv, pp. 2023–02, 2023.
Benoı̂t Frénay and Michel Verleysen. Classification in the presence of label noise: a survey. IEEE
  transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 25(5):845–869, 2013.
Yukiko Fujiwara, Yoshiko Yamashita, Tsutomu Osoda, Minoru Asogawa, Chiaki Fukushima,
  Masaaki Asao, Hideshi Shimadzu, Kazuya Nakao, and Ryo Shimizu. Virtual screening sys-
  tem for finding structurally diverse hits by active learning. Journal of chemical information and
  modeling, 48(4):930–940, 2008.
Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep bayesian active learning with image data.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1183–1192. PMLR, 2017.
Rohan Gorantla, Alzbeta Kubincova, Benjamin Suutari, Benjamin P Cossins, and Antonia SJS Mey.
  Benchmarking active learning protocols for ligand-binding affinity prediction. Journal of Chem-
  ical Information and Modeling, 64(6):1955–1965, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David E. Graff, Eugene I. Shakhnovich, and Connor W. Coley. Accelerating high-throughput virtual
  screening through molecular pool-based active learning. Chem. Sci., 12:7866–7881, 2021. doi:
  10.1039/D0SC06805E. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D0SC06805E.
Chengcheng Guo, Bo Zhao, and Yanbing Bai. Deepcore: A comprehensive library for coreset selec-
  tion in deep learning. In International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications,
  pp. 181–195. Springer, 2022.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Jonas Hübotter, Bhavya Sukhija, Lenart Treven, Yarden As, and Andreas Krause. Trans-
  ductive active learning: Theory and applications. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Bel-
  grave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 124686–124755. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/
  file/e17fe6fe9990fffb637b42c98c005515-Paper-Conference.pdf.
James P Hughes, Stephen Rees, S Barrett Kalindjian, and Karen L Philpott. Principles of early drug
  discovery. British journal of pharmacology, 162(6):1239–1249, 2011.
Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Self-
 referencing embedded strings (selfies): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine
 Learning: Science and Technology, 1(4):045024, 2020.
Greg Landrum, Paolo Tosco, Brian Kelley, Ricardo Rodriguez, David Cosgrove, Riccardo Vianello,
  sriniker, Peter Gedeck, Gareth Jones, NadineSchneider, Eisuke Kawashima, Dan Nealschneider,
  Andrew Dalke, Matt Swain, Brian Cole, Samo Turk, Aleksandr Savelev, Alain Vaucher, Maciej
  Wójcikowski, Ichiru Take, Vincent F. Scalfani, Rachel Walker, Kazuya Ujihara, Daniel Probst,
  tadhurst cdd, guillaume godin, Axel Pahl, Juuso Lehtivarjo, François Bérenger, and strets123.
  rdkit/rdkit: 2024 03 6 (q1 2024) release, August 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.13469390.
Tobias Lang, Florian Flachsenberg, Ulrike von Luxburg, and Matthias Rarey. Feasibility of active
  machine learning for multiclass compound classification. Journal of chemical information and
  modeling, 56(1):12–20, 2016.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Bowen Li and Srinivas Rangarajan. Designing compact training sets for data-driven molecular
  property prediction through optimal exploitation and exploration. Molecular Systems Design &
  Engineering, 4(5):1048–1057, 2019.
Xiongquan Li, Xukang Wang, Xuhesheng Chen, Yao Lu, Hongpeng Fu, and Ying Cheng Wu. Un-
  labeled data selection for active learning in image classification. Scientific Reports, 14(1):424,
  2024.
Michal Lukasik, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Aditya Menon, and Sanjiv Kumar. Does label smoothing
 mitigate label noise? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6448–6458. PMLR,
 2020.
Yunan Luo, Yang Liu, and Jian Peng. Calibrated geometric deep learning improves kinase–drug
  binding predictions. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(12):1390–1401, 2023.
Katerina Margatina, Giorgos Vernikos, Loı̈c Barrault, and Nikolaos Aletras. Active learning by
  acquiring contrastive examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03764, 2021.
Lorenz M Mayr and Dejan Bojanic. Novel trends in high-throughput screening. Current Opin-
  ion in Pharmacology, 9(5):580–588, 2009. ISSN 1471-4892. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
  j.coph.2009.08.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S1471489209001283. Anti-infectives/New technologies.
Thahir P Mohamed, Jaime G Carbonell, and Madhavi K Ganapathiraju. Active learning for human
  protein-protein interaction prediction. BMC bioinformatics, 11:1–9, 2010.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Armaghan W Naik, Joshua D Kangas, Christopher J Langmead, and Robert F Murphy. Efficient
  modeling and active learning discovery of biological responses. PLoS One, 8(12):e83996, 2013.
Emmanuel Noutahi, Cas Wognum, Hadrien Mary, Honoré Hounwanou, Kyle M. Kovary, Desmond
  Gilmour, thibaultvarin r, Jackson Burns, Julien St-Laurent, t, DomInvivo, Saurav Maheshkar, and
  rbyrne momatx. datamol-io/molfeat: 0.9.4, September 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.
  5281/zenodo.8373019.
Mark Plutowski and Halbert White. Selecting concise training sets from clean data. IEEE Transac-
 tions on neural networks, 4(2):305–318, 1993.
Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O. Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O. Anatole von Lilienfeld. Quan-
  tum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific Data, 1(1):140022, Aug
  2014. ISSN 2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2014.22. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  sdata.2014.22.
Daniel Reker. Practical considerations for active machine learning in drug discovery. Drug Discov-
  ery Today: Technologies, 32:73–79, 2019.
Daniel Reker and Gisbert Schneider. Active-learning strategies in computer-assisted drug discovery.
  Drug discovery today, 20(4):458–465, 2015.
Lars Ruddigkeit, Ruud van Deursen, Lorenz C. Blum, and Jean-Louis Reymond. Enumeration
  of 166 billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database gdb-17. Journal of
  Chemical Information and Modeling, 52(11):2864–2875, 2012. doi: 10.1021/ci300415d. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1021/ci300415d. PMID: 23088335.
Kaziwa Saleh, Sándor Szénási, and Zoltán Vámossy. Occlusion handling in generic object detection:
  A review. In 2021 IEEE 19th World Symposium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics
  (SAMI), pp. 000477–000484. IEEE, 2021.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00489, 2017.
Justin S Smith, Ben Nebgen, Nicholas Lubbers, Olexandr Isayev, and Adrian E Roitberg. Less is
  more: Sampling chemical space with active learning. The Journal of chemical physics, 148(24),
  2018.
Hampus Gummesson Svensson, Esben Jannik Bjerrum, Christian Tyrchan, Ola Engkvist, and
  Morteza Haghir Chehreghani. Autonomous drug design with multi-armed bandits. In 2022 IEEE
  International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 5584–5592. IEEE, 2022.
Maciej Sypetkowski, Morteza Rezanejad, Saber Saberian, Oren Kraus, John Urbanik, James Tay-
 lor, Ben Mabey, Mason Victors, Jason Yosinski, Alborz Rezazadeh Sereshkeh, et al. Rxrx1: A
 dataset for evaluating experimental batch correction methods. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4284–4293, 2023.
Maciej Sypetkowski, Frederik Wenkel, Farimah Poursafaei, Nia Dickson, Karush Suri, Philip Frad-
 kin, and Dominique Beaini. On the scalability of gnns for molecular graphs, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11568.
Gary Tom, Stefan P. Schmid, Sterling G. Baird, Yang Cao, Kourosh Darvish, Han Hao, Stanley
  Lo, Sergio Pablo-Garcı́a, Ella M. Rajaonson, Marta Skreta, Naruki Yoshikawa, Samantha Corapi,
  Gun Deniz Akkoc, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Martin Seifrid, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Self-driving
  laboratories for chemistry and materials science. Chemical Reviews, 124(16):9633–9732, 2024.
  doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00055. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.
  4c00055. PMID: 39137296.
Hugo Touvron, Piotr Bojanowski, Mathilde Caron, Matthieu Cord, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Edouard
  Grave, Gautier Izacard, Armand Joulin, Gabriel Synnaeve, Jakob Verbeek, and Hervé Jégou.
  Resmlp: Feedforward networks for image classification with data-efficient training, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.03404.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Manfred K Warmuth, Jun Liao, Gunnar Rätsch, Michael Mathieson, Santosh Putta, and Christian
 Lemmen. Active learning with support vector machines in the drug discovery process. Journal of
 chemical information and computer sciences, 43(2):667–673, 2003.
Mary Jo Wildey, Anders Haunso, Matthew Tudor, Maria Webb, and Jonathan H. Connick. Chap-
 ter five - high-throughput screening. In Robert A. Goodnow (ed.), Platform Technologies in
 Drug Discovery and Validation, volume 50 of Annual Reports in Medicinal Chemistry, pp. 149–
 195. Academic Press, 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.armc.2017.08.004. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0065774317300076.
Dongrui Wu. Pool-based sequential active learning for regression. IEEE Transactions on Neural
  Networks and Learning Systems, 30(5):1348–1359, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2868649.
Zhao Xu, Youzhi Luo, Xuan Zhang, Xinyi Xu, Yaochen Xie, Meng Liu, Kaleb Dickerson, Cheng
  Deng, Maho Nakata, and Shuiwang Ji. Molecule3d: A benchmark for predicting 3d geometries
  from molecular graphs, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.01717.
Kai Yu, Jinbo Bi, and Volker Tresp. Active learning via transductive experimental design. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’06, pp. 1081–1088,
  New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1595933832. doi:
  10.1145/1143844.1143980. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143980.
Xueying Zhan, Huan Liu, Qing Li, and Antoni B Chan. A comparative survey: Benchmarking for
  pool-based active learning. In IJCAI, pp. 4679–4686, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HEORETICAL SUPPLEMENTS
A.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

For completeness, we start by re-stating Lemma 1 in more detail.
We consider a multi-class classification problem, with K := {1, 2, . . . , K} the set of K labels and
p̂(x) := (p̂1 (x), . . . , p̂K (x)) the predicted probabilities for x that y = k for all k ∈ K. We denote
yi the true label for a sample xi , ŷi := arg maxk p̂k (xi ) the predicted class by the model and
v̂i := maxk∈K p̂k (xi ) the predicted probability value for that class. In the context of sequential
                                     t−1
label acquisition, we denote Xinf        := {xi }N
                                                 i=1 the inference set containing N samples at acquisition
                    t−1
step t − 1, and Dinf := {(xi , yi )}N    i=1 the same  set with the associated labels yi . Stepping forward,
at time t, an acquisition batch of Nb samples and their labels Dbt := {(xi , yi )}N     b
                                                                                      i=1 are selected from
                                                  t−1
the inference dataset of the previous step Dinf .
                                                                                     t−1
Following the least-confidence acquisition function, at time-step t, the samples in Dinf are ordered
by confidence where x1 has the predicted class with the lowest confidence and xN has the predicted
class with the highest confidence:
                               v̂1 ≤ v̂2 ≤ · · · ≤ v̂Nb ≤ v̂Nb +1 ≤ · · · ≤ v̂N                            (6)
                               |         {z           } |          {z         }
                                    first Nb samples          last N −Nb samples

and the selected batch consists of the first Nb samples. The remaining inference set is composed of
                                        t        t−1
the remaining N − Nb samples, i.e. Dinf    := Dinf   \ Dbt = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                                         i=Nb +1 .

The practical utility of this ordering depends on the calibration of the model. Calibration reflects
the correctness of the model’s confidence compared to its true performance. A perfectly calibrated
model p̂ would output confidence levels that perfectly match the true probability of correct classifi-
cation. We extend the notation of Guo et al. (2017) to be dataset-specific, and denote PD [Y = Ŷ ]
the probability of p̂ producing the correct class prediction for any sample from a dataset D, which
can equivalently be thought of as p̂’s accuracy on that dataset:
                                 PD [Y = Ŷ ] := E(xi ,yi )∼D [1(yi = ŷi )]                               (7)
Similarly, PD [Y = Ŷ |ṽ] denotes the confidence-conditional accuracy of the model for ṽ, a specific
confidence level3 :
                           PD [Y = Ŷ |ṽ] := E(xi ,yi )∼D [1(yi = ŷi )|v̂i = ṽ]                (8)
Perfect calibration on the inference set would thus imply that for any confidence level ṽ ∈ [0, 1], we
have PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |ṽ] = ṽ. Instead, in Lemma 1, we only assume weak calibration of the model
         inf
on the predicted class, i.e. that the confidence ordering of the model’s top predictions reflects the
                                                                                     t−1
ordering of probabilities of correct classification. Formally, weak calibration on Dinf    implies that
                                                     t−1
for any pair of samples xi and xj in our dataset Dinf , we have:
                         v̂i ≤ v̂j =⇒ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂i ] ≤ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂j ]                          (9)
                                              inf                     inf

We aim to prove that, assuming weak calibration on the inference set, the expected accuracy on the
least-confidence batch is bounded by the expected accuracy over the remaining inference set:
                                      PDbt [Y = Ŷ ] ≤ PDinf
                                                         t [Y = Ŷ ]                                      (10)

Proof. The expected accuracy from Equation 7 can be rewritten in terms of its confidence-
conditional form in Equation 8:
                                                        |D|
                                                 1 X
                                 PD [Y = Ŷ ] =         PD [Y = Ŷ |v̂i ]                                 (11)
                                                |D| i=1
From the weak calibration assumption in Equation 9, it follows that the model’s confidence-
conditional accuracy is a non-decreasing function of its confidence. Combined with the acquisition
   3
     In practice such confidence levels would be binned together such that PD [Y = Ŷ |ṽ] represents the accu-
racy over all samples in D for which the model’s confidence is in [ṽ − ϵ, ṽ + ϵ], see (Guo et al., 2017).


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mechanism of Equation 6, we obtain an ordering of the probability that the model obtains the correct
label along the entire inference set at step t − 1:
PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂1 ] ≤ · · · ≤ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂Nb ] ≤ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂Nb +1 ] ≤ · · · ≤ PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂N ]
| inf                    {z      inf
                                                  } | inf                        {z         inf
                                                                                                            }
                    Nb first terms                                        N −Nb remaining terms
                                                                                                (12)
The empirical average of a set of numbers that are inferior or equal to those of a second set has to
be inferior or equal to the empirical average of the second set:
                        bN                                      N
                   1 X                             1            X
                          PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂i ] ≤                       PDt−1 [Y = Ŷ |v̂i ]            (13)
                   Nb i=1   inf                  N − Nb                   inf
                                                             i=Nb +1

                   t       t−1
By definition of Dinf := Dinf  \ Dbt , the left-hand side from Equation 13 thus captures all the terms
from Dbt and the right-hand side those from Dinf t
                                                   . Rewriting each side using Equation 11, we obtain:

                                     PDbt [Y = Ŷ ] ≤ PDinf
                                                        t [Y = Ŷ ]                                    (14)
This concludes the proof.

A.2    B OUND DERIVATION

Here we derive the bound presented in Equation 5. The Chernoff bound (Chernoff, 1952) for
Bernouilli random variables provides an exponential tail bound for the true mean µ of a sequence
of Bernouilli distributed random variables Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zn . It can be expressed using the Kullback-
Leibler Divergence (KL) for Bernouilli distributions (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020, page 135, Cor-
rollary 10.4):

                        P (µ ≤ a) ≤ exp − n · KL(µ̂||a) ∀ a ∈ [0, µ̂]                                (15)
                                                         µ̂                  1 − µ̂
                            with KL(µ̂||a) := µ̂ log + (1 − µ̂) log                                  (16)
                                                         a                   1−a
It quantifies the probability that the true mean µ is smaller or equal to some bound a given the
observed sample mean µ̂ and sample size n. For us, the value {0, 1} of a variable Zi indicates
whether a particular sample xi was correctly classified i.e. Zi := 1(yi = ŷi ). In the context of
inference set design and following the notation from Section 2, µ̂tb represents the observed accu-
racy on the acquired batch at time-step t, with acquisition batch-size Nb , and µtinf represents the
(unknown) accuracy of the model on the remaining inference set. Note that the Chernoff bound
usually assumes that µ̂tb is an unbiased estimator of µtinf . In our case, µ̂tb is a biased estimator due
to the active selection mechanism of the batch. However, in Lemma 1, we show that this estimator
is actually a conservative estimate of the true accuracy, and thus in turn contributes to making the
bound presented in Equation 15 even more conservative, and preserves its validity.
To establish a confidence level on that bound, we can lower-bound the right-hand side itself to the
desired bound-failure probability δ, which after rearranging yields:
                                                         log( 1δ )
                                          KL(µ̂||a) ≥                                                  (17)
                                                           Nb
At time t, we thus seek the maximum bound value a = αt for µtinf such that the inequality on
Equation 17 holds by finding the value of a that satisfies the following condition:
                                                                   log( 1δ )

                         αt = min a ∈ [0, µ̂tb ] : KL(µ̂||a) ≤                          (18)
                                 a                                   Nb
Since this is a scalar optimization problem from closed-form expressions, computing αt can be done
easily and efficiently using a grid-search. With this choice for a, we obtain the desired probabilistic
bound P (µtinf < αt ) ≤ δ summarized in Equation 5.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Hybrid Screen using Inference Set Design
 1: Input: Acquisition batch-size Nb , threshold γ, margin δ
                                             t=0                           t=0
 2: Initialize Step t=0, observation set Xobs       ← ∅, inference set Xinf    ← Xtarget , predictor p̂.
 3: repeat
 4:     Train the predictor p̂ on (X , Y)tobs (if not empty)
                                                           t
 5:     Obtain the predictions on the inference set P̂inf     ← {p̂(xi ) ∀xi ∈ Xinf }
                                                         t          t

 6:     Run acquisition function to obtain scores Sinf       ← g P̂inf
                                                                  t
 7:     Select a batch of Nb inputs with the highest scores Sinf       to form Xbt
                                                                  t         t−1
 8:     Remove the acquired batch from the inference set Xinf ← Xinf            \ Xbt
 9:     Obtain the true labels Ybt for the acquisition batch
10:     Append the acquired batch to the observation set (X , Y)tobs ← (X , Y)t−1     obs ∪ (X , Y)b
                                                                                                     t

11:     Compute α on (X , Y)tb from Equation 5
12: until
                                       t            t
                                   |Xobs  | + α|Xinf  |                 t
                                                        > γ or Xinf       =∅
                                         |Xtarget |
13: Return hybrid screen readouts: (X , Y)t=τ           t=τ
                                          obs ∪ (X , Ŷ)inf


C     A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON DATASETS AND PREPROCESSING

C.1    M OLECULAR DATASET PREPROCESSING

In many practical applications, exact geometries of screened molecules are unknown as they require
computationally expensive DFT calculations. As a first data processing step, we use the RDKit
(Landrum et al., 2024) and Molfeat (Noutahi et al., 2023) libraries to convert molecular structures
into SMILES strings and compute their Extended Connectivity Fingerprints (ECFPs). Both molec-
ular datasets are cleaned by removing duplicated SMILES and fingerprints as well as single-atom
structures. For total energies in the Molecules3D dataset we use a reference correction technique
where atomic energies are calculated using a linear model fitted to the counts of atoms of each
type present in a molecule (the obtained atomic energies are presented in Table 1). For reference
correction, a randomly selected sample of 100k molecules is used. The atomic energies are then
subtracted from the total energies of all molecules in the dataset. The obtained referenced-corrected
energies are normally distributed with mean around 0 eV. A small number of outliers with reference-
corrected energy values above 10 standard deviations are removed from the dataset as well as the
100k samples that were used for reference correction to avoid data leakage.
The final QM9 and Molecule3D datasets contain 133, 885 and 3, 453, 538 molecules respectively.
Both datasets are split into inference, validation, and test sets with 80%, 5%, 15% fractions. The
QM9 HOMO-LUMO gap values are discretized into 2 balanced classes using median as a boundary
condition to explore agents’ performance on a classification task.

                  Atomic Number        Energy (eV)      Atomic Number         Energy (eV)
                        1                 -26.765            14                -7922.180
                        5                -673.550            15                -9313.610
                        6               -1054.411            16               -10810.329
                        7               -1483.001            17               -12474.680
                        8               -2034.056            32               -56538.647
                        9               -2687.455            33               -60828.588
                       12               -5367.759            34               -65296.349
                       13               -6657.476            35               -69980.303

          Table 1: Atomic energies used for reference correction on Molecules3D dataset.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2    R X R X 3 DATASET PREPROCESSING

The RxRx3 dataset contains one embedding for each well. Each perturbation type (gene-guide
pair or compound-concentration pair) has several replicates across wells, plates and experiments.
Each plate also contains unperturbed control cells which are used to keep track of and eliminate
a portion of the batch effects (Sypetkowski et al., 2023). These raw embeddings thus need to be
aligned and aggregated. We align them by centering and scaling each perturbation embedding to
the embeddings of the experiment-level unperturbed control wells. The embeddings are then aggre-
gated through a multi-stage averaging procedure, across wells, plates, experiments and guides (for
CRISPR perturbations), which yields an average embedding for each gene-perturbation and each
compound-concentration perturbation. We then use the obtained embeddings to compute the cosine
similarities between gene and compound perturbations in the RxRx3 dataset.

D     H YPERPARAMETERS AND I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
For all experiments presented in this work we use MLP models with residual connections (Touvron
et al., 2021). All experiments were repeated with 3 different random seeds and the hyperparameters
are summarized in Table 2.

    Hyperparemeter name                MNIST     QM9      Molecules3D     RxRx3     Proprietary
                                                                                    data
    Acquisition batch size             1,000     250      10,000          10        1000
    Number of hidden layers            2         3        2               2         2
    Hidden layer size                  512       512      512             512       1024
    Learning rate                      0.001     0.001    0.001           0.001     0.001
    gradient norm clip                 1.0       1.0      1.0             1.0       1.0
    Dropout                            0.1       0.1      0.1             0.1       0.1
    Train epochs                       1,000     1,000    30              30        1000
    Train batch size                   1,024     1,024    32,768          1,024     1,024
    Early stop patience                50        50       15              25        25
    Number of ensemble members         -         -        5               -         -

                              Table 2: Hyperparameters for experiments.


                                                 18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 E                  A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

 E.1                 R EGRESSION TASK ON M OLECULES 3D

 To evaluate the inference set design paradigm on a regression task we use the Molecules3D dataset
 (Xu et al., 2021). Molecules3D contains structures and DFT-computed properties of nearly 4 million
 molecules. In our experiments we aim to predict the HOMO-LUMO gap and total energy. For
 inputs, we convert the SMILES strings molecular representations into their Extended Connectivity
 Fingerprints (ECFPs) (see Appendix C.1 for all details).
 For this regression task, we use a query-by-committee (QBC) active learning approach that computes
 variance across the predictions of an ensemble. To determine the stopping time we use a criterion
 with two parameters: MSE threshold tM SE on the acquired batch and patience p. The stopping
 time is reached if the acquired batch MSE is lower than tM SE for p steps. Like for our QM9
 experiments, in addition to active and random agents, we also evaluate the performance of heuristic-
 based acquisition orderings (molecules ordered by size, sorted by SA-score, etc.). QBC achieves
 an approximately five times lower MSE compared to the random agent or heuristic-based orderings
 (see Figure 9). This shows that inference set design approach is not limited to classification tasks
 and can be applied to regression problems.


               System Performance                             Inference set                        Acquired batch                         Test set
             101                                                                                                                                                QBC
             100
                                                  101                                  101                                  101                                 Savings: 21.3%
                                                                                                                                                                Random agent
MSE, eV 2


            10 1                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                Savings: 0.0%
                                                                                       100
            10 2                                                                                                                                                SA-score agent
                                                                                                                            100                                 Ordered
            10 3                                 10 1                                 10 1                                                                      Small to large
            10 4                                                                                                                                                Ordered
            10 5                                 10 2                                 10 2                                 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                Large to small
                    0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%            0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%            0%    20% 40% 60% 80% 100%           0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
                   Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %
               System Performance
             104
                                                              Inference set                        Acquired batch                         Test set
                                                                                       104
                                                                                                                                                                QBC
             103                                                                                                                                                Savings: 20.2%
             102                                  103                                                                                                           Random agent
MSE, eV 2


                                                                                       103                                                                      Savings: 0.0%
                                                                                                                            103
             101                                                                                                                                                SA-score agent
             100                                  102                                  102                                                                      Ordered
                                                                                                                                                                Small to large
            10 1                                                                                                                                                Ordered
            10 2                                  101                                  101                                  102                                 Large to small
                    0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%            0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%            0%    20% 40% 60% 80% 100%           0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
                   Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %          Percent of data acquired, %



 Figure 9: Performance of QBC, random, and heuristic agents for HOMO-LUMO gap prediction
 (top) and energy prediction (bottom) on Molecules3D dataset. The dashed vertical shows average
 stopping time across random seeds, surrounded by mix to max intervals (left to right). The patience
 parameter p = 10 was used in all experiments with the threshold MSE tM SE = 0.1eV 2 for HOMO-
 LUMO gap and tM SE = 100eV 2 for Energy predictions. QBC agent satisfied stopping condition
 after acquiring ≈ 80% of the data.


 Although, in many applications predicting properties of larger molecules presents a more challeng-
 ing task, our experiments on the Molecules3D dataset demonstrate that acquiring molecules ordered
 from large to small may harm the predictions on inference set and overall system performance (see
 Figure 9). One of the reasons is the distribution of chemical elements across molecules in the dataset.
 When acquiring molecules from small to large, all unique chemical elements of the Molecules3D
 dataset are present in the training set after acquiring just the first 1,000 samples. However, when
 acquiring molecules from large to small, some chemical elements remain only in the inference set
 until the very end of the experiment which is especially detrimental to the total energy predictions
 (see Figure 10). This result demonstrates that using heuristic rules such as ordering molecules by
 size for data acquisition does not guarantee optimal acquisition or generalization of heuristic rules
 to new data and instead risks harming the performance due to the introduction of such biases.


                                                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          N unique chemical elements acquired
                                                                16
                                                                14
                                                                12
                                                                10
                                                                 8
                                                                 6
                                                                 4                                                              Molecules ordered small to large
                                                                 2                                                              Molecules ordered large to small
                                                                       100           101              102     103      104                                 105          106
                                                                                                        N molecules acquired

Figure 10: Number of unique chemical elements in the training set when acquiring samples ordered
by molecule size. Acquiring molecules from large to small leaves several chemical elements out of
the training set until the end of the dataset.



E.2   C LASSIFICATION TASK ON R X R X 3

Our results on the RxRx3 dataset demonstrate minor improvements from the active agents (LC
and BALD) compared to random selection. The accuracy on the inference and test sets remains low
throughout the experiment regardless of the acquisition method. This is unsurprising considering the
extreme difficulty of predicting biological relationships in a low data regime. The result suggests
that in the setting with low predictive power, even when the majority of the data is acquired, the
ability of inference set design to provide significant budget reductions is limited.



                                                           System Performance                                                                             Inference set
                    100                                                                                                              100        LC agent             SA-score agent
                                                                                                                                                BALD agent           Diversity agent
                    90                                                                                                               90         Random agent
      Accuracy, %


                                                                                                                       Accuracy, %


                    80                                                                                                               80
                    70                                                                                                               70
                    60                                                                                                               60
                                                                         LC agent                    SA-score agent
                    50                                                   BALD agent                  Diversity agent                 50
                                                                         Random agent
                    40                                                                                                               40
                          0%                                     20%         40%       60%           80%        100%                       0%       20%        40%       60%           80%   100%
                                                                Percent of data acquired, %                                                       Percent of data acquired, %
                                                                     Acquired batch                                                                            Test set
                    100                            LC agent                        SA-score agent                                    100        LC agent             SA-score agent
                                                   BALD agent                      Diversity agent                                              BALD agent           Diversity agent
                    90                             Random agent                                                                      90         Random agent
      Accuracy, %


                                                                                                                       Accuracy, %


                    80                                                                                                               80
                    70                                                                                                               70
                    60                                                                                                               60
                    50                                                                                                               50
                    40                                                                                                               40
                          0%                                     20%         40%       60%           80%        100%                       0%       20%        40%       60%           80%   100%
                                                                Percent of data acquired, %                                                       Percent of data acquired, %

          Figure 11: Performance of agents on pheno-similarity classification task on RxRx3.


                                                                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     A DDITIONAL ANALYSIS
F.1   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF WEAK CALIBRATION ASSUMPTION

In Lemma 1, we show that when using a least-confidence acquisition function, at any time-step t,
the measured accuracy µ̂tb on the acquisition batch is a lower-bound on the unobserved accuracy on
the remaining inference set µ̂tinf , assuming that the model p̂ is weakly calibrated in the inference set.
A weakly calibrated model is such that an increased confidence translates to a higher likelihood of
correct prediction (higher accuracy). In Figure 12, we can see that at several points throughout the
active learning loop, the least-confidence based agent is not perfectly calibrated. Indeed, there is a
substantial gap between its confidence levels and the true accuracy (seen when comparing the col-
ored bars to the identity function shown in gray). However, the model is generally weakly calibrated
(the colored bars are always increasing). These observations support the empirical validity of our
assumption for Lemma 1.


Figure 12: Model calibration analysis for a run of the least confidence agent at different active
learning steps (columns) for all of our classification experiments (rows). The colored bars represent
the accuracy of predictions binned w.r.t their confidence level, and the gray bars show the identity
function illustrating what perfect calibration would look like. The models satisfy the condition of
being weakly calibrated since the accuracy of the model’s predictions increases monotonically with
their confidence. The confidence distribution shifting to the right as t increases indicates the growing
confidence of the model in correctly predicting the labels of the remaining examples in the inference
set.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION OF STOPPING CRITERION

In Section 2.2, we present a stopping criterion based on the fact that the accuracy measured on the
acquisition batch can be used as a proxy for the accuracy on the remaining, non-acquired samples
(inference set). The criterion is simple, once the estimated system accuracy µ̂tsys at time t (see
Equation 4) is above a user-defined targeted threshold γ, the acquisition is stopped. This criterion
makes use of the bound of Equation 5, and both a random sampler and a least-confidence based
agent can use this bound in a principled way. The random agent can validly use it because the
accuracy of its acquisition batches, uniformly drawn from the inference set, are unbiased estimates
of the true accuracy on the entire inference set, which is typically required for such bounds. The
least-confidence agent can use it validly because we show in Lemma 1 that, assuming that the model
is weakly calibrated (which we empirically validate in Appendix F.1), because of its confidence-
based acquisition function, the accuracy of its acquisition batches represent a lower-bound on the
true inference set accuracy, making the bound of Equation 5 even more conservative.
To empirically validate this bound (Equation 5), we run a large number of trials for both the least-
confidence (LC) and random agents across the classification datasets used in the experiments section.
The results show that for the LC agent, all trials ended at a stopping time t = τ at which the true
system accuracy µtsys was above the threshold γ, which is in accordance with the fact that the LC
agent uses a lower-bound estimate in place of an unbiased estimate for the inference set accuracy,
resulting in a looser bound for Equation 5 and an actual failure-probability lower than δ. For the
random agent, we observed 1% of the trials end with a system accuracy below the threshold in
one of the experiments, 6% in another, and 0% on the three remaining datasets. These results
are in accordance with the theory presented in Section 2.2 and Appendix A.2. On QM9, 6 out of
100 experiments resulting in slight bound failure is statistically in accordance with the theoretical
bound failure probability of δ = 5%. For the other datasets, the bound was looser, which is also a
possibility, and showcases that the observed gap between δ and the true bound-failure probability
can be problem-dependent.


Figure 13: System accuracy at stopping time observed across 100 seeds for the MNIST, Cropped
MNIST, Shuffled MNIST and QM9 experiments, and 50 seeds for the Phenomics experiments. In
all experiments, we use a bound-failure probability of δ = 0.05. For the LC agent, all trials lead to
a stopping time t = τ at which the true system accuracy µt=τ
                                                           sys higher than the threshold γ. For the
Random Agent, we observed the same thing for Cropped MNIST, Shuffled MNIST and Phenomics.
We also observed 1% of bound failure for (regular) MNIST, and 6% for QM9.


                                                 22
