Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RNN S ARE NOT T RANSFORMERS (Y ET ):
T HE K EY B OTTLENECK ON I N -C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL
  Kaiyue Wen1∗ Xingyu Dang2∗ Kaifeng Lyu3†‡
 1
   Stanford University 2 Tsinghua University
 3
   University of California, Berkeley
 kaiyuew@stanford.edu dangxy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 kaifenglyu@berkeley.edu



                                               A BSTRACT
           This paper investigates the gap in representation powers of Transformers and Recur-
           rent Neural Networks (RNNs), which are more memory efficient than Transformers.
           We aim to understand whether RNNs can match the performance of Transform-
           ers, particularly when enhanced with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting. Our
           theoretical analysis reveals that CoT improves RNNs but is insufficient to close
           the gap with Transformers. A key bottleneck lies in the inability of RNNs to
           perfectly retrieve information from the context, even with CoT: for several tasks
           that explicitly or implicitly require this capability, such as associative recall and
           determining if a graph is a tree, we prove that RNNs are not expressive enough to
           solve the tasks while Transformers can solve them with ease. Conversely, we prove
           that adopting techniques to enhance the in-context retrieval capability of RNNs,
           including Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and adding a single Transformer
           layer, can elevate RNNs to be capable of solving all polynomial-time solvable
           problems with CoT, hence closing the representation gap with Transformers. We
           validate our theory on synthetic and natural language experiments.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the dominant choice of the backbone for Large
Language Models (LLMs). The core component of Transformers is self-attention modules, which
allow the model to route information densely across the entire sequence. However, this design leads
to high inference costs for long sequences, including a memory cost linear in the sequence length
to maintain intermediate attention keys and values for each token, and a time cost quadratic in the
sequence length to compute the attention score for each pair of tokens.
Recently, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have become an increasingly popular choice in
sequence modeling tasks due to their ability to maintain a memory size constant in sequence length
during inference, thus being more memory efficient than Transformers. Katharopoulos et al. (2020)
showed that Linear Transformers (Transformers with linear attention) can be expressed as RNNs.
Gu et al. (2022) took a different path to design RNNs by structuring latent states as State Space
Models (SSMs) from control theory. These ideas have led to a series of development of modern
RNNs, including RWKV (Peng et al., 2023), RetNet (Sun et al., 2023), and Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023). Most notably, Mamba can achieve competitive performance with Transformers on several
sequence modeling tasks with linear time and constant memory in sequence length.
Can RNNs replace Transformers yet? The rise of these modern RNNs has led to an interest in
understanding their limitations. A recent work by Arora et al. (2023) showed that a broad family
of RNNs, input-independent gating SSMs, are empirically inferior to Transformers in a task that
has a long history in artificial intelligence, Associative Recall (AR) (Willshaw et al., 1969; Hopfield,
1982; Hinton & Anderson, 2014): Given a series of key-value pairs as a string, the model is required
to recall the value given a key. On the theory side, Sanford et al. (2023) and Jelassi et al. (2024)
demonstrated that constant-memory RNNs do not have sufficient representation power to solve
     ∗
       Equal contribution
     †
       Corresponding author
     ‡
       The work was done while Kaiyue was at Tsinghua University and Kaifeng was at Princeton University.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Transformer + CoT ⊃ P                          RNN + In-Context RAG ⊃ P

                                                                       RNN + CoT ̸⊃ P

            Vanilla Transformer
                                                                Vanilla RNN


                   Transformer                                    RNN (This work)
Figure 1: Hierarchy of Representation Power. While RNN with chain-of-thought (CoT) with
O(log n) bit memory provably has strictly stronger representation power than RNN without CoT
under mild complexity assumptions (Theorem 4.1), it is still exponentially weaker than Transformer
with CoT in representing solutions to algorithmic problems (Theorem 4.7). We proceed to show that
the incapability of RNNs in In-Context Retrieval is the root cause of the gap and propose two forms
of In-Context Retrieval Augmented Generation (In-Context RAG) to close the gap by illustrating
their power to simulate any polynomial-time Turing machines (Theorems 5.2 and 5.4).

the tasks of averaging a given subset of input vectors (q-sparse averaging) and repeating the input
sequence (copying), respectively, while there exist shallow Transformers that can solve these tasks.
However, the above results do not exclude the possibility that enhancing RNNs with additional
prompting techniques or minor architectural changes could close the gap with Transformers. In fact,
Transformers themselves are not perfect either and sometimes need additional techniques at inference
time to perform well. For instance, Transformers may struggle with mathematical and algorithmic
reasoning problems if they are forced to produce the correct answer immediately after processing the
input sequence. But with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting applied, a prompting technique that
guides the model to generate a series of intermediate tokens before arriving at the final answer, their
performance can be significantly improved. Feng et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024) explained the success
of CoT from the perspective of representation power: Transformers alone do not have sufficient
representation power to solve problems beyond a certain circuit complexity class (TC0 ), but with
CoT, they can even simulate any polynomial-time Turing machine.
The effectiveness of CoT on Transformers naturally leads to the following question:

Can similar enhancements, such as adopting CoT, improve RNNs to be on par with Transformers?

Our Contributions. This paper examines potential ways to close the gap in the representation powers
of RNNs and Transformers (with softmax attention) on algorithmic problems. Through a series of
lower and upper bound results, we show that CoT improves the representation power of RNNs, but to
close the gap with Transformers, CoT alone is not enough to overcome a key bottleneck of RNNs:
their inability to retrieve information from the context, which we call in-context retrieval for short.
We further illustrate that addressing this in-context retrieval bottleneck is sufficient to close this
gap: RNNs can solve all polynomial-time solvable problems if adopting techniques to enhance the
in-context retrieval capability, including involving Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and using
hybrid architectures, such as appending a single Transformer layer.
Our main contributions are listed as follows:
1. CoT improves RNNs but cannot close the representation gap with Transformers. (Section 4)
   • On the positive side, we prove that CoT makes RNNs strictly more expressive under mild
     assumptions from circuit complexity (PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly).
   • On the negative side, we show that adopting CoT is not enough to close the representation gap
     between RNNs and Transformers: the memory efficiency of RNNs fundamentally limits their
     ability to perform in-context retrieval, even with CoT. This point is made concrete by proving
     that RNNs with CoT cannot solve a set of fundamental algorithmic problems that directly ask
     for in-context retrieval, including associative recall.
   • We further exemplify that in-context retrieval can be implicitly required in tasks that appear
     unrelated, by proving the inability of RNNs to solve the classic problem of determining whether
     a graph is a tree (IsTree).


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: We train RNNs (Mamba) and Transformers (LLaMA 2 Touvron et al. (2023)) with a frozen
word embedding and decoding head of three different model sizes (0.5M, 1M, 2M) on IsTree with
three different sizes of graph (16, 32, 64) under three different setups. Vanilla means the model
directly predicts the label. COT means the model will generate a chain-of-thought process based on
DFS (see Algorithm 1) before prediction. Retrieval means the model will generate the chain of search
queries and reasoning before prediction (see Algorithm 2). We observe that (1) Both Transformer
and RNNs can’t solve the IsTree question without a chain of thought; (2) RNNs’ performance with
chain-of-thought decays quickly when the number of nodes increase, which is consistent with our
theory; (3) All models reach almost perfect accuracy when enhanced with retrieval.

    Our negative results hold for a wide range of RNN architectures, including the aforementioned
    Mamba, RWKV, and even Linear Transformers. Technically, this is because RNNs are so memory
    efficient that they can trigger streaming lower bounds (Sanford et al., 2023), especially for
    problems that require in-context retrieval.
2. Enhancing the in-context retrieval capability of RNNs can close the gap. (Section 5)
    • We prove that allowing RNNs to invoke function calls to perform a primitive of in-context
      retrieval based on regular expression is sufficient to boost their representation power to solve all
      polynomial-time solvable problems with CoT, hence closing the representation gap.
    • As one layer of the Transformer is sufficient to perform many in-context retrieval operations,
      mixing some Transformer layers in RNNs should also narrow the representation gap. We prove
      that a minimal possible change in the RNN architecture can just work: adding one Transformer
      layer at the end of the RNN architecture is sufficient to close the representation gap.
    Our positive results showing that enhancing in-context retrieval can improve RNNs’ representation
    power hold for vanilla Linear RNNs, and can be easily extended to more complex architectures.
    The intuition behind these results is that RNN can focus on the local reasoning steps and use the
    in-context retrieval module to adaptively fetch the relevant information from the context.

We validate our theoretical findings through synthetic and natural language experiments on IsTree
and HotPot-QA, confirming that while CoT alone cannot close the performance gap between RNNs
and Transformers, the proposed two solutions effectively narrow this gap. (Section 6)
Implications. We believe these results could provide valuable insights into architecture designs of
LLMs: RNNs alone can suffer from many fundamental limitations in representation power, even
with CoT; on the other hand, it is promising to explore strategies to enhance the in-context retrieval
capability of RNNs with little overhead, such as using a hybrid architecture that mixes in one or more
Transformer layers (Ren et al., 2024; Waleffe et al., 2024; Lieber et al., 2024b).

2    R ELATED W ORKS
State Space Machines and Linear Transformers. There has been a recent surge of interest in
state space machines and (kernalized) linear transformers (Gu et al., 2022; Katharopoulos et al.,
2020; Peng et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2023; Fu et al., 2023; Poli et al., 2023; Luo
et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020), which are a class of models that combine the
parallelizability of the Transformer with the memory efficiency of the RNN. These models can
process both a sequential and a recurrent form, and can use the former for fast parallelizable training


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the latter for memory-efficient inference. However, these models are still empirically inferior
to the Transformer in terms of performance. Our work investigates the reasons behind this gap and
proposes to close it by enhancing the in-context retrieval capability.
Chain of Thought (CoT). Chain of thought (Wei et al., 2023; Nye et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2023;
Wang & Zhou, 2024) is an augmentation to the Transformer, that allows it to solve more complex
reasoning tasks by generating a reasoning process before outputting the answer. It has been shown
that Transformers with CoT provably have more expressive power than the original Transformer
without CoT (Feng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). However, the expressive power of RNNs with CoT
has not yet been systematically studied. Theorem F.1 in Feng et al. (2023) shows that RNN cannot
output a particular format of CoT for evaluating arithmetic expressions and solving linear equations
while Transformers with the same amount of parameters can. Concurrent work (Yang et al., 2024)
discovers that linear Transformers, a special class of RNNs, are not able to solve some dynamic
programming problems with CoT, unless the number of parameters grows with the length of the input.
One high-level message our work conveys is similar to theirs: RNNs have limited representation
power to perform reasoning with CoT. However, we show that such limitation is not specific to the
output format or architecture and apply tools from streaming complexity to prove lower bounds on a
broader range of tasks and memory-efficient architectures.
Streaming Algorithms. Our lower bound leverages the technique in streaming algorithms. Streaming
algorithms are algorithms that take constant (typically just 1) pass over the input and use sublinear
space, hence including RNNs with fixed state space as a special case. Works in streaming algorithms
date back to the 1980s (Munro & Paterson, 1980) and have been formalized and popularized in the
1990s (Alon et al., 1996) due to the need to process large data streams. The study of streaming
algorithm is closely connected with the concept of communication complexity. The communication
complexity of an algorithm is defined by the amount of communication cost required when the
algorithm is distributed, and all streaming algorithms can be viewed as distributed algorithms with
sublinear communication complexity, whose communication content is the internal state of the
algorithm. The lower bound in our work is a direct application of this observation to the study of
RNNs and we mainly consider the lower bounds for (1) indexing the input (Munro & Paterson, 1980)
and (2) determining whether the input is a tree (Henzinger et al., 1998).
We will defer other related works to Appendix A.

3    P RELIMINARIES
We briefly introduce the definitions that are necessary for understanding our results and defer detailed
definitions to Appendix B.
Vocabulary and Embeddings. Let n be a parameter so that the input length can be bounded by
Θ(n). We assume a finite vocabulary V that includes natural numbers from 1 to n and a constant
number of special tokens. For our theoretical analysis, we fix word and position embeddings and
only consider the representation power of the model when the non-embedding parameters can change.
See Appendix B.3 for the formal definitions. Note that in the common practice, the vocabulary size
does not increase with n and numbers may be tokenized into a few tokens according to their decimal
representations. Nevertheless, our lower bounds can be easily extended to this more practical case,
since these results do not rely on the specific form of the vocabulary and embeddings. For upper
bounds, our embedding scheme should be easily implemented from other embedding schemes with a
few RNN or Transformer layers.
Language Models. We denote the set of all finite sequences and all non-empty finite sequences
of tokens in V as V ∗ and V + . A language model (LM) is a function M : V + → PV that maps a
non-empty sequence to a probability distribution over the next token, where PV is the probability
simplex over V . We focus on LMs realized by deep neural networks: mapping an input sequence S
to a sequence of embeddings Emb(S), then applying a neural network (e.g., Transformer or RNN) to
process the embeddings and output the probability distribution.
Numerical Precision. We consider models with fixed numerical precision. We use p to denote the
precision of the number of bits to represent real numbers and use Rp to denote the set of all real
numbers that can be represented by p-bit floating point numbers. We defer the details to Appendix B.2.
We assume p = O(log n), which is a common assumption when studying the finite precision neural
networks (Feng et al., 2023; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Transformers. We study Transformers with a standard decoder architecture containing softmax
attention and gated feedforward layers. See Appendix B.3 for definitions. We focus on constant-size
Transformers, where the depth, width and number of parameters are fixed and do not depend on n.
RNNs. Recently there has been a lot of interest in the linear-time Transformer, which replaces the
full-attention calculation with linear-time alternatives. These variants are mostly special forms of
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that are parallelizable. Here we define a general form of RNNs
containing all the common variants to the best of our knowledge, including Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023), RWKV (Peng et al., 2023), RetNet (Sun et al., 2023), StreamingLLM (Xiao et al., 2023),
RMT (Bulatov et al., 2022), TOVA (Oren et al., 2024), xLSTM (Beck et al., 2024) etc. An RNN
maintains a state st ∈ RΛ p storing Λ p-bit floating point numbers. At each step, the RNN generates
the next state st+1 based on the current state st and token St , and then it makes a prediction based on
the updated state st+1 . We characterize the complexity of an RNN with the following three measures:
(1) the parameter size P in bits, which is the total number of bits in parameters; (2) the memory size
M = Λp in bits, which is the total number of bits in each state; (3) the circuit size C, which is the
number of bit-wise operations needed to compute one step of the RNN. A particularly interesting class
of RNNs is constant-size RNNs, where the dimension of state and number of parameters are fixed and
do not depend on n, i.e., Λ = O(1), p = O(log n), P = O(log n), M = O(log n), C = O(log n).
We do not assume a specific structure of the RNN when we want to prove impossibility results for
RNNs, i.e., what RNNs cannot represent. But when we want to showcase what RNNs can represent,
we focus on Linear RNNs, one of the simplest form of RNNs, so that our results are more likely to be
generalizable to more complex RNNs. See Appendix B.3 for the definitions of all the above models.
Algorithmic Problems. An algorithmic problem is a problem that may be solved by an algorithm. In
this paper, we focus on algorithmic problems f : V + → VA that asks for computing f (Sin ) given a
sequence of tokens Sin as the input, where VA is the set of possible answers. We say that an LM M can
(directly) solve an algorithmic task f if, given the sequence Sin , the probability distribution M (Sin )
for the next token is peaked at the correct output token f (Sin ), i.e., arg maxj∈V M (Sin )[j] = f (Sin ).
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning allows the LM to produce
intermediate steps before the final output. Following Feng et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024), our paper
studies the effectiveness of CoT reasoning in improving the expressiveness of LMs, and we allow
the intermediate steps to be an arbitrary sequence of tokens. We say that an LM M can solve an
algorithmic problem f with CoT if the following process terminates with a sequence ended with
f (Sin ). First, let S0 = Sin . For all i ≥ 0, decode the next token snext
                                                                       i    = arg maxj∈V M (Si )[j]
from M , and append it to the current sequence Si+1 = Si ⊕ snexti   . If snext
                                                                          i    ∈ VA , then the process
terminates with Si+1 with i steps of CoT; otherwise the process continues. It is evident that if an LM
can solve an algorithm problem with 0 steps of CoT, then an LM M can (directly) solve the problem.
In this case, we also say that the LM can solve the problem without CoT.

4     H OW W ELL D OES C OT I MPROVE THE R EPRESENTATION P OWER OF RNN S ?
In this section, we aim to understand how well CoT improves the representation power of RNNs and
how it compares with Transformers.
4.1   C OT S TRICTLY I MPROVES RNN S

First, we show a positive result that RNNs with CoT can solve tasks that RNNs without CoT cannot
solve. This relies on a mild complexity assumption PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly, i.e., not all polynomial
space complexity problems can be solved by a polynomial-size circuit family. This has been widely
believed to be true since PSPACE ⊂ P/poly would imply severe complexity consequences (Karp &
Lipton, 1980; Babai et al., 1991).
Theorem 4.1. Assuming PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly, there exists an algorithmic problem such that (1)
there exist constant-size Linear RNNs that can solve the problem with polynomial length CoT; and
(2) any constant-size regular RNNs cannot solve the problem without CoT.

See Appendix E.5 for the proof. The key insight is that the representation power of RNNs without
CoT is limited to shallow circuits of size poly(log n), but RNNs with CoT can simulate O(log n)-
space Turing machines perfectly with poly(n) steps. This result is consistent with previous works on
the benefit of CoT for Transformers (Feng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), which also prove based on
mild complexity assumptions that Transformers with CoT have the representation power to simulate


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


polynomial-size circuits to solve all the problems in P but Transformers without CoT cannot. Here
we rigorously prove that a similar benefit of CoT also applies to RNNs, but a key difference is that
CoT cannot boost the representation power of RNNs to simulate every polynomial-size circuit family.

4.2     C OT C ANNOT C LOSE THE R EPRESENTATION G AP WITH T RANSFORMERS

Now we proceed to understand whether CoT can make RNNs as expressive as Transformers. The
answer turns out to be negative: RNNs, even with CoT, struggle to solve very simple algorithmic
problems that require the capability of retrieving information from the current context, which we call
In-Context Retrieval for short. This limitation is directly related to the memory efficiency of RNNs.
For a model with at most o(n) bits in memory, we can involve techniques from streaming complexity
to prove impossibility results for problems requiring In-Context Retrieval.

4.2.1    S IMPLE P ROBLEMS ON I N -C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL
Here we list several simple algorithmic problems that directly test the in-context retrieval capability of
the model, which turn out to be a good test-bed for understanding the limitations of RNNs compared
to Transformers. We defer discussion on the history of these problems to Appendix C.
Definition 4.2 (Index). Index is a problem that given a sequence of tokens with length n and a query
token i ∈ [n], requires the model to output the type of the i-th token.
Definition 4.3 (Associative Recall). Associative Recall (AR) is a problem that given a sequence of
tokens with length n consisting of tokens in [n] and a query token q ∈ [n], requires the model to
output the next token of q in the sequence.
Definition 4.4 (c-gram Retrieval). An c-gram is a contiguous subsequence of c tokens in a sequence
of tokens. c-gram retrieval is a problem that given a sequence of tokens with length n and a query
(c − 1)-gram that is the prefix of a c-gram in the sequence, requires the model to output the last token
of that c-gram.
Definition 4.5 (Counting). Counting is a problem that given a sequence of tokens with length n,
a query token q ∈ [n], and a query number t ∈ N, requires the model to output 0 or 1 to indicate
whether the number of occurrences of q in the sequence is greater than t.

The following theorems show that constant-size RNNs cannot solve any of the four tasks when the
context length is long, while constant-size Transformers can solve them perfectly.
Theorem 4.6. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting}, there exist constant-size Trans-
formers that can solve T . On the other hand, any RNN with o(n)-bit memory cannot solve T of size
n with any length of CoT for large enough n.

See Appendix E.4 for the proof. The key idea of the lower bound is to view RNNs in the framework
of communication complexity and use information-theoretic arguments to prove a lower bound. The
computation of RNNs can be distributed to two parties: party A simulates the RNN on the first part
of the input and sends the state to party B, then party B receives the state and simulates the RNN
on the second part of the input (the query string) until it finishes producing the output. Therefore,
if the RNN can solve the problem with o(n)-bit memory, then the input can be compressed to o(n)
bits while maintaining all the necessary information to answer all possible queries, which contradicts
certain information-theoretic lower bounds.
We note that Theorem 4.6 does not imply that RNNs are incapable of in-context retrieval at all.
Instead, it states that the maximal context length that RNNs can effectively retrieve from is linear
in its state size. Although for a short context window, RNNs can be trained to perform in-context
retrieval (see e.g. Arora et al. (2023); Gu & Dao (2023)), this limitation in retrieval capabilities
has been empirically observed: for example in Waleffe et al. (2024), both pretrained Mamba and
Mamba-2 7B models are shown to have significantly worse Phonebook-retrieval capabilities on 1K
context length than Transformers with the same size and trained on the same data.

4.2.2    L IMITATIONS OF RNN S B EYOND S IMPLE I N -C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL P ROBLEMS
A natural question would be if an algorithmic problem does not directly test the in-context retrieval
capability, can we hope that RNNs would have the representation power to solve it? Do RNNs and
Transformers have the same representation power in this case? Still, the answer is negative. We show


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that the limited memory size in RNNs can still be a bottleneck in solving algorithmic problems. Even
if the retrieval capability is not explicitly tested in an algorithmic problem, it may still be required
implicitly for reasoning about the answer.
We demonstrate this gap on a simple algorithmic problem that is seemingly irrelevant to retrieval:
the IsTree problem. Given an undirected graph G of n nodes, determine whether G is a tree, i.e.,
whether every pair of nodes is connected by exactly one simple path. We convert the graph G into a
token sequence, where we input the graph edge by edge. Figure 6 shows an example of the IsTree
problem. A classical solution to IsTree is running Depth First Search (DFS), which takes O(n) time.
See Appendix B for more details.
Our result below shows that constant-size RNNs cannot solve IsTree, even with CoT. But constant-
size Transformers can perform CoT reasoning by simulating DFS and perfectly solve the problem.
Theorem 4.7. There exist constant-size Transformers that can solve IsTree with CoT of length O(n).
On the other hand, any RNN with o(n)-bit memory cannot solve IsTree with any length of CoT.
See Appendix E.6 for the proof. The key idea of the lower bound is to again utilize information-
theoretic lower bounds. This idea lies in the core of streaming complexity literature and investigation
on the IsTree problem, dating back to Henzinger et al. (1998). We hereby restate the proof for
completeness.
Given any binary sequence x of length n − 2 and an index k ∈ [n − 3], we construct a graph as
follows: the graph has n nodes, and vertex a is connected to vertex xa + n − 1 for any a ∈ [n − 2].
Additionally, vertex k is connected to vertex k + 1. The graph is a tree if and only if xk ̸= xk+1 .
Assuming there is an RNN with o(n)-bit memory that can solve IsTree, consider two parties, A and
B, each holding the sequence x and the index k. They can construct two parts of the graph using
their information: A simulates the RNN on the first part and sends the state to B, who then simulates
the RNN (potentially with CoT) on the second part to determine the output of the IsTree problem,
equivalent to checking whether xk ̸= xk+1 . However, since k is never sent to A, B can determine
whether xk ̸= xk+1 for any k ∈ [n − 3], contradicting certain information-theoretic lower bounds.
4.2.3    T RANSFORMERS ( WITH C OT) ARE S TRICTLY M ORE E XPRESSIVE T HAN RNN S
The above theorems show that RNNs have a significant representation gap with Transformers, even
with CoT. Finally, we show that this gap is one-sided: there only exist tasks where Transformers can
solve them and RNNs cannot, but not the other way around. The proof (Appendix E.7) is inspired by
a recent work on CoT for Transformer (Li et al., 2024).
                                                                                             (n+n )×d
Theorem 4.8. Given input length n, let R is an RNN with word embedding W (E) ∈ Rp              S
                                                                                                    ,
where p = Θ(log n) is the precision, the constant nS is the number of special symbols in the
vocabulary, the constant d is the embedding dimension. If each recurrent iteration can be computed
by a circuit of size C(n) ≤ 2p/2 , and if the RNN produces the final answer after running at most nA
steps of CoT for some constant A > 0, then  there exist Transformers
                                                                         with O(log n)-bit precision,
O(C(n)) parameters and word embedding W (E) 0(n+nS )×d that can produce the same final
answer after running (C(n) + 1)nA steps of CoT.
5     E NHANCING THE I N -C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL C APABILITY C LOSES THE G AP
In Section 4.2, we show that RNNs are deficient at In-Context Retrieval, hence leading to a significant
representation gap with Transformers. In this section, we aim to understand: if we enhance the
In-Context Retrieval capability of RNNs, do RNNs remain to have any representation gap with
Transformers? We answer this question by examining two representative approaches to enhance the
In-Context Retrieval capability, one explicit and one implicit, and show that both ways can close the
representation gap between RNNs and Transformers in solving algorithmic problems.
5.1     E XPLICIT R ETRIEVAL T HROUGH R EGULAR E XPRESSION
First, we explore the power of RNNs with Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), which gives
an LM the capability to retrieve relevant information to assist generation. In our context, we are
specifically interested in allowing LMs to call functions to retrieve information from their context,
which we call In-Context Retrieval Augmented Generation (In-Context RAG).
Perhaps the simplest form of In-Context RAG is to allow the model to invoke function calls to
associative recall, but we show in Appendix E.8 that this is not enough to close the representation


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                                Retriever



            Context                           Search Query                    Search Result     RNN   ...   RNN        RNN          ...   RNN   RNN
                                StartSearch                     EndSearch


      ...                                     ...                                  ...                            Attention + MLP
RNN             RNN     RNN         RNN               RNN         RNN       RNN           RNN


                      StartSearch                   EndSearch


                           In-Context RAG                                                       Appending One Transformer Layer

Figure 3: Illustration of the two approaches to enhance the In-Context Retrieval capability of RNNs:
In-Context RAG (left) and appending one Transformer layer (right).

gap between RNNs and Transformers. In this light, we need to consider a more general form of
In-Context Retrieval capability. We then turn to implement In-Context RAG by enabling an LM
to perform regular expression matching, since the regular expression is a flexible primitive that
can be used to describe a wide range of retrieval tasks and can be implemented efficiently on
modern hardware. To be precise, when the context is string<StartSearch>pattern<EndSearch>,
we evaluate the Python code re.search(pattern, string).group(1) to get the result
of the regular expression matching. Then we append the result to the end of the context. See
Definition B.10.
The following theorem shows that In-Context RAG with regular expressions is powerful enough for
RNNs to solve the In-Context Retrieval problems in Section 4.2.1 with CoT.
Theorem 5.1. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting, IsTree}, there exist constant-
size Linear RNNs that can solve T with In-Context RAG. For T other than IsTree, O(1) steps of CoT
is required and for IsTree, O(n log n) steps of CoT is required.
More generally, the following theorem further shows that In-Context RAG empowers constant-size
RNNs to simulate polynomial-time Turing machines.
Theorem 5.2. Given A, B > 0, for all polynomial-time Turing machines T ∈ TIME(nA ) with
B states and vocabulary size B, there exist Linear RNNs with B special symbols, O(A log n)-bit
precision and memory, and O(AB 2 ) parameters that can output the result of T by running O(nA )
steps of CoT with In-Context RAG.
By introducing In-Context RAG, RNNs are able to use regular expressions to retrieve information
from a distance and put relevant information together. Then RNNs can use perform more complex
operations locally and output tokens to be retrieved later.
As a final note, our focus here is to understand the representation power of RNNs given an appropriate
RAG, but not to propose a method that immediately leads to practical applications. While the above
results show that In-Context RAG can close the representation gap between RNNs and Transformers
in solving algorithmic problems, a limitation here is that In-Context RAG is not an immediate
practical solution, as there is no existing training data for this In-Context RAG.

5.2   I MPLICIT R ETRIEVAL BY A PPENDING J UST O NE T RANSFORMER L AYER
Since Bahdanau et al. (2016), attention mechanisms have been understood as a form of compensation
for the fixed memory size of RNNs, allowing the model to attend to the entire context and retrieve
information. More recently, several hybrid Transformer-RNN architectures, such as Jamba (Lieber
et al., 2024a), SPADE (Zuo et al., 2022), and Block-state Transformers (Fathi et al., 2023), have
shown significant performance improvements over RNNs in practice.
Now we demonstrate that adding attention layers as a form of implicitly enhancing the retrieval
capability can close the representation gap. We study a simple hybrid architecture that combines
RNN and Transformer by appending just one Transformer layer to the RNN output (Appendix B).
The following theorem shows that it can solve the In-Context Retrieval problems in Section 4.2.
Theorem 5.3. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting, IsTree}, there exist constant-
size hybrid Linear RNNs that can solve T . For T other than IsTree, no CoT is required and for IsTree,
O(n log n) steps of CoT is required.

Further, we show that this hybrid architecture is powerful enough to even simulate all polynomial-time
Turing machines with CoT. The proof idea is similar to the case of using In-Context RAG but now
we use attention to retrieve information instead.


                                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: We train Mamba with one additional Transformer layer with a frozen word embedding and
decoding head of three different model sizes (0.5M, 1M, 2M) on IsTree with three different sizes of
graph (16, 32, 64) under three different setups. Vanilla means the model directly predicts the label.
COT means the model will generate a chain-of-thought process based on DFS (see Algorithm 1)
before prediction. Retrieval means the model will generate the chain of search queries and reasoning
before prediction (see Algorithm 2).
Theorem 5.4. Given A, B > 0, for all polynomial-time Turing machines T ∈ TIME(nA ) with B
states and vocabulary size B, there exist a constant-size hybrid Linear RNNs with B special symbols,
O(A log n)-bit precision and memory, and O(AB 2 ) parameters that can output the result of T by
running O(nA ) steps of CoT.

6     E MPIRICAL VALIDATION
We validate our theoretical findings through synthetic and natural language experiments: CoT alone
cannot close the performance gap between RNNs and Transformers, but enhancing the in-context
retrieval capability can narrow the gap.
6.1   VALIDATION ON S YNTHETIC TASK : I S T REE
First, we validate our theoretical findings on the IsTree task introduced in Section 4.2.2. We generate a
synthetic dataset for this task, where each data point is a tokenized graph concatenated with an answer
of YES or NO, potentially with a CoT inserted in between. We then train RNNs and Transformers as
language models on this dataset autoregressively.
Experiment Details. To generate the graph, we follow the procedure described in the proof of The-
orem 4.7 (see Figure 6). The CoT data is generated using Algorithm 1 and the retrieval data is
generated using Algorithm 2. For the CoT model, we decode the reasoning path during inference time
until we reach the first YES or NO up to a max token limit greater than the length of all ground truth
CoT. For the data points that the model fails to give a prediction, we assume the model gets it correct
with 0.5 probability. For the retrieval task, we omit the explicit format of the regular expression and
only ask the model to generate the vertices and special tokens in the regular expression to shorten
the length of the input sequence. The reported accuracy is calculated over a validation set of 5000
samples using the last iteration of the model. We defer the experiment details to Appendix D. The
results are shown in Figures 2 and 4.
Results with CoT. Without CoT, both the Transformers and RNNs model cannot learn to solve the
IsTree problem. CoT improves the performance of both Transformers and RNNs but the RNNs’ per-
formance degrades sharply as the graph size increases and the Transformers consistently outperforms
RNNs in this case. This is consistent with our theory that CoT can improve the expressiveness of the
RNN models but the expressiveness is still not enough to solve IsTree (see Theorems 4.1 and 4.7).
Results with In-Context RAG. In-Context RAG allows all the models to reach near-perfect accuracy.
This is consistent with our theory that retrieval augmentation via regular expression can improve
the expressiveness of the RNN models to solve algorithmic tasks (see Theorems 5.2 and E.33). The
hybrid model (a Mamba model with one additional Transformer layer on the top) shows performance
on par with the Transformer, which is consistent with our theory (see Theorems 5.4 and E.36).
6.2   VALIDATION ON H OTPOT-QA
We further conduct experiments on open-source LLMs based on Transformer, Mambda, and a hybrid
architecture to show that for tasks that require stronger in-context retrieval capability, RNNs suffer
more performance degradation compared to Transformers.
Experiment Details. We use Phi-1.5 1.3B (Li et al., 2023) as our Transformer model. We further use
two Mamba and Transformer-Mamba hybrid models distilled from Phi-1.5 with approximately the


                                                   9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                    Retrieval Required                                        Retrieval Free
       1.0                                                      1.0
       0.9                                                      0.9
       0.8                                                      0.8

Accuracy


                                                         Accuracy
       0.7                                                      0.7
                Transformer                                             Transformer
       0.6      Hybrid                                          0.6     Hybrid
       0.5      RNN                                             0.5     RNN
       0.4 2           4          6          8                  0.4 2          4          6          8
                   Number of Paragraphs                                    Number of Paragraphs

 Figure 5: Evaluation of Multi-Document Reasoning on Hotpot-QA. n paragraphs are given to the
 model before the question and 2 among which contains required information to answer the question.
 (Left). When provided paragraphs are given in a random order, the task requires stronger in-context
 retrieval capabilities when n increases. RNNs’ performance drop more sharply, as predicted by theory.
 (Right). When the required paragraphs are always at the end of the provided paragraphs, the retrieval
 difficulty significantly decreases and all the models have stable performance with respect to n.
 same parameters’ sizes (Bick et al., 2024) as our RNN and hybrid models. To test our theory, we
 use the Hotpot-QA (Yang et al., 2018) dataset. In the validation set of Hotpot-QA, each question is
 accompanied by a set of different related paragraphs from Wikipedia. 2 of these paragraphs contain
 useful information to answer this question. The model needs to retrieve the correct paragraphs and
 reason based on these paragraphs to get the answer to the question.
 HotpotQA with Controlled Retrieval Difficulty. We consider the following version of Hotpot-QA
 with enhanced retrieval difficulty: We choose n paragraphs containing the correct paragraphs and
 order them randomly before the question. The model needs to answer the question based on the
 given paragraphs after CoT reasoning. This design allows us to use the hyperparameter n to control
 the difficulty of in-context retrieval in this task, with larger n corresponding to a higher difficulty.
 We test our models under a 4-shot setting with Chain-of-Thought. The model we tested has varying
 performance even if n = 2. This is mostly due to their different capabilities to follow instructions
 and in-context examples. To mitigate this effect and highlight the impact of retrieval, we only test
 on a subset of 350 samples of the validation set where all the models can answer correctly given
 the correct paragraphs. This ensures perfect accuracy when n = 2 in both settings. We vary n in
 {2, 4, 6, 8} and the result is shown in Figure 5.
 RNNs’ performance drops sharply with increased retrieval difficulty. While all the model’s
 performance drops with increased retrieval difficulty (Figure 5, left), the RNN model has the largest
 drops. The hybrid model with only 4 attention layers performs significantly better than the RNN
 model. This validates our theory that RNN architectures’ limited in-context retrieval capabilities will
 impact their performance in reasoning and hybrid architecture is a potential solution to this limitation.
 Deconfouding the effect of context length. The context length also increases with the number
 of provided paragraphs and can be a potential confounder. We then experiment with a controlled
 group: after choosing the same set of n paragraphs, we always order the correct paragraph at the end,
 which significantly simplifies the in-context retrieval process. In this case, all the models have stable
 performance when the number of paragraphs increases.

 7         C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
 This paper studies the representation gap between RNNs and Transformers on algorithmic problems.
 We prove that while CoT improves RNNs, it is insufficient to close the gap with Transformers due
 to the key bottleneck of RNNs’ inability to perform in-context retrieval. We show that adopting
 In-Context RAG or appending a single Transformer layer to RNNs can enhance their in-context
 retrieval capabilities, thus closing the representation gap with Transformers.
 Considering the inherent limitations of RNNs in in-context retrieval, it is crucial to explore strategies
 that enhance this capability. This includes developing more effective in-context RAG methods
 tailored for RNNs, beyond the theoretically simple but impractical approach using regular expressions
 discussed here. Further research should also focus on architectural modifications that strike a balance
 between representational power and memory efficiency. In this study, we demonstrate that adding
 just a single Transformer layer significantly enhances the representational capacity of RNNs. Future
 work could investigate the optimization and generalization of various hybrid architectures to achieve
 a more comprehensive understanding.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Bailin Wang, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas. In-context language learning: Architec-
  tures and algorithms, 2024.
Silas Alberti, Niclas Dern, Laura Thesing, and Gitta Kutyniok. Sumformer: Universal approximation
   for efficient transformers, 2023.
Noga Alon, Yossi Matias, and Mario Szegedy. The space complexity of approximating the frequency
  moments. In Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pp. 20–29, 1996.
Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Aman Timalsina, Isys Johnson, Michael Poli, James Zou, Atri Rudra,
  and Christopher Ré. Zoology: Measuring and improving recall in efficient language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.04927, 2023.
Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast
  weights to attend to the recent past. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
L. Babai, L. Fortnow, N. Nisan, and A. Wigderson. Bpp has subexponential time simulations unless
   exptime has publishable proofs. In [1991] Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Structure in Complexity
  Theory Conference, pp. 213–219, 1991. doi: 10.1109/SCT.1991.160263.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate, 2016.
Maximilian Beck, Korbinian Pöppel, Markus Spanring, Andreas Auer, Oleksandra Prudnikova,
 Michael Kopp, Günter Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. xlstm: Extended
 long short-term memory, 2024.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. On the ability and limitations of transformers
  to recognize formal languages, 2020.
Aviv Bick, Kevin Y. Li, Eric P. Xing, J. Zico Kolter, and Albert Gu. Transformers to ssms: Distilling
  quadratic knowledge to subquadratic models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.
  10189.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
  de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren
  Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol
  Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. Improving
  language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens, 2022.
Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, and Mikhail S. Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer, 2022.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Mahan Fathi, Jonathan Pilault, Orhan Firat, Christopher Pal, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Ross Goroshin.
 Block-state transformers, 2023.
Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: A theoretical perspective. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=qHrADgAdYu.
Daniel Y. Fu, Tri Dao, Khaled K. Saab, Armin W. Thomas, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hungry
  hungry hippos: Towards language modeling with state space models, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka.             Neural turing machines.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2023.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=uYLFoz1vlAC.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
  augmented language model pre-training, 2020.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156–171, December 2020. ISSN 2307-387X.
 doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00306. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00306.
Jie Hao, Xing Wang, Baosong Yang, Longyue Wang, Jinfeng Zhang, and Zhaopeng Tu. Modeling
   recurrence for transformer. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 1198–1207,
   Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
   N19-1122. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1122.
Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention
  transformers: Perspectives from circuit complexity, 2022.
Monika Rauch Henzinger, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Sridhar Rajagopalan. Computing on data
 streams. External memory algorithms, 50:107–118, 1998.
Geoffrey E Hinton and James A Anderson. Parallel models of associative memory: updated edition.
  Psychology press, 2014.
John J Hopfield. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
  abilities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 79(8):2554–2558, 1982.
Samy Jelassi, David Brandfonbrener, Sham M Kakade, and Eran Malach. Repeat after me: Trans-
  formers are better than state space models at copying. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01032, 2024.
Zhengbao Jiang, Luyu Gao, Zhiruo Wang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig.
  Retrieval as attention: End-to-end learning of retrieval and reading within a single transformer. In
  Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2336–2349, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
  Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  emnlp-main.149. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.149.
Richard M. Karp and Richard J. Lipton. Some connections between nonuniform and uniform
  complexity classes. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  STOC ’80, pp. 302–309, New York, NY, USA, 1980. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  0897910176. doi: 10.1145/800141.804678. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/800141.
  804678.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  RNNs: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/katharopoulos20a.html.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners, 2023.
Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, Petr Anokhin, Dmitry Sorokin, Artyom Sorokin, and Mikhail Burtsev.
  In search of needles in a 11m haystack: Recurrent memory finds what llms miss, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2309.05463.

Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to
  solve inherently serial problems, 2024.

Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, Weinan E, and Qianxiao Li. On the curse of memory in recurrent neural
  networks: Approximation and optimization analysis. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=8Sqhl-nF50.

Zhong Li, Haotian Jiang, and Qianxiao Li. On the approximation properties of recurrent encoder-
  decoder architectures. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=xDIvIqQ3DXD.

Opher Lieber, Barak Lenz, Hofit Bata, Gal Cohen, Jhonathan Osin, Itay Dalmedigos, Erez Safahi,
  Shaked Meirom, Yonatan Belinkov, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Omri Abend, Raz Alon, Tomer Asida,
 Amir Bergman, Roman Glozman, Michael Gokhman, Avashalom Manevich, Nir Ratner, Noam
  Rozen, Erez Shwartz, Mor Zusman, and Yoav Shoham. Jamba: A hybrid transformer-mamba
  language model, 2024a.

Opher Lieber, Barak Lenz, Hofit Bata, Gal Cohen, Jhonathan Osin, Itay Dalmedigos, Erez Safahi,
  Shaked Meirom, Yonatan Belinkov, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Omri Abend, Raz Alon, Tomer Asida,
 Amir Bergman, Roman Glozman, Michael Gokhman, Avashalom Manevich, Nir Ratner, Noam
  Rozen, Erez Shwartz, Mor Zusman, and Yoav Shoham. Jamba: A hybrid transformer-mamba
  language model, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19887.

Bingbin Liu, Jordan T. Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=De4FYqjFueZ.

Shengjie Luo, Shanda Li, Tianle Cai, Di He, Dinglan Peng, Shuxin Zheng, Guolin Ke, Liwei Wang,
  and Tie-Yan Liu. Stable, fast and accurate: Kernelized attention with relative positional encoding,
  2021.

Shahar Lutati, Itamar Zimerman, and Lior Wolf. Focus your attention (with adaptive iir filters), 2023.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The Parallelism Tradeoff: Limitations of Log-Precision
 Transformers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 06
 2023. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00562. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
 tacl_a_00562.

William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-depth
 threshold circuits, 2022.

J Ian Munro and Mike S Paterson. Selection and sorting with limited storage. Theoretical computer
   science, 12(3):315–323, 1980.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and
 Augustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language
 models, 2021.

Matanel Oren, Michael Hassid, Yossi Adi, and Roy Schwartz. Transformers are multi-state rnns,
 2024.

Jongho Park, Jaeseung Park, Zheyang Xiong, Nayoung Lee, Jaewoong Cho, Samet Oymak, Kang-
  wook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Can mamba learn how to learn? a comparative study on
  in-context learning tasks, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Stella Biderman, Huanqi
  Cao, Xin Cheng, Michael Chung, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, Xuzheng He, Haowen Hou,
  Jiaju Lin, Przemyslaw Kazienko, Jan Kocon, Jiaming Kong, Bartlomiej Koptyra, Hayden Lau,
  Krishna Sri Ipsit Mantri, Ferdinand Mom, Atsushi Saito, Guangyu Song, Xiangru Tang, Bolun
  Wang, Johan S. Wind, Stanislaw Wozniak, Ruichong Zhang, Zhenyuan Zhang, Qihang Zhao, Peng
  Zhou, Qinghua Zhou, Jian Zhu, and Rui-Jie Zhu. Rwkv: Reinventing rnns for the transformer era,
  2023.
Hao Peng, Nikolaos Pappas, Dani Yogatama, Roy Schwartz, Noah A. Smith, and Lingpeng Kong.
  Random feature attention, 2021.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y. Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional
 language models, 2023.
Liliang Ren, Yang Liu, Yadong Lu, Yelong Shen, Chen Liang, and Weizhu Chen. Samba: Simple
  hybrid state space models for efficient unlimited context language modeling, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.07522.
Ohad Rubin and Jonathan Berant. Long-range language modeling with self-retrieval, 2023.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limitations of
  transformers, 2023.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Transformers, parallel computation, and logarith-
  mic depth, 2024.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced
   transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, Yuqing Xia, Jilong Xue, Jianyong Wang, and
  Furu Wei. Retentive network: A successor to transformer for large language models, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Roger Waleffe, Wonmin Byeon, Duncan Riach, Brandon Norick, Vijay Korthikanti, Tri Dao, Albert
  Gu, Ali Hatamizadeh, Sudhakar Singh, Deepak Narayanan, Garvit Kulshreshtha, Vartika Singh,
  Jared Casper, Jan Kautz, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. An empirical study of
  mamba-based language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07887.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z. Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity, 2020.
Xuezhi Wang and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought reasoning without prompting, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, 2023.
David J Willshaw, O Peter Buneman, and Hugh Christopher Longuet-Higgins. Non-holographic
  associative memory. Nature, 222(5197):960–962, 1969.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming
  language models with attention sinks, 2023.
Kai Yang, Jan Ackermann, Zhenyu He, Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yunzhen Feng, Qiwei Ye, Di He,
  and Liwei Wang. Do efficient transformers really save computation?, 2024.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09600.
Shunyu Yao, Binghui Peng, Christos Papadimitriou, and Karthik Narasimhan. Self-attention networks
  can process bounded hierarchical languages, 2023.
Simiao Zuo, Xiaodong Liu, Jian Jiao, Denis Charles, Eren Manavoglu, Tuo Zhao, and Jianfeng Gao.
  Efficient long sequence modeling via state space augmented transformer, 2022.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                    1

2   Related Works                                                                                   3

3   Preliminaries                                                                                   4

4   How Well Does CoT Improve the Representation Power of RNNs?                                    5
    4.1   CoT Strictly Improves RNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
    4.2   CoT Cannot Close the Representation Gap with Transformers . . . . . . . . . . .           6
          4.2.1    Simple Problems on In-Context Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
          4.2.2    Limitations of RNNs Beyond Simple In-Context Retrieval Problems . . . .          6
          4.2.3    Transformers (with CoT) are Strictly More Expressive Than RNNs . . . .           7

5   Enhancing the In-Context Retrieval Capability Closes the Gap                                   7
    5.1   Explicit Retrieval Through Regular Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
    5.2   Implicit Retrieval by Appending Just One Transformer Layer . . . . . . . . . . . .        8

6   Empirical Validation                                                                            9
    6.1   Validation on Synthetic Task: IsTree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
    6.2   Validation on Hotpot-QA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

7   Conclusion and Discussion                                                                      10

A Extended Related Works                                                                           18

B Additional Definitions                                                                           19
    B.1 Reasoning Tasks on Graphs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
    B.2 More on Numeric Precisions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
    B.3 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
    B.4 Language Models for Reasoning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21

C Omitted Discussion on In-Context Retrieval Examples                                              22

D Omitted Experiment Details                                                                       22

E Omitted Proof                                                                                    23
    E.1 Building Blocks of FFNs Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    E.2 Building Blocks of Transformers Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
    E.3 Building Blocks of RNNs Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
    E.4 Proof of Theorem 4.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
    E.5 Proof of Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E.6 Proof of Theorem 4.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    34
        E.6.1    Proof of Lemma E.26 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
        E.6.2    Proof of Lemma E.27 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
   E.7 Proof of Theorem 4.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    37
   E.8 AR function calls is not enough for closing the representation gap . . . . . . . . .      39
   E.9 Proof of Theorem E.32 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     40
   E.10 Proof of Theorem E.33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    40
   E.11 Proof of Theorem 5.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
   E.12 Proof of Theorem E.35 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
   E.13 Proof of Theorem E.36 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
   E.14 Proof of Theorem 5.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORKS


Comparison Between Transformers and RNNs (without CoT). A line of works focused on
the comparison between RNNs and Transformers in terms of recognizing or generating formal
languages (Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Hahn, 2020; Merrill et al., 2022). These works show that the
lack of recurrent structure in Transformers makes them fail to recognize some formal languages that
RNNs can recognize. However, Liu et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023); Hao et al. (2022) show that
such limitation can be mitigated when we consider bounded length of input or bounded grammar
depth. Our work differs from these works in that we consider the expressive power of RNNs and
Transformers with CoT and show that in this case, the gap between RNNs and Transformers is
one-sided (Theorem 4.8). Another thread of recent works focuses on understanding why RNNs or
SSMs are inferior to Transformers (Arora et al., 2023; Jelassi et al., 2024; Sanford et al., 2023; 2024).
Our work differs from these prior works from two perspectives: (1) we identify the common reason
behind a wide range of tasks where RNNs fall behind Transformers; (2) we show two potential
solutions that can bridge the representation gap by addressing this common reason (the incapability
to retrieve from context).
Retrieval Augmented Generation. Our work proposes to use retrieval augmentation to close the
representation gap between RNNs and Transformers. This is consistent with the recent trend of
retrieval augmented generation (Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022; Rubin & Berant, 2023).
Empirically, retrieval augmented generation has been shown to improve the performance of recurrent
models in various tasks (Kuratov et al., 2024; Akyürek et al., 2024) and our work provides a theoretical
foundation for this phenomenon. Our work also shows that an attention layer can be used to simulate
the retrieval process, which is consistent with the finding that attention can improve the performance
of RNNs (Vaswani et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2023; Hao et al.,
2019). It has also been shown empirically that attention can be used to simulate complex retrieval
process (Jiang et al., 2022).
Comparison Between Transformers and RNNs Prior work (Arora et al., 2023) has shown that
input-independent gating SSMs are inferior to Transformers in the task called associative recall
(Willshaw et al., 1969; Hopfield, 1982; Hinton & Anderson, 2014). The task requires the model to
recall a previously seen pattern given a partial input. They show that input-dependent gating SSMs
have better performance in associative recall and also propose a hybrid architecture that combines
input-independent state space machines with attention to achieve better performance. Our work
differs from this work in the following ways: (1) Our work studies associative recall from a theoretical
perspective and proves formal lower bounds on the memory size of RNNs necessary for solving
associative recall and other retrieval tasks; (2) We also study hybrid architectures but we provide a
proof that appending a single Transformer layer to RNNs can make them expressive enough; (3) Our
theory applies to not only input-independent gating SSMs but also all RNNs with o(n)-bit memory.
Prior work (Jelassi et al., 2024) proves a representation gap between RNNs and Transformers in
repeating a long sequence, which can be seen as a retrieval task. They show that RNNs have difficulty
performing the task due to their limited memory. Our work further proves that RNNs are limited
in solving many other retrieval tasks, even with CoT. Technically, a key ingredient in their proof
is a counting argument on the output sequence to show a limited memory size is not enough to
produce too many different output sequences, but our proof can handle retrieval tasks that only require
outputting a single token.
Notably, Sanford et al. (2023) apply communication complexity to prove circuit size or memory size
lower bounds for RNNs and Transformers on the task of sparse averaging. Sanford et al. (2024)
extend this technique to another task called hopk , a generalization of the associative recall task. Our
technique is similar to theirs since our proof is also based on communication complexity. But we
consider a broader range of tasks including seemingly irrelevant reasoning tasks such as IsTree, and
further explore various ways to close the representation gap.
Representation Theory of RNNs. Another line of works (Li et al., 2021; 2022; Alberti et al.,
2023) studies the universal approximation power of RNNs. They show that the upper bound of the
approximation power of linear RNNs will be constrained by the dimension of the hidden states. Their
works on the high level are consistent with our findings but are not directly comparable because we
are considering finite precision compute models with the assistance of CoT or In-Context RAG.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A DDITIONAL D EFINITIONS
We will now define some definitions used in the proofs.

B.1   R EASONING TASKS ON G RAPHS .

When resaoning on graphs, without otherwise specified, we will use n as the number of vertices and
m as the number of edges. Without loss of generality, we will assume the vertices are labeled by [n].
We will focus on decision problems on graphs, which are defined as follows:
Definition B.1 (Decision Problem on Graphs). A decision problem on graphs is a function f : G →
{YES, NO}, where G is the set of all possible graphs.
We will use the following decision problem as our main example:
Definition B.2 (IsTree). IsTree(G) = YES if G is a tree, and IsTree(G) = NO otherwise.
One can view IsTree as a minimal example of reasoning task2s. One of the classical solutions to
IsTree is running Depth First Search and this algorithm takes O(n) time.

B.2   M ORE ON N UMERIC P RECISIONS .

We will use ROUND(x, p) to denote the rounding function that rounds x to the nearest number in
Rp . We will assume p is an odd number without loss of generality.
                                    p−1
                       (                              !                        )
                                    X
                                            (p−1)/2−i
                 Rp = (2bp − 1)         bi 2            : ∀i ∈ [p], bi ∈ {0, 1} .          (1)
                                       i=1

For calculation over Rp , we will assume the calculation is exact and the result is rounded to Rp at the
end, that is, for operator ⊕, we will have
                            ROUND(x, p) ⊕p ROUND(y, p)
                          =ROUND (ROUND(x, p) ⊕ ROUND(y, p), p)) .
We will additionally define Zp as the set of all integers that can be represented by p-bit floating
point numbers. We will define 1/[m] as the set of unit fractional { 1i }i∈[m] . Further, we will define
ROUND(1/[m], p) as the rounding of 1/[m] to Rp . We will additionally define for any real number
                         1
x ∈ {0, 1}, next(x) = m+1   where m = arg mink∈Z |x − k1 |.

B.3   M ODELS

Tokenization. To tokenize a string, we will tokenize all the words separated by the space character
into a sequence of tokens. To tokenize a graph G, we will order its edges E = {(ui , vi ) | ui < vi }
randomly and tokenize it into the following string:
                        Tokenize(G) = {<s>, u1 , ∼, v1 , . . . , um , ∼, vm }.                   (2)
We hereby assume there are constant more special tokens that are not the same as any number token,
which are listed below:
 • <s>: the first special token, indicating the start of a sentence.
 • ∼: the second special token, indicating an edge.
 • YES: the third special token, indicating the answer is yes.
 • NO: the fourth special token, indicating the answer is no.
 • <StartSearch>: the fifth special token, indicating the start of a search query.
 • <EndSearch>: the sixth special token, indicating the end of a search query.
We will denote the total number of special tokens as nS and the total vocabulary size as |V | = n + nS .
We will further define the detokenization function Detokenize,
                                Detokenize(S) = “S1 S2 . . . Sl ”.
Here each Si is either a number or a special token, which we will treat as a word.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Embedding Functions. We will use d to denote the dimension of the embedding and wi to denote
the i-th coordinate vector in Rd .
We will separate the embedding function into two parts: the word embedding and the position
embedding. For the word embedding, we will use iw1 ∈ Rd to represent the embedding of the
vertice i in the tokenization of the graph. For the k-th special token, we will use w2+k to represent its
embedding. For example, the embedding of ∼ is w2 . We will denote the word embedding matrix as
W (E) ∈ R|V |×d .
For the position embedding, we will use lwd to represent the position embedding of the l-th token in
the tokenization of the graph, which is a hyperparameter. The final embedding of any token sequence
is the sum of the word embedding and the position embedding. We will use Emb to denote the
embedding function.
This embedding function will be fixed and shared across all models we consider in this paper and
will not be learned during training, hence we will not consider it as part of the model parameters.

Language Modeling. We use V ∗ and V + to denote the set of all finite sequences and all non-empty
finite sequences of tokens in V , respectively. We study language models that can predict the next token
given a prefix of tokens. For this, we define a language model (LM) as a function M : V + → PV
that maps a non-empty sequence to a probability distribution over the next token, where PV is the
probability simplex over V . We specifically study the case where the language model is realized by
deep neural networks: first map the input sequence S into a sequence of embeddings Emb(S), and
then apply a neural network, such as a Transformer or RNN, to process the embeddings and output
the probability distribution. We would call a series of parameterized models with increasing input
size a family of models.

Transformer      We will first define the Transformer architecture used in the theoretical analysis in
this paper.
Definition B.3 (Transformer Block). Let X ∈ Rd×l be the input matrix, where l is the sequence
length. The output of a Transformer block f is defined as:
                 f (X) = X + A(X) + g(X + A(X)),
                            H                                           ⊤           !
                            X
                                      (V,h)                   W (K,h) X W (Q,h) X
                A(X) =            W           Xsoftmax                 √          +C ,                (3)
                            h=1
                                                                         d

where g is a column-wise ReGLU feed-forward network 1 with width w and output dimen-
sion d, A is the scaled dot-product attention, softmax is the column-wise softmax function,
W (K,h) , W (Q,h) , W (V,h) are the learnable parameters and H is the number of heads, and
          0     0    ... 0
                             
     −∞        0    . . . 0
C =  ...      ..     ..  ..  ∈ Rl×l is a mask to prevent the attention from attending to future
                 .      .   .
          −∞   −∞     ...    0
tokens.

In the context of language modeling, given a sequence of tokens S, a Transformer T (S) is defined as:

Definition B.4 (Transformer). Let S ∈ |V |l be the tokenized input sequence, the output of a
Transformer is defined as:

                      T (S) = softmax W (E) (fL (. . . f1 (Emb (S))))   .                (4)
                                                                              :,l

where softmax is the column-wise softmax function, fi is the i-th Transformer block. We will call
the i-th Transformer block the i-th layer of the Transformer and denote its feed-forward layer and
attention layer as gi and Ai respectively.
  1
    ReGLU means σ(x) = ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) ⊗ (W2 x + b2 ), this is a surrogate for the commonly used
SwiGLU activation and allows the model to perform multiplication of two coordinates.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RNNs We formally define the RNN architecture here.
Definition B.5 (RNN). An RNN architecture
                                                is characterized by two functions:    state transition
function t : Θ → RΛ    p × R d
                             p →  R Λ
                                    p   and output function o  : Θ →    R Λ
                                                                          p →   R d
                                                                                  p , where Λ is the
dimension of the state and Θ is the parameter space. Let S ∈ |V |l be the input sequence, the output
of a recurrent neural network with parameter θ ∈ Θ is defined as:

                                   Rθ (S) = softmax W (E) oθ (sl ) ,
                              ∀k ∈ [l], sk = tθ (sk−1 , Emb(S):,k ),

where s0 ∈ RΛ p is a vector determined by θ and W
                                                   (E)
                                                       is the word embedding matrix. We will omit
the subscript θ when it is clear from the context.

We define the following RNN architecture for the proof of our upper bound.
Definition B.6 (RNN block). A Linear RNN block is defined as follows:
                             f (X) = X + LU(X) + g(X + LU(X)),
where g is a column-wise ReGLU feed-forward network with width w and output dimension d and
LU is a linear unit, defined as
                       h0 = 0, h:,t = Ah:,t−1 + BX:,t , LU(X:,1:l ) = h:,1:l .
Definition B.7 (Linear RNN). A Linear RNN is a recurrent neural network

                      R(S) = softmax W (E) (fL (. . . f1 (Emb (S))))    .                          (5)
                                                                            :,l

where softmax is the column-wise softmax function, fi is the i-th Linear RNN block. We will call
the i-th Linear RNN block the i-th layer of the Linear RNN and denote its feed-forward layer and
linear unit layer as gi and LUi respectively.

Hybrid RNNs.      We formally define the hybrid RNN architecture here.
Definition B.8 (Hybrid RNN). A hybrid RNN is a model that consists of an RNN with transition
and output function t, o and one Transformer layer f , the output of the RNN is used as the input
of the Transformer layer and the output of the Transformer layer is used to produce the next token.
Concretely, given the input sequence Sin , the output of the hybrid architecture is:

                              H(S) = softmax W (E) f [o(sk )]k∈[l]           ,
                                                                          :,l
                        ∀k ∈ [l], sk = t(sk−1 , Emb(S):,k ),

B.4   L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR R EASONING .

Chain of Thought. We will now define how we use language models to solve reasoning tasks
utilizing the following technique called chain of thought.
Definition B.9 (Chain of Thought). Given a language model, M with vocabulary V and the tokenized
input sequence Sin ∈ |V |l0 , chain of thought (CoT) generates the following sequence of tokenized
sequence:
                                       S0 = Sin ,                                                  (6)
                                     next
                                    si    = arg max M (Si )[j],                                    (7)
                                                  j∈V

                                     Si+1 = Si ⊕ snext
                                                  i    , ∀i ≥ 0.                                   (8)
The process terminates at Si when arg maxj∈V M (Si )[j] is YES or NO. The language model can
solve the reasoning task within T steps of CoT if the process terminates at Si where i ≤ T and the
final output is correct. We will call the special case where the language model solves the reasoning
task within 0 steps of CoT as solving the reasoning task without CoT.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Retrieval Augmentation. We will show in this paper that retrieval augmentation is a necessary
technique to solve reasoning tasks for recurrent neural networks. We will define retrieval augmentation
as follows:
Definition B.10 (Retrieval Augmented Generation). Given an LM M with vocabulary V (containing
two additional special tokens, <StartSearch> and <EndSearch>) and the tokenized input sequence
Sin ∈ |V |l0 , the LM M with In-Context RAG generates following sequence of tokenized sequence:
                 S0 = Sin ,     snext
                                 i    = arg max M (Si )[j],
                                              j∈V
                               next
                                                               if snext

                        Si ⊕ si ,                                  i    ̸= <EndSearch>
               Si+1 =          next
                        Si ⊕ si     ⊕ RETRIEVE (Si ) ,         otherwise.
Here RETRIEVE looks for the last occurrence of <StartSearch> at position ls and <EndSearch>
in S at position le and treat Detokenize(Sls :le ) as a regular expression, where Detokenize maps the
tokenized sequence back to the string, inserting a space between every pair of adjacent tokens. The
algorithm then runs a regular expression matching on Detokenize(S1:ls −1 ), finds the first matching
substring, and returns the first capturing group according to the regular expression (i.e., content
embraced by a pair bracket in the regular expression). While there are many grammar standards of
regular expressions, we adhere to the standard specified in the re library of Python. That is, we
evaluate the following Python code to get the result of the regular expression matching:

                        re.search(pattern, string).group(1)

where Detokenize(Sls :le ) is the pattern and Detokenize(S1:ls −1 ) is the string.
We will note that assuming |V | = O(n) and every search query and the result is of length O(1), the
regular expression evaluation can typically be evaluated in O(n) time.

IsTree In the context of language modeling, we can write the graph G as a sequence of tokens, and
then the task of IsTree is to determine whether G is a tree by predicting a YES/NO token with or
without CoT. We use the following tokenization for the graph G:
                    Tokenize(G) = {<s>, u1 , ∼, v1 , u2 , ∼ v2 , . . . , um , ∼, vm },             (9)
where <s> and ∼ are two special tokens representing the start of the sentence and an edge, and ui , vi
are numbers denoting the nodes of the graph.

C    O MITTED D ISCUSSION ON I N -C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL E XAMPLES
Index and AR are perhaps the most basic problems in retrieval, where Index asks for retrieving a
token from the input sequence viewed as a linear array of tokens, and AR asks for retrieving a token
from the input sequence viewed as an associative array. These two problems have been studied
extensively by different communities. Index is a classic problem in streaming and communication
complexity (Munro & Paterson, 1980), known to be impossible to solve with o(n) bits of memory for
streaming algorithms. AR has been regarded as a fundamental problem that an artificial intelligence
system should be able to solve (Willshaw et al., 1969; Hopfield, 1982; Hinton & Anderson, 2014;
Graves et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2016). In the context of LLMs, AR has been observed to correlate
with in-context learning performance (Elhage et al., 2021) and has also been used extensively as
synthetic surrogate tasks for pretraining performance (Fu et al., 2023; Poli et al., 2023; Lutati et al.,
2023). Besides Index and AR, c-gram retrieval is a natural extension of AR to the case where the
query key can contain multiple tokens: instead of retrieving a token given a single-token key, c-gram
retrieval asks for retrieving a token when the given key is a (c − 1)-gram. This task has been studied
empirically, but not theoretically in Jelassi et al. (2024). Counting is a problem that asks for the
number of occurrences of a token, thereby testing the model’s capability to retrieve some statistics of
relevant information from the input sequence.

D    O MITTED E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We train three different architectures: (1) LLaMA architecture (Touvron et al., 2023) representing
Transformers, (2) Mamba architecture (Gu & Dao, 2023) representing RNNs, and (3) Mamba with


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


one additional layer of LLaMA block representing hybrid architectures. Following our theory, we
freeze and weight-tie the prediction head and word embedding in all the models. For ease of training,
                                                                          i                 i
we use a different embedding function mapping i−th token to [sin( 10000     j/d ), cos( 10000j/d )]j∈[d/2]
with N being the number of different tokens and use standard RoPE (Su et al., 2024) as position
embedding. We train every model with at least 1M samples to guarantee convergence using Adam
with a cosine learning rate. If the model doesn’t converge, we retrain using 5M samples. After a grid
search over learning rates, we train all the Transformer models with learning rates 1e-3 and the rest
of the models with learning rates 3e-4. We run all the experiments on a server with 8 A100s and the
estimated time to reproduce the results is within 2 days.


E     O MITTED P ROOF

E.1      B UILDING B LOCKS OF FFN S C ONSTRUCTION

We will first show some basic operations that multiple layers of feedforward neural networks with
ReGLU activation can perform that will be used in the following proofs.
Lemma E.1 (Multiplication). Given two dimensions i1 , i2 , there exists a parameter configuration of
a 1-layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation that for any input x ∈ Rd and constant
width, computes the product of xi1 and xi2 .

                                        g(x) = [xi1 × xi2 , 0, . . . , 0]⊤ .

Proof. We can construct the following feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation:
                                                          ⊤
                W1 x = [xi1       −xi1     0...       0] ,
                                                      ⊤
                W2 x = [xi2       xi2    0...     0] ,
                                                                    ⊤
                W3 h = [h1 + h2 0           0     0    ...         0] ,
                b1 = b2 = b3 = 0.
                g(x) = W3 (ReLU(W1 x) ⊗ ReLU(W2 x)) = [xi1 × xi2 , 0, . . . , 0]⊤ .



Lemma E.2 (Linear Operations). Given a linear transformation W ∈ Rd×d , there exists a parameter
configuration of a 1-layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation and width w = d that
for any input x ∈ Rd , computes W x.

Proof.
                                        b1 = 1w , b2 = 0, b3 = 0,
                                        W1 = 0, W2 = W, W3 = Id×d



Lemma E.3 (Indicator). Given a constant integer B ≤ d and a dimension i, there exists a parameter
configuration of a 1-layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation and width 4 that for
any input x ∈ Rd , computes the indicator function of xi = B when xi is an integer.

Proof.

b2 = 1w , b1 = [−B − 0.5, −B + 0.5, B − 0.6, B + 0.4]⊤ , b3 = 10,
W2 = 0, W1 x = [xi , xi , −xi , −xi ]⊤ ,
ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) = [ReLU(xi − B − 0.5), ReLU(xi − B + 0.5), ReLU(B − xi − 0.6), ReLU(B − xi + 0.4)]
                              ⊤
W3 = 10 [1     −1    −1    1] .


                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then,
                g(x) =W3 ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) + b3
                     =10 (ReLU(xi − B − 0.5) − ReLU(xi − B + 0.5))
                      + 10 (ReLU(B − xi − 0.6) − ReLU(B − xi + 0.4)) + 10
                      
                      10 × 0 + 10 × −1 + 10 = 0,       if xi < B,
                     = 10 × −0.5 + 10 × −0.4 + 10 = 1, if xi = B,
                        10 × −1 + 10 × 0 + 10 = 0,
                      
                                                        if xi > B.



Lemma E.4 (Lookup Table). For constant B and k such that kB ≤ d, given a lookup table which key
is tuple of k integers bounded by B, and value is a scalar in Rp , there exists a parameter configuration
of a 1− layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation with width O(B k ) that for any
input x ∈ Rd , computes the value of the lookup table at the key xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xik .

Proof. We can calculate xi1 + B × xi2 + B 2 × xi3 + . . . + B k−1 × xik , and then scale B k indicator
functions to get the value of the lookup table at the key xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xik .

Lemma E.5 (Threshold). Given any threshold u and constant ϵ > 0, there exists a parameter
configuration of a 1-layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation and width 2 that for
any input x ∈ Rd , computes the indicator function xi > u on xi ∈ [−∞, u − ϵ] ∪ [u, ∞].

Proof.
                 b2 = 1w , b1 = [−u + ϵ, −u + 0.5ϵ]⊤ , b3 = 0,
                 W2 = 0, W1 x = [xi , xi ]⊤ ,
                 ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) = [ReLU(xi − u + ϵ)          ReLU(xi − u + 0.5ϵ)]
                      2                 ⊤
                 W3 = [1 −1 −1 1] .
                      ϵ
Then,
                      g(x) = W3 ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) + b3
                           = 2/ϵ (ReLU(xi − u − ϵ) − ReLU(xi − u + 0.5))

                               0 if xi < u − ϵ,
                           =
                               1, if xi > u,



Lemma E.6 (Interval). Given any constant u, v and ϵ > 0, there exists a parameter configuration of
a 1-layer feedforward neural network with ReGLU activation and width 4 that for any input x ∈ Rd ,
computes the indicator function xi ∈ [u, v] on xi ∈ [−∞, u − ϵ] ∪ [u, v] ∪ [v, ∞].

Proof. The interval function here can be written as the difference of two threshold functions. We
can use the same construction as in Lemma E.5 to approximate the indicator function xi > u and
xi > v + ϵ and then take the difference.

E.2      B UILDING B LOCKS OF T RANSFORMERS C ONSTRUCTION

We will show in this section some construction for basic functionality using Transformer Blocks.
This construction will be used in the following sections to prove the main results.
We will always use X ∈ Rpd×l as the input to the Transformer Block, where d is the dimension of the
input, and l is the length of the sequence. We will first outline all the building functionality and then
show how to implement them.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition E.7 (Copying Function). For integer s, index set I1 , I2 ⊂ [d − 20] satisfying |I1 | = |I2 |,
a copying function COPY[s, I1 , I2 ] satisfies the following, ∀X ∈ Rd×l
                                                                     p , then

                        COPY[s, I1 , I2 ](X)I2 ,k = xI1 ,max{k−s,0}        ∀k ≤ [m]
                        COPY[s, I1 , I2 ](X)I2c ,k = 0 ∀r ∈ [m]
Definition E.8 (Counting Function). For index set I1 , I2 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10 and index i, a
counting function COUNT[I1 , I2 , i] satisfies the following, if ∀v ∈ I1 ∪ I2 , k ∈ [l], Xv,k ∈ Zp and
Xv,k ̸= 0, then
                                                                   1
                 COUNT[I1 , I2 , i](X)i,k = Pk                                      ∀k ∈ [l].
                                                    h=1 1[XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k ] + 1
                COUNT[I1 , I2 , i](X)ic ,k = 0 ∀k ∈ [l].
Definition E.9 (Matching Function). For index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | =
|I4 |, a matching function Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ] satisfies the following, if ∀v ∈ I1 ∪ I2 , k ∈ [l], Xv,k ∈
Zp , then
      Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](x)I3 ,k = XI4 ,k∗ ∀k ∈ [l]

                                      ∗     min{h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k }, {h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k } =
                                                                                              ̸ ∅
                            where k =                                                                   .
                                            1, otherwise
Definition E.10 (Matching Closest Function). For index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤
10, |I3 | = |I4 |, a matching closest function Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ] satisfies the following, if ∀v ∈
I1 ∪ I2 , k ∈ [l], Xv,k ∈ Zp , then
  MatchClose[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](x)I3 ,k = XI4 ,k∗ ∀k ∈ [l]

                                       ∗     max{h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k }, {h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k } =
                                                                                               ̸ ∅
                             where k =                                                                      .
                                             1, otherwise
Definition E.11 (Matching Nearest Function). For index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤
10, |I3 | = |I4 | and index i, a matching nearest function MatchNearest[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , i] satisfies the
following, if ∀v ∈ I1 ∪ I2 , k ∈ [l], Xv,k ∈ Zp , then
         MatchNearest[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](x)I3 ,k = XI4 ,k∗ ∀k ∈ [l]
                     (
                      arg minh∈{h|XI1 ,h =XI2 ,k } |h − Xi,k |, {h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k } =
                                                                                       ̸ ∅
         where k ∗ =                                                                                .
                      1, otherwise

Definition E.12 (Matching Next Function). Given any interger constant A, assuming p > 10A log n,
for index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | = |I4 |, and a special counting index
a, a matching next function MatchNext[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , a] satisfies the following, if X satisfies the
following condition:

1. ∀v ∈ I1 ∪ I2 , k ∈ [l], Xv,k ∈ Zp ,

2. Xa,k ∈ ROUND(1/[nA ], p) ∪ {0},
3. For any k ∈ [l], given any k ≥ k, the counting index multiset Sk = {Xa,k′ | XI1 ,k′ =
   XI2 ,k } takes consecutive and disjoint values in ROUND(1/[nA ], p), that is, there exists uk , vk ∈
   ROUND(1/[nA ], p) such that Sk = [uk , vk ] ∩ ROUND(1/[nA ], p).

then, we have
                     MatchNext[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , a](X)I3 ,k = XI4 ,k∗ ∀k ∈ [l]
                     where k ∗ = arg              min           |Xa,h − next(Xa,k )|.
                                       h∈{h|XI1 ,h =XI2 ,k }∪{1}


Now we will show how to implement these functions using Transformer Blocks. The construction
here is motivated by the construction in Feng et al. (2023) with some modifications.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.13 (Copying Blocks). For integer s, index set I1 , I2 ⊂ [d − 10] satisfying |I1 | = |I2 |, a
copying function COPY[s, I1 , I2 ] can be implemented with 1 feedforward block g and 1 attention
block A with 1 attention head. Formally, when Xd,k = k, it holds that
                                A (g (X) + X) = COPY[s, I1 , I2 ](X).

                                                                     2
Proof of Lemma E.13. We will use the feedforward block to calculate Xk,d and 1 (Lemma E.1) and
have
                                                        (g(X) + X)d−1,k = k 2
                                                        (g(X) + X)d−2,k = 1.
                            ∀i ̸∈ {d − 1, d − 2}, (g(X) + X)i,k = Xi,k .

We will use X ′ to denote g(X) + X. Then we will choose W (K) , W (Q) such that
                                                             
                                                              1
                                                   ′
                                           W (K) X:,k ′ = n
                                                             k′ 
                                                             k ′2
                                                                 
                                             −(k 2 + s2 − 2sk)
                                      ′
                               W (Q) X:,k =      2k − 2s         
                                                     −1

Hence
                                                    ⊤
                                         (K)                  (Q)
                                     W         X          W         X
                                                                            k′ ,k
                                         ′2         ′
                            = − n k − k (2k − 2s) + k + s2 − 2sk            2


                            = − n(k − s − k ′ )2

Hence we have
                                                  ⊤
                   arg max
                        ′
                                     W (K) X            W (Q) X                     = max{k − s, 0}.
                         k <k                                              k′ ,k

Also, for any k ′ ≤ k, k ′ ̸= max{k − s, 0}, we have
                     ⊤                                  ⊤
           W (K) X          W (Q) X       −    W (K) X      W (Q) X                                          < −n.
                                         k′ ,k                                                max{k−s,0},k

Hence after the column-wise softmax and rounding to p = O(log n) bit, we have
                                   ⊤
               softmax    W (K) X      W (Q) X          = 1[k ′ = max{k − s, 0}].
                                                                        k′ ,k


We will then choose W (V ) such that
                            W (V ) XI′ 2 ,k′ = XI′ 1 ,k′ = XI1 ,k′                  ∀k ′ ∈ [l].
                                                    W (V ) XI′ 2c ,k′ = 0 ∀k ′ ∈ [l].

This then concludes that
                                A (g (X) + X) = COPY[s, I1 , I2 ](X).
The proof is complete.
Lemma E.14 (Counting Blocks). For index set I ⊂ [d − 20] satisfying |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, a counting
function COUNT[i, I1 , I2 ] can be approximated with 1 feedforward block g and 1 attention block A
with 1 attention head. Formally, when Xd,k = k and X3,k = 1[k = 1], XI1 ,1 = 0, it holds that
                   A (g (X) + X)i,k = ROUND (COUNT[s, I1 , I2 ](X)i,k , p) .
                  A (g (X) + X)ic ,k = 0.


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     2
Proof of Lemma E.14. We will use the feedforward block to calculate Xv,k , v ∈ I1 ∪ I2 (Lemma E.1)
and have
                                          (g(X) + X)d−i,k = XI21 [i],k , i ∈ [|I|].
                                                (g(X) + X)d−|I|−i,k = XI22 [i],k , i ∈ [|I|].
                                               (g(X) + X)d−2|I|−1,k = 1.
                  ∀i ̸∈ {d − i | i ∈ [2|I| + 1]}, (g(X) + X)i,k = Xi,k .

We will use X ′ to denote g(X) + X. Then we will choose W (K) , W (Q) such that
                                                 1 + 1[k ′ = 1]
                                                                 
                                      ′
                             W (K) X:,k   ′ = n
                                                 XI1 [i],k′ 
                                                   XI21 [i],k′
                                                                   i∈[I]
                                               2         
                                                XI2 [i],k
                                        ′
                               W (Q) X:,k   = −XI2 [i],k 
                                                   1        i∈[I]

Hence,

                             ⊤
                 W (K) X        W (Q) X
                                                k′ ,k
                  |I|                                                                        |I|
                  X                                                                          X
          =−n             XI′22 [i],k′ − XI1 [i],k′ (2XI2 [i],k ) + XI22 [i],k + n1[k ′ = 1]      2
                                                                                                 XI[i],k .
                  i=1                                                                        i=1
                  |I|                                               |I|
                  X                                                 X
          =−n           (XI1 [i],k′ − XI2 [i],k )2 + n1[k ′ = 1]          XI22 [i],k .
                  i=1                                               i=1

Hence we have
                                                         ⊤
                                 max
                                  ′
                                              W (K) X          W (Q) X                = 0.
                                  k <k                                        k′ ,k

Equality holds when k ′ = 1 or XI1 [i],k′ = XI2 [i],k for all i ∈ [|I1 |].
Also, for any k ′ ≤ k, k ′ ̸= 1 or XI1 [i],k′ ̸= XI2 [i],k for some i ∈ [|I1 |], we have
                                                 ⊤
                                        (K)              (Q)
                                    W        X      W X               < −n.
                                                                     k′ ,k

Hence after the column-wise softmax and rounding to p = O(log n) bit, we have
                                                                                             !
                           ⊤                                              1
                    (K)         (Q)
    softmax      W      X      W X              = ROUND Pk                                 ,p
                                          k′ ,k                h=1 1[XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k ] + 1

Here the O n1A term comes from the fact that the softmax is rounded to p = O(log n) bit.


We will then choose W (V ) such that
                                   ′        ′          ′
                           W (V ) Xi,k ′ = X3,k ′ = 1[k = 1] ∀k ′ ∈ [l].
                                                    W (V ) XI′ c ,k′ = 0 ∀k ′ ∈ [l].

This then concludes that
                  A (g (X) + X)i,k = ROUND (COUNT[s, I1 , I2 ](X)i,k , p) .
                    A (g (X) + X)ic ,k = 0.


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.15 (Matching Blocks). Given any constant c, for index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂ [d − 20], |I1 | =
|I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | = |I4 |, a matching function Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ] can be implemented with 1 feed-
forward block g and 1 attention block A with 1 attention head. Formally, when Xd,k = k, X3,k =
1[k = 1], XI1 ,1 = 0 and k ≤ nc , it holds that
                             A (g (X) + X) = Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](X)

Proof. We will use the feedforward block to calculate k 2 , Xv,d
                                                             2
                                                                 , v ∈ ∪I1 ∪ I2 as in the proof
of Lemmas E.13 and E.14.
We then choose W (K) , W (Q) such that
                                      ⊤
                               (K)         (Q)
                            W      X      W X
                                                                k′ ,k
                                      |I|
                                      X
                        = − n4c+1      (XI1 [i],k′ − XI2 [i],k )2 − nk ′2
                                      i=1
                                                                                     
                                                       |I|
                                                       X
                                  ′             4c+1
                            + 1[k = 1] n                    XI22 [i],k + n − n2c+2  .
                                                       i=1


The detailed construction of W (K) , W (Q) is omitted here since it is similar to the proof of Lem-
mas E.13 and E.14.
                                                                ⊤
We will discuss several cases for the distribution of W (K) X       W (Q) X           . It always holds
                                                                                k′ ,k
                 ⊤

that W (K) X       W (Q) X         = −n2c+2 .
                                1,k


1. If
     there doesn’t  exists  k ′ , such that Xk′ ,I1 = Xk,I2 , then for any i > 1, we have
                ⊤
      W (K) X     W (Q) X         < −n4c+1 .
                               i,k

2. If
     there  exists k ′ , such  that Xk′ ,I1 = Xk,I2 , then for such k ′ , we have
              ⊤

                                = −nk ′2 > −n2c+1 . The rest of the entries are all

      W (K) X   W (Q) X      ′ k ,k
   smaller than  −n4c+1 . Finally, the  largest k ′ satisfying that Xk′ ,I1 = Xk,I2 will corre-
                            ⊤
   sponds to a    W (K) X       W (Q) X           that is at least n larger than the second largest
                                            k′ ,k
               ⊤

     W (K) X      W (Q) X     ′
                                , as in the proof of Lemma E.13.
                               k ,k


Concluding the above discussion, we have after the column-wise softmax and rounding to p =
O(log n) bit,
                       ⊤                        ′
                                               1[k = min{h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k }], {h | XI1 ,h = XI2 ,k } =
                                                                                                        ̸ ∅
  softmax     W (K) X      W (Q) X          =      ′
                                        ′
                                       k ,k    1[k   = 1], otherwise

Further, we will choose W (V ) such that
                             W (V ) XI′ 3 ,k′ = XI′ 4 ,k′ = XI4 ,k′     ∀k ′ ∈ [l].
                                                W (V ) XI′ 3c ,k′ = 0 ∀k ′ ∈ [l].

This then concludes that
                             A (g (X) + X) = Match[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](X)
This concludes the proof.


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.16 (Matching Closest Blocks). Given any constant c, for index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂
[d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | = |I4 |, a matching closest function MatchClose[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ] can be
implemented with 1 feedforward block g and 1 attention block A with 1 attention head. Formally,
when Xd,k = k, X3,k = 1[k = 1], XI1 ,1 = 0 and k ≤ nc , it holds that
                           A (g (X) + X) = MatchClose[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ](X)

Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma E.15, and one can design the attention pattern as
                                   ⊤
                            (K)           (Q)
                        W       X      W X
                                                          k′ ,k
                                  |I|
                                 X
                     = − n4c+1    (XI1 [i],k′ − XI2 [i],k )2 − n(k − k ′ )2
                                  i=1
                                                                                    
                                                 |I|
                                                 X
                       + 1[k ′ = 1] n4c+1             XI22 [i],k + n(k − 1)2 − n2c+2  .
                                                 i=1

The rest of the proof is omitted here.
Lemma E.17 (Matching Nearest Blocks). Given any constant c, for index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂
[d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | = |I4 | and index i , a matching nearest function
MatchNearest[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , i] can be implemented with 1 feedforward block g and 1 attention
block A with 1 attention head. Formally, when Xd,k = k, X3,k = 1[k = 1], XI1 ,1 = 0 and k ≤ nc ,
it holds that
                         A (g (X) + X) = MatchNearest[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , i](X)

Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma E.15, and one can design the attention pattern as
                                 ⊤
                       W (K) X       W (Q) X
                                                        k′ ,k
                                |I|
                               X
                   = − n4c+1          (XI1 [u],k′ − XI2 [u],k )2 − n(Xi,k − k ′ )2
                               u=1
                                                                                      
                                               |I|
                                               X
                     + 1[k ′ = 1] n4c+1             XI22 [u],k + n(1 − Xi,k )2 − n2c+2  .
                                               u=1

The rest of the proof is omitted here.
Lemma E.18 (Matching Next Blocks). Given any constant A, c, for index set I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 ⊂
[d − 20], |I1 | = |I2 | ≤ 10, |I3 | = |I4 | and a special counting index a, a matching next function
MatchNext[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , a] can implement with 1 feedforward block g and 1 attention block A with
1 attention head. Formally, when Xd,k = k, X3,k = 1[k = 1], XI1 ,1 = 0 and k ≤ nc , it holds that
                          A (g (X) + X) = MatchNext[I1 , I2 , I3 , I4 , a](X)

Proof. We will use the feedforward block to calculate the following next function, where
                                      1
                                           ,             x ≥ 23 .
                                       21
                                      
                                                          3        2
                                           ,              5 > x > 5.
                                      
                           next(x) = 31                    7         3
                                           ,              20 > x > 10
                                      4
                                      
                                      
                                               2    3          11
                                        x − x + x , x ≤ 40 .
                                     11 3
The value can be arbitrary for x ∈ [ 40 , 10 ] ∪ [ 25 , 20
                                                         7
                                                           ] ∪ [ 35 , 23 ]. This function is achievable by a
feedforward block through combination of Lemmas E.1 and E.6.
The purpose of this is to approximate the next function for x ∈ ROUND(1/[nA ], p), and we have
the following lemma.


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.19. For large enough n and any x ∈ ROUND(1/[nA ], p), we have

                                                  3        1
                     |next(x) − next(x)| ≤ next(x) + O           .
                                                         n10A

Proof. We always have ROUND(1/[nA ], p) ∩ [ 11    3       2 7          3 2

                                            40 , 10 ] ∪ [ 5 , 20 ] ∪ [ 5 , 3 ] = ∅. We will discuss
several cases for x ∈ ROUND(1/[nA ], p).
          3
1. If x ≥ 10 , then next(x) = next(x).
          7
2. If x ≤ 20 , it holds that |x − 1/m| ≤ 1/n10A , m ≥ 3, then

                                                1    1    1         1
                         next(x) = x − x2 =       − 2 + 3 +O
                                               m m       m        n10A

                                           1       1           1
                                       =      − 3        +O
                                         m + 1 m (m + 1)      n10A

This then concludes the proof.

We then choose W (K) , W (Q) such that
                            ⊤
                  W (K) X       W (Q) X
                                                    k′ ,k
                           |I|
                           X
              = − n4A+3          (XI1 [i],k′ − XI2 [i],k )2 − n4A+1 (next(Xa,k ) − Xa,k′ )2
                           i=1
                                                                                           
                                          |I|
                                          X
                 + 1[k ′ = 1] n4A+3            XI22 [i],k + n4A+1 Xa,k
                                                                    2
                                                                        − n4A+2  .
                                          i=1


Again, the detailed construction of W (K) , W (Q) is omitted here since it is similar to the proof
of Lemmas E.13 and E.14.
                                                               ⊤
We will discuss several cases for the distribution of W (K) X     W (Q) X           . It always holds
                                                                              k′ ,k
                ⊤
that W (K) X       W (Q) X         = −n4A+2 .
                                 1,k


1. If
     there doesn’t  exists  k ′ , such that Xk′ ,I1 = Xk,I2 , then for any i > 1, we have
                ⊤
      W (K) X     W (Q) X         < −n4A+3 .
                              i,k

2. If
     there  exists k ′ , such  that Xk′ ,I1 = Xk,I2 , then for such k ′ , we have
              ⊤
      W (K) X   W (Q) X      ′
                               = −n3A (next(Xa,k ) − Xa,k′ )2 > −n4A+1 . The rest of the
                              k ,k
   entries are all smaller than −n4A+2 .
                                                               ⊤
   It remains to discuss the distribution of        W (K) X          W (Q) X                for k ′ satisfying Xk′ ,I1 =
                                                                                    k′ ,k
   Xk,I2 . When X satisfies the condition in Definition E.12, we have that Sk = {Xa,k′ | Xk′ ,I1 =
   Xk,I2 } takes consecutive and disjoint values in ROUND(1/[nA ], p). Hence, if |Sk | > 2, suppose
   y, z ∈ Sk satisfies that
                           |y − next(Xa,k )| = min |x − next(Xa,k )|
                                                       x∈Sk

                           |z − next(Xa,k )| =              min     |x − next(Xa,k )|.
                                                       x∈Sk ,x̸=y


   We will discuss several cases for y, z.


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    • If y − next(Xa,k ) and z − next(Xa,k ) are both negative, then y > z, we have,
                                2                      2
               y − next(Xa,k ) − z − next(Xa,k ) = (y − z)(y + z − 2next(Xa,k ))
                                                                              1
                                                         ≤ −(y − z)2 ≤ − 4A .
                                                                            4n
      .
    • If y − next(Xa,k ) and z − next(Xa,k ) are both positive, then y < z, and same as above we
      have
                                2                      2
               y − next(Xa,k ) − z − next(Xa,k ) = (y − z)(y + z − 2next(Xa,k ))
                                                                              1
                                                         ≤ −(y − z)2 ≤ − 4A .
                                                                            4n
      .
    • If y − next(Xa,k ) and z − next(Xa,k ) have different signs, then according to Lemma E.19,
      we have, y = ROUND(next(Xa,k ), p) because Sk takes consecutive and disjoint values in
      ROUND(1/[nA ], p). This then implies that
                                       2                      2
                      y − next(Xa,k ) − z − next(Xa,k )
                                                                                    2
                          1            1                           1
                  ≤O( 10A ) +                    −
                        n         next6 (Xa,k )      next(Xa,k )(next(Xa,k ) + 1)
                          1
                  ≤ − 4A .
                        4n
                                                                            ⊤
   Concluding, we always have for any k ′′ ̸= k ∗ = arg maxk′ ,k W (K) X        W (Q) X
                                                                                                              k′ ,k
                             ⊤                                                ⊤                          n
                  W (K) X          W (Q) X                −        W (K) X          W (Q) X            ≤− .
                                                  k′ ,k                                        k∗ ,k     4

Concluding the above discussion, we have after the column-wise softmax and rounding to p =
O(log n) bit,
                       ⊤
  softmax     W (K) X      W (Q) X       = 1 k ′ = arg          min         |Xa,h − next(Xa,k )| .
                                              k′ ,k                          h∈{h|XI1 ,h =XI2 ,k }∪{1}


Further, we will choose W (V ) such that
                             W (V ) XI′ 3 ,k′ = XI′ 4 ,k′ = XI4 ,k′            ∀k ′ ∈ [l].
                                                   W (V ) XI′ 3c ,k′ = 0 ∀k ′ ∈ [l].
This then concludes the proof.

E.3   B UILDING B LOCKS OF RNN S C ONSTRUCTION

We will now describe the building blocks of Linear RNNs construction. We will introduce some
basic operations that will be used to build more complex RNNs family.
Lemma E.20 (Recent Input Memorizing). Given any constant k and C, there exists a parameter
configuration of linear unit that maintains C dimensions of last k input vectors in the state.

Proof. Suppose the input sequence is x1:t ∈ Rd , and the dimensions that the state should memorize
are d1 , d2 , . . . , dC . We can construct the following linear unit:

    ht = xt−1,d1 . . . xt−1,dC ht−1,1 . . . ht−1,C×(k−1) ht−1,C×k+1 . . . ht−1,d .


Lemma E.21 (Summation). Given any constant k and C, there exists a parameter configuration of
linear unit that maintains the sum of one dimension of the last k input vectors in the state.


                                                              31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Suppose WLOG the input sequence is x1:t ∈ Rd , and the dimension that the state should
memorize is 1. We can construct the following linear unit:
                           ht = [xt−1,1 + ht−1,1       ht−1,2 . . .   ht−1,d ] .


Lemma E.22 (Special Position Memorizing). Given any constant k and C, there exists a parameter
configuration of linear unit and a FFN with Ck width that maintains the C dimensions of the input
vector at position 1 to k in the state.

Proof. This is a direct combination of Lemma E.21 and Lemmas E.1 and E.4. The FFN can assign
all the input vectors with position greater than k to 0, and permute the corresponding dimensions
of first k input vectors to the first Ck dimensions of the state. The linear unit can then maintain the
state.
Lemma E.23 (Recite Fixed Sequence). Given any constant integer k and C, there exists a FFN with
width kC that can output fixed sequence of scalars that takes values in [C] on a fixed set of positions
l1 , . . . lk .

Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemma E.4.

E.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.6

We will first restate the theorem for clarity.
Theorem 4.6. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting}, there exist constant-size Trans-
formers that can solve T . On the other hand, any RNN with o(n)-bit memory cannot solve T of size
n with any length of CoT for large enough n.

Proof. We will discuss by cases.
When T is Index, we will first show why RNN cannot solve the Index question without Ω(n) memory.
The key observation is that the recurrent form of RNNs allowed the algorithm to be run in a streaming
fashion with o(n) bit memory. Here streaming means that the algorithm gets to look at each bit of the
memory sequentially and can only update a constant size of memory.
Lemma E.24. Consider the following two-party game, where Alice receives string x ∈ {0, 1}n and
Bob receives an integer k, and Bob wants to know the value of xk . If only Alice is allowed to send a
signal to Bob, then Ω(n) bit communication complexity is required.

Proof of Lemma E.24. Suppose there exists a communication protocol where B only receives o(n)
bit and can perfectly decide xk . Because Alice doesn’t know k, the protocol must send the same
message to Bob for all k. Hence Bob can reconstruct the whole string x with n bit with o(n) bit
communication. This is a contradiction.

Now if RNN can solve the Index problem with o(n) bit memory, then it can also solve the Index
problem with o(n) bit communication complexity. This is because Alice can simply run the RNN on
input x and send the hidden state to Bob. Then Bob can run the RNN with the hidden state and k to
get the answer. This is a contradiction to Lemma E.24. Hence RNN cannot solve the Index problem
with o(n) bit memory.
On the other hand, we will show that Transformers can solve the Index problem with O(log n)
bit parameters. This is because using 2 layers of Transformer, we will implement a Match Block
(Lemma E.15) that can match the last query token with the position of the previous token and retrieve
the type of the matched token to the query token.
When T is AR, wthout loss of generality, we assume that n is even. The proof is similar to the proof
of the proof of theIndex problem. As there are n different types of tokens, we can label them as [n].
Now for any boolean sequence x ∈ {0, 1}n/2 , solving AR for the following input is equivalent to
solving the Index problem for x:
                   Sin = <s>, 1, x1 + n/2, 2, x2 + n/2, . . . , n/2, xn/2 + n/2, k


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This then implies that RNN cannot solve AR with o(n) bit memory. Transformers, on the other hand,
can still solve AR with O(log n) bit parameters, we will use one layer of copying function to copy
each token’s previous token’s type to it. Then we can use the Match Block to match the last query
token with the position of the previous token and retrieve the type of the matched token to the query
token.
When T is c-gram retrieval, without loss of generality, we assume that n is a multiple of c. The proof
is similar to the proof of Theorem 4.6. As there are n different types of tokens, we can label them as
[n]. Now for any boolean sequence x ∈ {0, 1}n/2 , solving AR for the following input is equivalent
to solving the Index problem for x:

      Sin = <s>, 1, . . . , 1, x1 + n/c, 2, . . . , 2, x2 + n/c, . . . , n/c, . . . , n/c, xn/c + n/c, k, . . . , k
                 | {z }                  | {z }                          |     {z       }              | {z }
                       c−1                    c−1                             c−1                          c−1


This then implies that RNN cannot solve c-gram retrieval with o(n) bit memory. Transformers, on
the other hand, can still solve c-gram retrieval with O(log n) bit parameters, we will use one layer of
copying function to copy each token’s previous c − 1 tokens’ type to it. Then we can use the Match
Block to match the last query token with the position of the previous token and retrieve the type of
the matched token to the query token.
When T is Counting, we will first show why RNN cannot solve the Counting question without Ω(n)
memory. Consider the following setup, given any x ∈ {0, 1}n , the input string is j1 j2 . . . jk where
{ji . . . jk } = {j | xj = 1}, then solving the Counting question for this input string for queried
threshold 1 is equivalent to solving the Index problem for x. This then implies that RNN cannot solve
the Counting question with o(n) bit memory.
On the other hand, we will show that Transformers can solve the Counting question with O(log n)
bit parameters. This is because using 2 layers of Transformer, we can first use a COPY block to
copy the last query token to the token corresponds to the threshold, and then use a COUNT block
(Lemma E.14) that can count the number m of the appearance of the last query token in the input
sequence, and then write 1/(m + 1) to one of the dimension. Finally, we can use the Feed Forward
Network on the last layer to multiply threshold +1 with this value and compare the result to 1 to get
the answer.

E.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

We will first prove a lemma assuming PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly.
Lemma E.25. If PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly, then there exists a Turing machine M with linear space
complexity that cannot be simulated by a polynomial-size circuit family.


Proof. We will prove this by contradiction. Assuming for every Turing machine M with linear
space complexity, there exists a polynomial-size circuit family {Cn } that can simulate M . We will
construct a polynomial-size circuit family {Cn′ } that can decide PSPACE, which contradicts the
assumption that PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly.
Given any language L ∈ PSPACE, we can decide L by a Turing machine ML with space O(nk )
                                                                         k
for some constant k. We can consider another language L′ = {x1|x| | x ∈ L}. We can decide
L′ by a Turing machine ML′ with linear space complexity by checking the length of the input and
then simulating ML . By the assumption, there exists a polynomial-size circuit family {Cn } that can
simulate ML′ . We can then construct a polynomial-size circuit family {Cn′ } that can decide L by
first counting the length of the input and then simulating Cn on the extended input. This contradicts
the assumption that PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly.


Now we are ready to prove our theorem.
Theorem 4.1. Assuming PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly, there exists an algorithmic problem such that (1)
there exist constant-size Linear RNNs that can solve the problem with polynomial length CoT; and
(2) any constant-size regular RNNs cannot solve the problem without CoT.


                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Binary Message: 0101, Index: 2                            Euler Tour: 1, 5, 3, 2, 6, 4, 6, 2, 3, 5, 1, Is Tree: Yes



                                                                                               8
                                                                                                   3
   v1           v2           v3           v4                            v1            v2               v3              v4
                                                                             1              4               9
                                           Tokenize(G)                                                             6
                                          =<s>, 2, ∼, 6, 1, ∼, 5,
                                                                                           2                5
                                           3, ∼, 5, 4, ∼, 6, 2, ∼, 3.            10                7
                v5           v6                                                       v5               v6

                       G                                                                   DFS on G

Figure 6: An example of the graph constructed from the binary sequence x = 0101 and the index
k = 2 and the corresponding DFS tour.

Proof. By Lemma E.25, we know that if PSPACE ̸⊂ P/poly, then there exists a Turing machine
M with linear space complexity that cannot be simulated by a polynomial-size circuit family. We
will use this result to prove Theorem 4.1.
We design the task as follows, for any n, let m = ⌊log2 n⌋, for any boolean input x of length m, we
will choose input sequence as Sin = 0n−m x and the label as y = YES if M (x) = 1 and y = NO
otherwise.
Because we are considering regular RNN with O(m) memory, we know that we can compute the
result of RNN without CoT through a circuit family with size Poly(m). However, we know that M
cannot be simulated by a polynomial-size circuit family. Hence, no RNN family with O(m) memory
can solve the task for all n.
On the other hand, we can simulate M by the RNN by maintaining the state, the pointer, and the
tape of the M inside the state of the RNN. The RNN can then maintain the transition function of the
Turing machine in its output function as a lookup table Lemma E.4 and write down the updated state,
the direction of the pointer movement, and the updated cell value at the pointer in its context. Paired
with the ability to memorize the recent input Lemma E.20, the RNN can then simulate the running of
the Turing machine.
Because the space complexity of M is linear in m, the time complexity of M is exp(O(m)) which
is polynomial in n. Hence, we can solve the task by an RNN with CoT and O(m) memory and
polynomial-size circuit family.

E.6     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.7

We will now proceed to prove our main theorem, which states that Transformers with chain-of-thought
can solve IsTree perfectly, while RNNs cannot. We will first restate the theorem here.
Theorem 4.7. There exist constant-size Transformers that can solve IsTree with CoT of length O(n).
On the other hand, any RNN with o(n)-bit memory cannot solve IsTree with any length of CoT.

Proof of Theorem 4.7. We will prove this theorem by proving the following lemmas.

Lemma E.26. For any n and RNN R with o(n) memory, R cannot perfectly solve IsTree of size n.

Lemma E.27. There exists a Transformer T with constant depth and width, and O(log n) precision,
that can solve IsTree of size n perfectly with Chain of Thought.

This proof is a direct combination of Lemmas E.26 and E.27.

E.6.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.26
We first reduce another problem in communication complexity to IsTree.


                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.28. Consider the following two-party game, where Alice receives string x ∈ {0, 1}n and
Bob receives an integer k, and Bob wants to know whether xk = xk−1 . If only Alice is allowed to
send information, Ω(n) bit communication complexity is required.

Proof of Lemma E.28. We can reduce this problem to the problem in Lemma E.24. Considering the
                                                                    Pi
game in Lemma E.24, given any x ∈ {0, 1}n , we can construct x̃i = j=1 xi mod 2. Then x̃ is a
string of length n with only 0 and 1. Moreover, xk = xk−1 if and only if x̃k = x̃k−1 . Hence, if Bob
can solve the problem in Lemma E.28 with o(n) bit, he can solve the problem in Lemma E.24. This
is a contradiction.

Proof of Lemma E.26. Now suppose that we have a streaming algorithm for IsTree with only o(n)
memory. We shall prove Alice and Bob in Lemma E.28 can use it to solve the original question with
o(n) memory.
Consider the following graph with n + 2 nodes. There is a node i corresponding to each xi for i ∈ [n]
and two special nodes n + 1, n + 2. Node i will be connected to n + 1 if xi = 0 and to n + 2 if
xi = 1. Moreover, k − 1 and k will be connected. Now the original answer Bob wants is False if and
only if the graph is a Tree. Hence, given access to the streaming algorithm, Alice can run it on the
edges that she knows exist and send the memory to Bob. Bob can then run it on the edges that he
knows exist. Combining they will be able to solve the original problem. This is a contradiction.
Moreover, as RNN with CoT is also a streaming algorithm, it also requires Ω(n) memory.

E.6.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.27
Proof of Lemma E.27. The proof is two-folded. We will first define an algorithm that can solve
IsTree by generating a sequence of vertices of length O(n), and then we will show that this sequence
can be generated by a Transformer with constant depth and width, and O(log n) precision as a Chain
of Thought.

Algorithm 1 Depth-First Search Algorithm
Require: A graph G = (V, E) with n vertices and E has an ordering e1 , . . . , em .
 1: Initialize two stacks of vertices S1 , S2 with S1 = [v1 ], S2 = ∅.
 2: while S1 is not empty do
 3:    Let v be the top of S1 . Yield v.
 4:    if there exists a neighbor u of v not in S1 ∪ S2 then
 5:        Choose u such that edge (u, v) has the smallest possible order and push u to S1 .
 6:    else
 7:        Pop v from S1 and push v to S2 .
 8:    end if
 9: end while


Algorithm for IsTree. We define Algorithm 1 as a depth-first search algorithm that can generate a
sequence of vertices of length O(n) that can be used to solve IsTree. We will use two stacks S1 , S2
to store the vertices. S1 will be used to store the vertices that are not yet visited, and S2 will be used
to store the vertices that are already visited. The algorithm will start with S1 = [v1 ] and S2 = ∅. At
each step, the algorithm will pop the top of S1 and push it to S2 . Then it will push all the neighbors of
the popped vertex that are not in S1 ∪ S2 to S1 . The algorithm will terminate when S1 is empty. We
will denote the yielded vertice sequence for G as A(G). The following lemma shows the connection
between the result of the algorithm and the IsTree problem.
Lemma E.29. For any graph G, A(G) is a tree traversal of a spanning tree of the connected
component of G containing v1 . Hence IsTree(G) is True if and only if G has n − 1 edges and A(G)
contains 2n − 1 vertices.

Proof of Lemma E.29. First, every vertex in the connected component of G containing v1 will be
visited. This is because the algorithm will always push all the neighbors of the popped vertex that


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are not in S1 ∪ S2 to S1 . Hence, the algorithm will terminate when all the vertices in the connected
component of G containing v1 are visited.
Second, every two consecutive vertices in the yielded sequence will be connected by an edge. This
is because the algorithm will always push one of the neighbors of the popped vertex that is not in
S1 ∪ S2 to S1 . Hence, every two consecutive vertices in the yielded sequence will be connected by an
edge. On the other hand, the combination of these edges will form a tree because the algorithm will
never push a vertex that is already in S1 ∪ S2 to S1 . Hence, the yielded sequence is a tree traversal of
a spanning tree of the connected component of G containing v1 .

Construction of Transformer. We will now show that the yielded sequence of Algorithm 1 can
be generated by a Transformer with constant depth and width, and O(log n) precision as a Chain
of Thought. The Transformer will generate a valid yielded sequence but can terminate early if the
graph is not a tree. We will now describe the Transformer in detail. We will assume the input token
sequence S is as follows,
                                   S = Tokenize(G), v1 , . . . vr                               (10)
for some r ≥ 0 and v1 . . . vr is a valid yielded sequence. The length of Tokenize(G) is 3n − 2 with
3 tokens for each edges and 1 special token <s>. We will further denote the input to the first layer X
as Emb(S). We will similarly denote the input to layer ℓ as X (ℓ) . We will also denote the output of
the last layer as X out .

1. Layer 1 and Layer 2 Attention. The attention at Layer 1 will output zero and the FFN at Layer
   1 and Attention at Layer 2 will implement a counting function (Definition E.8) to  count the
   number of vertices n appears in the previous token sequence and write ROUND n1 , p in a new
   dimension i1 as a result.
2. Layer 2 FFN and Layer 3 Attention. The FFN at Layer 2 and Attention at Layer 3 will implement
   a copying function (Definition E.7) copying the first dimension and the counting dimension i1 of
   each token to its successor at two new dimensions i2 and i3 . For each edge, this moves the type of
   the first vertice and the number of times the first vertice appears to ∼. For every vertice in the
   chain of thought, this moves the type of the previous vertice to them.
3. Layer 3 FFN and Layer 4 Attention. The FFN at Layer 3 and Attention at Layer 4 will implement
   another copying function, copying the dimensions i2 and i3 of each token to its successor at two
   new dimensions i4 and i5 . Especially, for each edge, this moves the type of the first vertice and
   the number of times the first vertice appears to the position corresponding to the second vertices.
4. Layer 4 FFN. This FFN will process the information gathered from the previous layer and prepare
   for the next layer. It will make sure the following properties hold for X (5) ,
    • For every token, the position number, its square, and 1 will be kept in the last three dimensions.
    • For the first vertices in each edges, ∼ and <s> The rest dimension will be zero.
    • For the second vertices of each edges (a, b), there will be four dimensions i6 , i7 , i8 , i9 with
                                                                      1
      value a, b and na,e , nb,e , where na,e = ROUND( 1+#aappears up   to current edge , 1).
    • For vertice vl in v1 , . . . , vr , there will be four dimensions i10 , i11 , i12 , i13 with value vl , vl−1
      and vl2 , vl−1
                 2
                     (v0 = 0).
5. Layer 5 Attention. Combining with the previous Layer 4 FFN layer, we will implement two
   match functions with two attention heads matching (i10 , i11 ) or (i11 , i10 ) with (i6 , i7 ) at Layer 5
   Attention, i.e. finding the edge in input for each step in the chain of thought, we will then copy
   nvl ,(vl ,vl−1 ) to dimensions i8 and i9 .
6. Layer 6. We will use Layer 5 FFN and Layer 6 Attention to implement the match function that
   matches dimension i10 of the current token to i10 in the previous token. This will match vl to the
   first appearance of vl in the chain of thought and we will copy i11 of the matched token to i22 .
   This dimension will be the first predecessor of vl in the chain of thought (0 for v1 ). We will denote
   this predecessor of vl to be f (vl ) as it is the father of vl in the tree. Now we will need to split into
   two cases depending on whether vl−1 is f (vl ). If vl−1 = f (vl ) or vl−1 = 0 (for v1 ), we will set
   dimension i8 to be 1 and i9 to be 0. Otherwise, we will keep dimension i8 and i9 as nvl ,(vl ,vl−1 ) .


                                                      36
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 7. Layer 7. Now we will use Layer 6 FFN and Layer 7 Attention with two attention heads to
    implement two MatchNext functions2 (Definition E.12) which use i8 or i9 as the counting index,
    and match vl at i10 to i6 or i7 respectively. We will then copy dimensions i6 to i9 of the matched
    tokens to i14 to i21 (because there will be two of them).
    The match next function will be able to retrieve the first edge containing v1 . For any i ≥ 2, one
    of the matches next function will be able to retrieve the next edge containing vi after (vi , vi+1 )
    if it exists. If it doesn’t exist, the corresponding counting dimension will either be zero or no
    smaller than nvl ,(vl ,vl−1 ) . We will use Layer 6 FFN to decide whether the next edge exists and
    set dimension i14 of the output of Layer 6 to be the other edge in the next edge if it exists, or 0
    otherwise, and i15 , i16 of the output of layer 6 to be the counting dimension of the next edge if it
    exists, or 0 otherwise. For each edge in the original input, we will also set dimension i15 , i16 to be
    the counting dimension of the edge.
 8. Layer 8 Attention We will grab the next edge again, in the same manner as Layer 6, but this time
    using dimension i15 and i16 . The necessity of this step is that the next edge containing (vi−1 , vi )
    in the original graph can be the same as the (f (vl ), vi ) and in such case we need to check whether
    the next edge after this edge.
 9. Layer 8 FFN. We now have, at each position corresponding to vl , the first edge (f (vl ), vl ) in the
    yielded sequence containing vl and the other vertex in the edge containing vl that hasn’t been
    visited if it exists. If they don’t exist, the corresponding dimension will be zero. This allows us
    to use Layer 8s FFN to decide the next vertex in the yielded sequence, which is exactly the first
    vertex different with f (vl ) in the two edges if they exist, or f (vl ) otherwise. We will use Layer 8
    FFN to calculate the potential next vertex and put it in dimension i23 and its square in i24 .
10. Layer 9 Attention. Combining with Layer 8 FFN, we will match i23 of the current token to i10 of
    the previous token to find the first appearance of the potential next vertex in the chain of thought.
    We will then copy dimension d of the matched token to i25 . This value being 1 will imply this
    vertex has never appeared in the chain of thought before and any other value will imply the vertex
    has appeared before.
11. Layer 9 FFN. We can now check several cases,
        • If the potential next vertex v is either f (vr ) ̸= 0 or never appears in the chain-of-thought
          sequence, then Layer 9 will output n[−v, 1, −1, . . . − 1], which will decodes to v.
        • If the potential next vertex v is not f (vr ) and appears in the chain-of-thought sequence, then
          Layer 9 will output nw6 , which will decodes to NO, because the chain of thought has already
          visited v and hence the graph is not a tree.
        • If vr = 1 and the potential next vertex v is f (vr ) = 0, this means the chain of thought has
          finished. In this case, layer 9 FFN will check whether the position is 3n − 2 + 2n − 1 =
          5n − 3 and output nw5 if it is, or output nw6 otherwise, which will decode to YES and NO
          respectively.

 This concludes the construction of the Transformer.

 E.7      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.8

 The theorem is in the same vein as the recent work on the CoT for Transformer (Li et al., 2024),
 which shows the constant size and constant precision Transformer with a polynomial-size position
 embedding can simulate any polynomial size circuit. The major difference of our theorem is that (1)
 we consider a Transformer with fixed word and position embedding, hence allowing the parameter
 number to be logarithmic in the input size, and (2) we consider simulating RNNs, which is a special
 kind of circuit family and hence we can use more succinct representation utilizing the structural
 property attached to the recursive process.
 We will now prove Theorem 4.8. We will first restate the theorem for convenience.
                                                                                                (n+n )×d
 Theorem 4.8. Given input length n, let R is an RNN with word embedding W (E) ∈ Rp      S
                                                                                             ,
 where p = Θ(log n) is the precision, the constant nS is the number of special symbols in the
    2
        The constant A here in Definition E.12is 1


                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


vocabulary, the constant d is the embedding dimension. If each recurrent iteration can be computed
by a circuit of size C(n) ≤ 2p/2 , and if the RNN produces the final answer after running at most nA
steps of CoT for some constant A > 0, then  there exist Transformers
                                                                         with O(log n)-bit precision,
O(C(n)) parameters and word embedding W (E) 0(n+nS )×d that can produce the same final
answer after running (C(n) + 1)nA steps of CoT.

Proof. The proof is inspired by Theorem E.30 from Li et al. (2024).
Theorem E.30 (Theorem 3.3 of Li et al. (2024)). For any n and any circuit with size T (n) and input
size n, there exists a Transformer with constant depth and precision, O(log n) width, and a position
embedding with size O(T (n) log n), such that for any input S of length n, the Transformer computes
the output of the circuit on S using T (n) steps.

However, direct utilization of Theorem E.30 is not feasible because we are interested in (1) O(log n)
precision Transformer, and (2) simulating the RNN for nA step, which would correspond to a circuit
with nA C(n) in size. However, as the calculation is recurrent, we can encode the RNN circuit in
O(C(n)) parameter instead.
To do so, we will unroll the circuit of each recurrent step of the RNN into C(n) gates. We will then
assign each gate a unique id in [C(n)] and assume the circuit is calculated in the order of the gate id
in the following manner.

1. Each gate has a type t(i), which is either a constant gate outputting 1, an input gate, a hidden state
   gate, an AND gate, or an XOR gate.
2. Each gate i’s output depends on two values l(i) and r(i). If t(i) is a constant gate, then l(i) and
   r(i) are assigned to be 0. When it is an input gate, l(i) will be assigned to be the coordinate
   of the input embedding and r(i) will be assigned to be the index of the bit of the value at l(i)
   coordinate. When it is a hidden state gate, l(i) will be assigned to be the coordinate of the hidden
   state embedding, and r(i) will be assigned to be the index of the bit of the value at l(i) coordinate.
   If it is an AND gate or an XOR gate, l(i) and r(i) will be assigned to be the id of the two gates
   that it depends on.

We will further assume without loss of generality that the hidden state gate is the first pΛ gate. The
output of the last pΛ gate will be the next hidden state. We will also assume that the last p(Λ + d) to
pΛ − 1 gates are the output gates. We will now first describe the chain of thought that the Transformer
will output and then construct the Transformer.

Chain of thought Taking any input S with length n, the Transformer will output a sequence of
0 and 1 tokens. The first n tokens will be the same as the input sequence. For each a ≥ 0 and
b ∈ [C(n) + 1], the n + a (C(n) + 1) + b token is

1. the output of gate b when RNN circuit is calculating the output at a position plus 1, if b ≤ C(n).
2. the n + a + 1 token in the RNN chain of thought, if b = C(n) + 1.

Construction of the Transformer.

1. Layer 1. The first attention layer will output zero and the first FFN layer will be of width O(C(n)),
   encoding all the gate information. The output of the first layer at position n + a (C(n) + 1) + b
   will have the following coordinate:
     • The input i will be encoded in the first dimensions.
     • a, a2 , b, b2 will be encoded in four different dimensions.
     • The gate type t(s(b)) will be encoded in the next dimension, where s(b) = (b + 1)
       mod (C(n) + 1) If b = C(n) − 1, then the gate type will be encoded as 0.
     • The necessary dependence l(s(b)), l2 (s(b)) and r(s(b)), r2 (s(b)) will be encoded in the next
       two dimensions.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • A constant 1 will be encoded in the next dimension.
2. Layer 2 Attention. Together with the Layer 1 FFN, the Layer 2 Attention will implement two
   match functions (Definition E.9) to copy the output of gate l(b + 1) and r(b + 1) when RNN
   circuit is calculating the output at a position. When the type of gate b + 1 is not AND or XOR,
   the result will not be used in the following calculation.
3. Layer 2 FFN Layer 2 FFN will be of width O(1). The output of the layer will be
      • When b < C(n) and t(s(b)) is AND or XOR or constant, one dimension of the output will be
        the output of gate b + 1 when RNN circuit is calculating the output at a position.
      • When b < C(n) and t(s(b)) is an input or hidden state gate or b = C(n) + 1, one dimension
        of the output will be the position in the current chain of thought where the input bit or hidden
        state bit is copied from and the other dimension will be the square of that position
      • When b = C(n), the output remains the same as the input to Layer 2 FFN.
4. Layer 3 Attention. Layer 3 Attention will be of width O(1). Together with Layer 2 FFN, Layer
   3 Attention will implement Match heads (Definition E.9) to copy the output at the position where
   the input bit or hidden state bit is copied from. When the type of gate b + 1 is not input or hidden
   state gate, the result will not be used in the following calculation.
5. Layer 3 FFN Layer 3 FFN will be of width O(1). The output of the layer will be
      • When b ̸= C(n), one dimension of the output will be output of gate s(b) when RNN circuit is
        calculating the output at a + 1[b = C(n) + 1] position.
      • When b = C(n), the output remains the same as the input to Layer 3 FFN.
6. Layer 4 Layer 4 Attention will have p − 1 heads and each head will be of width O(1). Head
   h ∈ [p − 1] will copy the first dimension of the output of Layer 3 FFN at position n + a(P (n) +
   1) + b − (p − h) and weight each of them by 2−h+(p−1)/2 and add them in one dimension. The
   Layer 4 FFN will calculate r when the first dimension of the input is 1 and −r otherwise. Hence,
   for each a ≥ 0, the n + a (C(n) + 1) − hp, h ∈ [Λ : Λ + d] token contains a dimension i1 which
   is the k − Λ dimension of the output of the RNN at position a.
7. Layer 5 Layer 5 Attention will have d + 1 heads and each head will be of width O(1). Head
   h ∈ [d + 1] will copy the dimension i1 of the output of Layer 4 FFN at position n + a(P (n) +
   1) + b − (h + Λ)p to a disjoint dimension ih+1 . The Layer 5 FFN will then make sure the output
   of Layer 5 satisfies the following:
      • When b ̸= C(n), one dimension of the output will be n times the output of gate s(b) when
        RNN circuit is calculating the output at a + 1[b = C(n) + 1] position plus 1, which will
        decode to the corresponding value.
      • When b = C(n), the first d dimension of the output will be the same as the output of the RNN
        at position a, and the rest dimension will be 0, which will decode to the same token as the
        chain of thought of the RNN at position a + 1.

This concludes the construction of the Transformer.

E.8    AR FUNCTION CALLS IS NOT ENOUGH FOR CLOSING THE REPRESENTATION GAP

Proposition E.31. For any RNN family with O(log n) bit memory and O(log n) parameter with an
oracle to receive results for the AR problem (Definition 4.3) for any queries, for large enough n, the
RNN can’t solve the index problem (Definition 4.2) with length n in any CoT steps.

Proof. Consider a special type of index problem where every token at the even position of the input
sequence is a special token κ and the rest of the tokens are uniformly random. Then the oracle for the
AR problem can be simulated by the RNN by simply outputting the κ when the query is not κ and
outputting the third token when the query is κ. However, following similar proof of Theorem 4.6,
we can show that the RNN can’t solve this special form of index problem with length n in any CoT
steps.


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.9    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.32

We will first state the theorem for clarity.
Theorem E.32. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting}, there exists a Linear RNN
family with O(log n) bit memory and O(log n) parameter, that can solve T with In-Context RAG in
O(1) CoT steps.

Proof. When task T is Index, given an input sequence that ends with a query token k, RNN
will generate the following search query sequence:<StartSearch>, ^(?:\S\s*){k − 1}(\S),
<EndSearch>.
Then the regular expression will match the k-th token in the input sequence. The RNN needs to
recite the format of the query, remember the index k and calculate k − 1 to generate the regular
expression. As we have shown in Lemmas E.20 and E.23, RNN can recite a fixed sequence at fixed
position and memorize the recent input, the above sequence can be generated by an RNN. The explicit
construction of the RNN is omitted here.
When task T is AR, given an input sequence that ends with a query token k, RNN will generate the
following search query sequence: <StartSearch>, \b k \b(\S+)\b, <EndSearch>.
Then the regular expression will match the next token after the first occurrence of k in the input
sequence. The RNN needs to recite the format of the query and remember the query token k to
generate the regular expression. The explicit construction of the RNN is omitted here.
When task T is c-gram retrieval, given an input sequence that ends with query tokens, RNN
will generate the following search query sequence: <StartSearch>, \b k1 . . . kc−1 \b(\S+)\b,
<EndSearch>.
Then the regular expression will match the next token after the first occurrence of k1 , . . . kc−1 in the
input sequence. The RNN needs to recite the format of the query and remember the query tokens
k1 , . . . kc−1 to generate the regular expression. The explicit construction of the RNN is omitted here.
When task T is Counting, given an input sequence that ends with a query token v and a query threshold
k, RNN will generate the following search query sequence <StartSearch>,(\b v \b){k + 1},
<EndSearch>.
Then the regular expression will match the k-th occurrence of v in the input sequence. The RNN
needs to recite the format of the query and remember the query token v and the threshold k to generate
the regular expression. The RNN can then check whether the retrieval result is FAILED to determine
if the count is less than k. The explicit construction of the RNN is omitted here.



E.10    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.33

In this section, we will prove Theorem E.33. We will first state the theorem for convenience.
Theorem E.33. There exists a Linear RNN family with O(log n) bit memory and O(log n) parameter,
that can solve IsTree of size n with In-Context RAG in O(n) CoT steps.

Proof of Theorem E.33. We will first define the sequence that the retrieval-augmented RNN will
generate and then construct an RNN that can generate such a sequence.

Sequence Generation. We will use a variant of Algorithm 1 to generate the sequence and we will
use the concatenation of the tokenization of the sequence returned by Algorithm 2 as the sequence
that the retrieval augmented RNN will generate.

RNN Construction. We can use similar proof in Theorem 5.2 by having the RNN memorize local
sequences and determine the phase of Algorithm 2 it is in. The RNN will maintain the length of S2
(Lemma E.21) and the top of S1 in the state (Lemma E.20) and it is easy to check that the retrieval
function will retrieve the correct result for each search query. The way to determine the next vertex in
the stack is the same as in the proof of Lemma E.27. We will omit the simple but tedious detailed
construction here.


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Depth-First Search Algorithm with Retrieving
Require: A graph G = (V, E) with n vertices and E has an ordering e1 , . . . , em .
 1: Initialize two stacks of vertices S1 , S2 with S1 = [v1 ], S2 = ∅, a list L with L = ∅, and a vertex
    v ′ = FAILED.
 2: while S1 is not empty do
 3:     Let v be the top of S1 . Push v to L.
 4:     Generate the regular expression r2 = \b(\S+)\b − \bv\b .
 5:     Let f (v) be the predecessor of v in S1 for the first time and FAILED when v = v1 .
 6:     Push <StartSearch>, r2 , <EndSearch>, f (v) to L.
 7:     if v ′ ̸= f (v) then
 8:        Generate the    regular expression
           r1 =             \bv ′ \b ∼ \bv\b | \bv\b ∼ \bv ′ \b .*? \b(\S+)\b ∼ \bv\b |

           \bv\b ∼ \b(\S+)\b
 9:     else
10:        Generate the regular expression r1 =\b(\S+)\b ∼ \bv\b | \bv\b ∼ \b(\S+)\b
11:     end if
12:     Push <StartSearch>, r1 , <EndSearch> to L.
13:     if there exists a neighbor u of v such that (u, v) has larger order than (v, v ′ ) when v ′ ̸= f (v)
        or there exists a neighbor u of v such that u ̸= f (v) when v ′ = f (v) then
14:        Choose u such that edge (u, v) has the smallest possible order and push u to L. Let v ′′ = u.
15:     else
16:        Push FAILED to L. Let v ′′ = FAILED.
17:     end if
18:     if v ′′ = f (v) ̸= FAILED then
19:        Generate the   regular expression
           r3 =            \bv ′′ \b ∼ \bv\b | \bv\b ∼ \bv ′′ \b .*? \b(\S+)\b ∼ \bv\b |

           \bv\b ∼ \b(\S+)\b
20:        Push <StartSearch>, r3 , <EndSearch> to L.
21:        if there exists a neighbor u of v such that (u, v) has larger order than (v, v ′′ ) then
22:             Choose u such that edge (u, v) has the smallest possible order and push u to L. Let
                v ′′ = u.
23:        else
24:             Push FAILED to L. Let v ′′ = FAILED.
25:        end if
26:     end if
27:     if v ′′ = FAILED then
28:        Pop v from S1 . Push v to S2 . Let v ′ = v.
29:     else
30:        Generate the regular expression r4 =\b(\S+)\b − \bv ′′ \b
31:        Push <StartSearch>, r4 , <EndSearch>, 0 to L.
32:        if v ′′ is not in S1 then
33:             Push FAILED, v, −, v ′′ to L.
34:             Push v ′′ to S1 . Let v ′ = v.
35:        else
36:             Let f (v ′′ ) be the predecessor of v in S1 for the first time and FAILED when v ′′ = v1 .
37:             Push f (v ′′ ), NO to L.
38:             return L.
39:        end if
40:     end if
41: end while
42: if S2 has n vertices then
43:     Push YES to L.
44:     return L.
45: else
46:     Push NO to L.
47:     return L.
48: end if

                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.11    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

In this section, we will prove Theorem 5.2. We will first restate the theorem for convenience.
Theorem 5.2. Given A, B > 0, for all polynomial-time Turing machines T ∈ TIME(nA ) with
B states and vocabulary size B, there exist Linear RNNs with B special symbols, O(A log n)-bit
precision and memory, and O(AB 2 ) parameters that can output the result of T by running O(nA )
steps of CoT with In-Context RAG.

Proof of Theorem 5.2. We will denote the state of T as 1, . . . , B (we will use 1 as the initial state)
and the vocabulary of T as 1, . . . , B. We will assume T operates on an infinite tape TAPE, which is
a sequence of cells indexed by Z. We will also assume that the tape is initialized with all cells being 0
except for the n cell starting at 1. The Turing machine also has a pointer p that points to a cell in the
tape. The pointer is initialized to 1. At each time step, the Turing machine reads the cell pointed by
POINTER and updates the cell pointed by POINTER and the pointer p according to the transition
function δ : [B + 1] × [B] → [B] × [B] × {−1, 1}, which takes the current state and the current cell
value (could be empty, which corresponds to B + 1) as input and outputs the new state, the new cell
value and the direction to move the pointer. The Turing machine halts when the state is B. Because
T ∈ TIME(nA ), the Turing machine will always halt in nA steps. We will use TAPE[t, i] as the
value on the i-th cell on TAPE before the t timestep. We will use POINTER[t] as the value of the
pointer before the t timestep and State[t] as the state of the Turing machine before the t timestep.
We will further use Direction[t] as the direction of the pointer movement before the t timestep.
We will first define the sequence that the retrieval-augmented RNN will generate and then construct
an RNN that can generate such a sequence.

Sequence generation. The input token sequence Sin will be as followed,
                       Sin = <s>, TAPE[1, 1], TAPE[1, 2], . . . , TAPE[1, n]
Here all the symbols on the tape are represented by one special symbol in the vocabulary. Given
this input token sequence, the retrieval augmented RNN will generate the following output token
sequence,
       S = Sin ,<StartSearch>, ^(?:\S\s*).{1}(\S), <EndSearch>,
                TAPE[1, 1]
                1, TAPE[1, 1], 1,
                ...
                <StartSearch>, ^(?:\S\s*).{n}(\S), <EndSearch>,
                TAPE[1, n]
                n, TAPE[1, n], n,
                <StartSearch>, ((POINTER[1] (.) POINTER[1] .*?$)), <EndSearch>,
                SearchResult(1),
                POINTER[1], TAPE[2, POINTER[1]], POINTER[1]
                State[2], Direction[2],
                ...
                <StartSearch>, (POINTER[t] (.) POINTER[t] .*?$), <EndSearch>,
                SearchResult(t)
                POINTER[t], TAPE[t + 1, POINTER[t]], POINTER[t],
                State[t + 1], Direction[t + 1],
Here SearchResult(t) is defined as

                                   FAILED; if POINTER[t] is empty cell before t
           SearchResult(t) =
                                   TAPE[t, POINTER[t]];otherwise
The output token sequence simulates the Turing machine T on the tape TAPE due to the following
lemma.


                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.34. Given any t ∈ [nA ] and i ∈ [nA ], the last string in S that contains i, i as a substring
is i, TAPE[t, i], i if TAPE[t, i] is not empty and is the empty string otherwise.


Proof. The proof is by induction, for t = 1, the result holds. For any t ≥ 2, we only need to notice
that POINTER[t − 1] is the only cell that can be updated at time t − 1.


Construction of RNN Given the input, the RNN can first iterate over 1 to n and generate the first
n search queries and results by maintaining a counter in its state and memorizing the most recent
search result (Lemma E.20). Then it is easy to see that the retrieval oracle will generate the correct
SearchResult(t) given the input S. Therefore, we will only need to construct an RNN that can
generate the rest part of S.
We will assume the RNN maintains the state and pointer of the Turing machine in its state and show
that they can be updated.
Based on Lemma E.20, the RNN can maintain constant recent token types in its state, we will assume
the RNN memorize the last tokens up to the most recent <StartSearch> and also calculate the
position relative to the most recent <StartSearch>. By a lookup table in the FFN Lemma E.4, the
RNN can output the fixed format of the search query. Similarly, RNN can output the POINTER[t].
To generate the update TAPE[t + 1, POINTER[t]], State[t], Direction[t], the RNN can use a FFN
with O(B 2 ) width to memorize the transition function of the Turing machine and output the update.
Then, the RNN can use the memorized recent input to update the state and the pointer of the Turing
machine at the next <StartSearch>. The proof is then complete.



E.12    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.35

Theorem E.35. For task T ∈ {Index, AR, c-gram retrieval, Counting}, there exists a hybrid Linear
RNN (Definitions B.7 and B.8) family with O(log n) bit memory and O(log n) parameter, that can
solve T without CoT.


Proof. The proof here is essentially the same as the construction of the Transformer in Theorem 4.6.
We would use the same Transformer layer to solve T . The only difference is that we would use the
output of the RNN, instead of FFN, as the input of the Transformer layer.Also for Counting, instead
of using a COPY function, we write the query token in the state of the RNN (Lemma E.20).

E.13    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.36

Theorem E.36. There exists a hybrid Linear RNN with O(log n) bit memory and O(log n) parameter,
that can solve IsTree of size n with a chain of thought of length O(n log n).


Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem E.33. However, instead of using regular
expressions to retrieve the next neighbor and parent, we will need to use the Transformer layer. The
Transformer layer can retrieve the parent through an attention head implementing the match closest
head (Lemma E.16) if the RNN part maintains the predecessor of each node in the chain of thought.
Retrieving the next neighbor is more complicated and we will use O(log n) steps of the chain of
thought to do that. Given an edge (v, v ′ ), we will first use one match head to retrieve the position p of
(v, v ′ ) in the input sequence and write it to the chain of thought. Then we will use two MatchClose
heads to retrieve the edge that contains v and is closest to p + 2i for i = 0, 1, . . . , log2 n iteratively
until the heads return an edge that is not (v, v ′ ) or i reaches log2 n. Here 2i can be computed through
doubling one of the dimensions in the state of the RNN and reset that dimension to 1 after termination.
We will then compare the retrieved edge with the father of v to check if it is the same. If it is the
same, we will search the next neighbor of v after the parent of v in the same way. The other part of
the proof is similar to the proof of Theorem E.33.


                                                    43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.14   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.4

Theorem 5.4. Given A, B > 0, for all polynomial-time Turing machines T ∈ TIME(nA ) with B
states and vocabulary size B, there exist a constant-size hybrid Linear RNNs with B special symbols,
O(A log n)-bit precision and memory, and O(AB 2 ) parameters that can output the result of T by
running O(nA ) steps of CoT.

Proof. Sequence Generation. Under the same formulation of proof of the Theorem 5.2. The hybrid
RNN will output the following sequence.
               S = Sin ,POINTER[1], TAPE[2, POINTER[1]], POINTER[1]
                        State[2], Direction[2],
                        ...
                        POINTER[t], TAPE[t + 1, POINTER[t]], POINTER[t],
                        State[t + 1], Direction[t + 1],

Note that Lemma E.34 still holds. We only need to prove that the hybrid architecture can generate the
above sequence.
Hybrid Construction. The way RNN maintains the pointers and the states is the same as the proof
of Theorem 5.2. Given each pointer value, we can retrieve the last value of the cell at the pointer
through the one layer of attention by implementing a match closest head (Lemma E.16).


                                                 44
