Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C AUSAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING FROM M ULTI -
MODAL B IOMEDICAL O BSERVATIONS

 Yuewen Sun1,2∗, Lingjing Kong2∗ , Guangyi Chen1,2 , Loka Li1 , Gongxu Luo1 , Zijian Li1 ,
 Yixuan Zhang1 , Yujia Zheng2 , Mengyue Yang3 , Petar Stojanov4 , Eran Segal1 ,
 Eric P. Xing1,2 , Kun Zhang1,2
 1
   Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
 3
   University of Bristol, 4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard



                                                A BSTRACT

             Prevalent in biomedical applications (e.g., human phenotype research), multi-
             modal datasets can provide valuable insights into the underlying physiological
             mechanisms. However, current machine learning (ML) models designed to ana-
             lyze these datasets often lack interpretability and identifiability guarantees, which
             are essential for biomedical research. Recent advances in causal representation
             learning have shown promise in identifying interpretable latent causal variables
             with formal theoretical guarantees. Unfortunately, most current work on multi-
             modal distributions either relies on restrictive parametric assumptions or yields
             only coarse identification results, limiting their applicability to biomedical re-
             search that favors a detailed understanding of the mechanisms.
             In this work, we aim to develop flexible identification conditions for multimodal
             data and principled methods to facilitate the understanding of biomedical datasets.
             Theoretically, we consider a nonparametric latent distribution (c.f., parametric as-
             sumptions in previous work) that allows for causal relationships across potentially
             different modalities. We establish identifiability guarantees for each latent com-
             ponent, extending the subspace identification results from previous work. Our key
             theoretical contribution is the structural sparsity of causal connections between
             modalities, which, as we will discuss, is natural for a large collection of biomed-
             ical systems. Empirically, we present a practical framework to instantiate our
             theoretical insights. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through
             extensive experiments on both numerical and synthetic datasets. Results on a
             real-world human phenotype dataset are consistent with established biomedical
             research, validating our theoretical and methodological framework.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal datasets provide rich and comprehensive insights into complex biomedical systems,
offering the potential to provide a deeper understanding of physiological mechanisms. For example,
the human phenotype dataset (Levine et al., 2024) contains measurements from multiple modalities,
including anthropometric data, sleep monitoring, and genetic information. Proper analysis of such
data can potentially uncover the underlying mechanisms that drive phenotypic diversity and disease
susceptibility, leading to the discovery of novel molecular markers and the development of predictive
models for disease. Recent advances in large-scale models have made it possible to exploit large
biomedical datasets for various tasks such as protein structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021; Lin
et al., 2023), gene-disease association identification (Diaz Gonzalez et al., 2023; Zagirova et al.,
2023), and novel drug candidate discovery (Pal et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024b).
Despite the impressive performance of these models, their trustworthiness remains a contentious
issue (Zheng et al., 2023). A major concern lies in their lack of interpretability, which poses signifi-
cant challenges in biomedical research and hinders the safe and ethical application of these models.
For example, in clinical decision-making (Hager et al., 2024), if the model recommends a specific
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


treatment plan for a patient, it is important for clinicians to understand the rationale behind the rec-
ommendation. Without such transparency, it is difficult to trust the model’s output or integrate these
systems into critical decision-making workflows. Although several explainable models have been
developed for multimodal datasets (Tang et al., 2023), this area remains largely underexplored.
Fortunately, recent advances in causal representation learning (CRL) (Schölkopf et al., 2021) have
shown promise in identifying latent causal structures from raw observations, making it well-suited
for biomedical applications. For example, a plethora of CRL studies (Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khe-
makhem et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Buchholz et al., 2024; von Kügelgen et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024c; Ahuja et al., 2023) effectively utilize temporal information or domain
indices to identify latent causal models and apply them in fMRI data. Recently, a growing body
of CRL research has investigated multimodal distributions (Yao et al., 2023; Morioka & Hyvarinen,
2023; 2024; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Sturma et al., 2023; Gresele et al., 2020). These works leverage
shared information across modalities to establish identifiability guarantees for latent variables (Yao
et al., 2023; Morioka & Hyvarinen, 2024; Daunhawer et al., 2023). Despite these advancements,
some aspects of these works are still limited. For instance, Von Kügelgen et al. (2021); Daunhawer
et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023) only focus on identifying latent subspaces that are directly shared by
multiple modalities. In practice, however, many informative latent variables may influence multiple
modalities indirectly through intermediate latent mechanisms. Moreover, such subspace identifiabil-
ity loses track of the intricate causal influences among individual components, leading to a limited
view of the underlying latent mechanism. Morioka & Hyvarinen (2024); Gresele et al. (2020);
Morioka & Hyvarinen (2023) rely on specific assumptions about latent variable distributions (e.g.,
independence or exponential family). These constraints significantly limit their applicability for
biomedical datasets that involve complex interactions among latent factors.
                                         In this work, we aim to develop identification theory with
                                         multimodal biomedical datasets in mind, and design prin-
                                         cipled and interpretable models to facilitate analyzing such
                                         datasets. We assume that observations x(m) in each modal-
                                         ity m are generated by a specific set of latent components
                                             (m)
                                         {zi }i , and allow for flexible causal relationships among la-
                                         tent components from potentially different modalities, such
                                                (m)       (n)
                                         that zi     → zj for m ̸= n, i ̸= j, as shown in Figure 1.
                                         Theoretically, we provide identifiability guarantees for each
                                                               (m)
                                         latent component zi , thus generalizing the subspace iden-
                                         tification results in Yao et al. (2023); Daunhawer et al. (2023)
                                         while avoiding independence or parametric restrictions on the
                                                                   (m)
Figure 1: Multimodal data with latent distribution p({z }m ) as in Morioka & Hyvarinen
causal latent variables.                 (2023; 2024); Gresele et al. (2020). In particular, we first
                                         show that any latent subspace z(m) can be identified as long
                                         as z(m) exerts sufficient influences on other modalities, which
                                (m)
is weaker than assuming that z      is directly shared across multiple modalities as in Daunhawer et al.
(2023); Yao et al. (2023). Based on this subspace identification, we leverage the sparsity of the causal
                                                                                    (m)
connections between modalities to further identify each latent component {zi }i . This notion of
causal sparsity has been explored in recent work (Lachapelle et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024; Zheng
et al., 2022) in other causal identification settings and has been shown realistic in many biomedical
systems (Busiello et al., 2017; Milo et al., 2002; Babu et al., 2004; West et al., 2002; Banavar et al.,
1999), as we will discuss further in Section 4.
Empirically, we develop a theoretically grounded estimation framework to recover the latent com-
ponents in each modality. Our model implements our theoretical conditions (in particular, con-
ditional independence and sparsity constraints) on top of normalizing flow (Huang et al., 2018;
Kobyzev et al., 2020) within the encoder-decoder framework. Extensive experiments on both nu-
merical and synthetic datasets demonstrate its effectiveness. Most notably, our framework enables
the identification of latent causal variables that capture complex biomedical interactions and facili-
tates the analysis of potential causal mechanisms across modalities, which are important for clinical
decision-making. The evaluation results on a real-world human phenotype dataset provide novel in-
sights into the relationships between modalities, and the discovered causal relationships align with
the findings from biomedical research, highlighting our contributions to the biomedical domain.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2      R ELATED W ORK
ML models for biomedical research. For biomedical applications, ML models are developed to
extract informative representations to facilitate downstream tasks, including DNA sequence mod-
eling (Zhou et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2023; Dalla-Torre et al., 2023), protein structure predic-
tion (Jumper et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023), and disease detection (Zhou et al., 2023; Jang et al.,
2024). The success of large language models (LLMs) has significantly advanced sequence model-
ing for DNA, RNA, and proteins (Celaj et al., 2023; Shulgina et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2024; Li
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023), yet these methods primarily operate on a single
modality, limiting their applicability to the multimodal datasets, which are commonly encountered
in biomedical research. Although several studies have explored integrating multimodal biomedical
data (Garau-Luis et al., 2024; Pei et al., 2024; Taylor et al., 2022), these approaches often lack the-
oretical guarantees, raising concerns about the reliability of their results. In this paper, we leverage
causal principles to develop theoretically sound ML models for multimodal biomedical data, aiming
to provide reliable and interpretable insights into complex biomedical systems.
Multimodal representation learning. Multimodal representation learning (Zhang et al., 2020;
Manzoor et al., 2023) refers to the process of learning representations from multiple data modalities
(e.g., text, image, audio) for specific tasks. Recent advances have leveraged contrastive learning
techniques to improve the alignment of latent spaces across different modalities (Daunhawer et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2021; Khosla et al., 2020). Methods like CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) and Contrastive Predictive Coding (Oord et al., 2018) have demonstrated the ability to
recover shared latent factors across modalities by (implicitly) maximizing mutual information be-
tween representations. However, challenges remain in achieving finding modality-specific represen-
tations, which requires novel approaches that preserve the unique characteristics of each modality.
Identifiable CRL. CRL aims to identify high-level causal variables from low-level observations,
integrating principles from both machine learning and causality (Schölkopf et al., 2021), and can be
viewed as an extension of causal discovery (Spirtes et al., 2001; Li et al., 2024a; Luo et al., 2025; Li
et al., 2024b; Ziu et al., 2024). CRL methods with identifiability guarantees can be classified based
on the assumptions they impose, including sparsity constraints (Xu et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2022;
Zheng & Zhang, 2023; Lachapelle et al., 2024), interventional/multi-distribution settings (Hyvarinen
et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Kong et al., 2023; Buchholz et al., 2024;
von Kügelgen et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024c; Varici et al., 2023; Ahuja et al.,
2023; Jiang & Aragam, 2023), and of particular relevance to our work, multimodality (Yao et al.,
2023; Morioka & Hyvarinen, 2023; 2024; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Sturma et al., 2023; Gresele
et al., 2020). To provide a clearer comparison, Table 1 summarizes representative works in the
multimodality category and highlights their differences from our work.
Empirical CRL for multimodal applications. In contrast to the previously discussed works that
emphasize identifiability, another line of multimodal CRL research prioritizes practical applications
in various domains, without addressing theoretical identifiability. Mao et al. (2022) assume inde-
pendent latent variables and introduce a two-module amortized variational algorithm to learn rep-
resentations from medical images and biomedical data. Zheng et al. (2024a) develop a contrastive
learning-based approach to extract modality-specific and modality-invariant representations from
time-series tabular and textual data for root cause analysis. Rawls et al. (2021) leverage behavioral
and psychiatric phenotyping alongside high-resolution neuroimaging data from the Human Con-
nectome Project (Van Essen et al., 2013), and perform greedy fast causal inference (Ogarrio et al.,
2016) to investigate causal relations in alcohol use disorder. In contrast, our work establishes formal
identification theory and integrates the theoretical insights into our estimation model.
Table 1:    Related work on multimodal causal representation learning. This table considers whether a
method can accommodate more than two modalities, whether the latent variable distribution is nonparametric,
whether it allows dependency among latent variables, and whether identifiability is component-wise.
    Related work                  > 2 Modalities   Nonparam. Dist.   Latent Dependency   Component-wise Iden.
    Gresele et al. (2020)               ✓                ×                  ×                     ✓
    Von Kügelgen et al. (2021)         ×                ✓                  ✓                     ×
    Daunhawer et al. (2023)             ×                ✓                  ✓                     ×
    Yao et al. (2023)                   ✓                ✓                  ✓                     ×
    Morioka & Hyvarinen (2024)          ✓                ×                  ✓                     ✓
    Our work                            ✓                ✓                  ✓                     ✓


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3       L ATENT M ULTIMODAL C AUSAL M ODELS
Real-world biomedical datasets often integrate multiple modalities, each characterizing a unique yet
interrelated aspect of the subject. For instance, the human phenotype dataset (Shilo et al., 2021)
consists of tabular data, time series, images, and text, capturing diverse biomedical measurements
such as anthropometrics, sleep monitoring, and genetic information. Understanding the latent factors
behind each modality and their interplay can provide valuable insights into underlying biomedical
mechanisms, ultimately facilitating the advancement of biomedical technologies. With this goal in
mind, we formalize the multimodal data-generating processes as follows.
                 (1)          (1)          (2)         (2)              (3)            (3)
                ϵ1           ϵ2           ϵ1        ϵ2                 ϵ1             ϵ2
                       (1)          (1)          (2)         (2)              (3)            (3)
                     z1           z2           z1          z2                z1             z2      Figure 2: An illustrative exam-
                                                                                                    ple of the hypothesis space un-
                     η (1)                  η (2)                       η (3)
                                                                                                    derlying the biomedical system.
                             x(1)                   x(2)                          x(3)

Data-generating processes. Let x := [x(1) , . . . , x(M ) ] be a set of observations/measurements
                                           (m)
from M modalities, where x(m) ∈ Rd(x ) represents the observation from modality m with
dimensionality d(x(m) ). Let z = [z(1) , . . . , z(M ) ] be the set of causally related latent variables
underlying M modalities. Specifically, the data generation process (Figure 2) can be formulated as
                                    (m)                            (m)            (m)
                                  zi       := gz(m) (Pa(zi                  ), ϵi          ), (latent causal relations)                (1)
                                                       i
                                    (m)                         (m)        (m)
                                  x        := gx(m) (z                ,η         ),              (generating functions)                (2)
where Pa(·) denotes the parents of a variable. Since we allow for causal relations to exist within
and across modalities, Pa(·) potentially includes latent variables across multiple modalities. The
differentiable function gz encodes the latent causal graph connecting the latent components, and its
                                                                                   (m)
Jacobian matrix Jgz can be permuted into a strictly triangular matrix. We denote ϵi as the exoge-
                    (m)
nous variable for zi , where all exogenous variables are mutually independent. η (m) represents
domain-specific information independent of other components.
Example. In healthcare, different modalities capture complementary physiological aspects. A
chest X-ray x(m) may reflect latent factors such as lung density, cardiac silhouette, and ribcage
structure, represented by z(m) . These latent factors can causally influence those in other modali-
ties, z(n) , such as pulmonary function parameters (e.g., forced vital capacity) and cardiovascular
biomarkers (e.g., left ventricular mass). These, in turn, may affect electrical activity recorded in an
ECG, represented by x(n) , by modulating heart rate variability and conduction patterns.
Goal. As outlined previously, we aim to learn the latent variables underlying each modality and
their causal relations. Formally, consider two specifications of the data-generating process in Eq. (1)
and Eq. (2): θ := {gx(m) , gz(m) , p(ϵ(m) )}M
                                            m=1 and θ̂ := {ĝx(m) , ĝz(m) , p̂(ϵ
                                                                                  (m) M
                                                                                     )}m=1 , both of which
fit the marginal distribution p(x). Our objective is to show that, given the same value of x, each
                               (m)                                           (m)
estimated latent component ẑi is equivalent to its true counterpart zi up to an invertible trans-
             (m)        (m)     (m) (m)      1
formation hi , i.e., ẑi = hi (zi ). This component-wise identifiability ensures that latent
components (e.g., gene types, nutrient levels) are disentangled from the observed measurements x
while preserving their original information. Once component-wise identifiability is achieved, one
can readily apply standard causal discovery algorithms (e.g., PC (Spirtes et al., 2001)) to the identi-
                    (m)
fied components ẑi to infer the graphical structures. The choice of structure learning algorithms
can be tailored to the assumed graph class (e.g., potentially non-DAGs), and this step is orthogonal
to our contribution. These structures characterize the interactions between all latent components
across modalities, which is particularly desirable for biomedical applications.

4       I DENTIFICATION T HEORY
                                                                                                                                      (m)
As motivated in Section 3, we address the component-wise identifiability of latent components zi                                            .
    1
        Please see Appendix A for details on the notion of identifiability.


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remarks on the problem. Identification for multimodal distributions often leverages the structure
among the available modalities. However, component-wise identification, especially in the general
nonparametric setting, is challenging. Daunhawer et al. (2023); Von Kügelgen et al. (2021); Yao
et al. (2023) require certain information redundancy: the information of the latent variables should
be fully shared and preserved by the observations of at least two modalities – that is, we can express
z(m) as functions of x(m1 ) and x(m2 ) individually. Moreover, the identification can only be achieved
up to subspaces (i.e., groups of latent components) determined by the sharing pattern. Often, how-
ever, the latent components may not be fully shared by multiple modalities. For example, in health
monitoring, while sleep monitoring data (e.g., sleep stages or duration) may not fully encode genetic
predispositions, genetic factors may still influence sleep disorders, such as insomnia and circadian
rhythm disruptions. In this case, the subspace identification may fall short of providing detailed
interpretations of biomedical systems and the mechanisms encoded in the graphical structures over
individual causal components.
For work that achieves component-wise identifiability, Morioka & Hyvarinen (2023; 2024) assume
that the latent distribution p({z(m) }M
                                      m=1 ) follows an exponential family form with additive causal
influences from multiple parents, which may be restrictive in general cases. For instance, in brain
imaging studies, fMRI data and EEG data capture different neural activities, and the interactions
between brain regions are often highly nonlinear. Clearly, for general multimodal distributions
(Figure 2), we cannot access the information redundancy assumed in Daunhawer et al. (2023);
Von Kügelgen et al. (2021); Yao et al. (2023) and the nicely-behaved latent causal models in para-
metric assumptions (Morioka & Hyvarinen, 2023; 2024).

Our high-level approach. We divide the problem into two parts: we first identify latent subspaces
                                                                                      (m)
z(m) (Section 4.1) and further disentangle identified subspaces into components zi (Section 4.2).
For the subspace identification, we only assume that the information of the subspace z(m) is pre-
served in its corresponding observation x(m) and exerts sufficient influence on other modalities’ ob-
servations x(−m) , thus weakening the redundancy assumption in previous work (Daunhawer et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023). For the component-wise identification, we leverage a natural notion of struc-
tural sparsity in the literature (Zheng et al., 2022; Lachapelle et al., 2024) – the dependency among
all the modalities should be explained with a minimal number of causal edges among latent sub-
spaces {z(m) }M m=1 . This allows us to further disentangle each subspace into components, without
resorting to parametric assumptions (Morioka & Hyvarinen, 2023; 2024).

Notations. We denote the dimensionality and the component indices of a given argument with
d(·) and I(·), respectively. The notation −m represents the complement of modality m, while
superscripts and subscripts enclosed in parentheses, such as (m), explicitly index modality m. We
denote sub-matrices using the notation [·]R,C , where R and C are index sets corresponding to row
and column selections, respectively. In this notation, setting R (or C) to : indicates the inclusion of
all indices along the corresponding dimension.

4.1      I DENTIFYING L ATENT S UBSPACES

As previously discussed, we now provide the subspace identifiability. Formally, we would like to
show that the estimated latent subspace ẑ(m) for any modality m and its true counterpart z(m) are
equivalent up to an invertible map h(m) (·), i.e., ẑ(m) = h(m) (z(m) ).
Given the data-generating process Eq. (2), the task is to remove modality-specific information η (m)
from the observational data x(m) while retaining the latent variables z(m) causally related to other
modalities. In light of this, we express the relations between the latent variables z(m) and the
observation of its own modality x(m) and other modalities x(−m) as Eq. (3).
                       x(m) = gx(m) (z(m) , η (m) ),       x(−m) = g̃x(−m) (z(m) , η̃ (−m) ),                      (3)
           (−m)                                                                                       (−m)
where η̃     denotes all the information necessary to generate the complement group x        beyond
z(m) . 2 Consequently, η̃ (−m) may admit causal/statistical relations with z(m) . We denote the joint
map of gx(m) and g̃x(−m) as g̃ (m) : (z(m) , η (m) , η̃ (−m) ) 7→ x.
   2
       We use ˜· to differentiate η̃ (−m) from a collection of modality-specific variables η defined in Eq. (2).


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Condition 4.1 (Subspace Identifiability Conditions).

A1 [Smoothness & Invertibility]: The generating functions gx(m) and g̃ (m) are smooth and have
   smooth inverse functions.
A2 [Linear Independence]: The generating function g̃x(−m) is smooth and its Jacobian columns
   corresponding to z(m) (i.e., [Jg̃x(−m) ]:,I(z(m) ) ) are linearly independent almost anywhere.

Discussion on the conditions. Condition 4.1-A1 requires that the information of the latent vari-
ables z(m) is preserved in its observation x(m) , so that the identification of latent variables is well-
defined (Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020a; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Kong et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023; Daunhawer et al., 2023). Since this holds for any modality m, the observa-
tions x(−m) should collectively preserve the information of other modalities z(−m) .
Condition 4.1-A2 formalizes the notation of a minimal connectivity over modalities: z(m) should
also exert sufficient influence on other modalities z(−m) , so that the other modality observations
x(−m) could be informative to identify z(m) . This condition excludes degenerate scenarios where
the causal influences between modalities are nearly negligible and is equivalent to local invertibility
of z(m) , which is strictly weaker than the global invertibility assumption in previous work (Daun-
hawer et al., 2023; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2023) (e.g., y = x2 is locally invertible but
not globally so), as discussed earlier.
Theorem 4.2 (Subspace Identifiability). Let θ := {gx(m) , g̃z(−m) , p(ϵ(m) ), p(ϵ̃(−m) )}M   m=1 and
                ˆ             (m)   ˆ
θ̂ := {ĝx(m) , g̃z(−m) , p(ϵ̂ ), p(ϵ̃ (−m) M
                                           )}m=1 be two specifications of the data-generating process
in Eq. (3). Suppose that they generate identical observational distributions (i.e., p(x) = p̂(x)), θ
satisfies Condition 4.1, and θ̂ satisfies Condition 4.1-A1. The latent subspace ẑ(m) for any group m
and its counterpart z(m) are equivalent up to an invertible map h(m) (·), i.e., ẑ(m) = h(m) (z(m) ).

Interpretation and proof sketch. Theorem 4.2 states that one can disentangle the modality-
specific information η (m) and the latent variables z(m) contained in the observation x(m) (which is
a mixture of both). To achieve this, we leverage the fact that η (m) has no influence on other modal-
ities x(−m) , while z(m) has a non-trivial influence on x(−m) , as characterized in Condition 4.1-A2.
This crucial distinction provides sufficient footprints to disentangle these two subspaces for each
modality, yielding the intended result.

4.2   I DENTIFYING L ATENT C OMPONENTS

Proceeding from the subspace identifiability (Theorem 4.2), we now further disentangle each sub-
                                     (m)
space into individual components zi as outlined in Section 3. As foreshadowed, our key condition
entails the sparsity of the graphical structures between modalities. Such dependency structures are
captured in the generating function gz defined component-wise in Eq. (1), in particular its partial
derivatives. We now introduce Condition 4.3, which facilitates component-wise identification.

Additional notations. We denote the indices of the non-zero
matrix entries by Supp(·). We denote the collection of partial
                                             (m)
                                           ∂zi
derivatives among all latent components       (n)   as a matrix func-
                                           ∂zj
tion G(z, ϵ) ∈ Rd(z)×d(z) . We adopt diag(·) to denote matrices
consisting of equally-sized square matrices on its diagonal and
define T to possess the structure T = diag(T1 , . . . , TM ) with
                     (m)     (m)
invertible Tm ∈ Rd(z )×d(z ) . We denote the class of gener-
alized permutation matrices of dimensionality d(z) as P(d(z)).           Figure 3: Denser graph Ĝ.

Condition 4.3 (Component Identifiability Conditions). Over the domain of (z, ϵ), for any modality
m and any T ̸∈ P(d(z)), we have
                    X                                  X
                              −1
                            Tm   [G](m),(n) Tn >               [G](m),(n) .                   (4)
                                                         0                        0
                    m̸=n∈[M ]                                m̸=n∈[M ]


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Discussion on the conditions. Condition 4.3 stipulates sparse cross-modality causal connections
                                                                                  (m)
among latent components z. Under this condition, if a latent component ẑi is a function of two
               (m)        (m)
components ẑj and ẑk (when component-wise identification breaks down), the cross-modality
causal connections in G are guaranteed to be denser than those in Ĝ. We give a simple example to
                                                                           (1)      (2)    (3)      (1)
aid intuition in Figure 3: for a causal graph with three modalities, z1 → z1 → z1 and z2 →
  (2)      (3)                   (2)                                (2)      (2)
z2 → z2 , suppose that ẑ1 is a non-trivial mixture of z1 and z2 and other components are
                               (1) (1) (2) (2) (3) (3)               (1) (1)     (2) (2)    (2) (3) (3)
correctly identified, i.e., [ẑ1 , ẑ2 , ẑ1 , ẑ2 , ẑ1 , ẑ2 ] = [z1 , z2 , h(z1 , z2 ), z2 , z1 , z2 ].
                                                                                           (1)     (2)
As a consequence, the alternative causal graph Ĝ would include additional edges ẑ2 → ẑ1 and
  (2)      (3)
ẑ2 → ẑ1 , giving rise to a strictly denser graph. In Theorem 4.4, we show that this sparse struc-
ture could give us the desired component-wise identifiability under a proper sparse regularization
constraint. The availability of multiple modalities greatly improves the feasibility of such sparsity
conditions, especially with a large number of modalities, because the entanglement is limited within
a single modality (owing to Theorem 4.1) and all other modalities can be leveraged to provide space
for sparse connections.
Sparsity conditions have been embraced by the causal representation learning commu-
nity (Lachapelle et al., 2024; Moran et al., 2022; Fumero et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). Especially
relevant to our work is Zheng et al. (2022). As discussed above, we are obliged to deal with causal
structures among all latent variables. In contrast, Zheng et al. (2022) assumes the sparsity of the
causal connections between the latent variables and the observed variables – the directions (from the
latent to the observed variables) are given and the children are directly observed. Notably, sparse
properties manifest in biomedical systems of our interest, including gene regulatory networks (Milo
et al., 2002; Babu et al., 2004; Nacher & Akutsu, 2013; Liu et al., 2011), metabolic systems (West
et al., 2002; Banavar et al., 1999), and other living systems (Busiello et al., 2017), evidencing the
plausibility of Condition 4.3 for biomedical applications.
Theorem 4.4 (Component-wise Identifiability). Let θ := ({gx(m) , gz(m) , p(ϵ(m) )}M       m=1 ) and θ̂ :=
({ĝx(m) , ĝz(m) , p̂(ϵ(m) )}M
                              m=1 ) be two  specifications of the data-generating  process in Eq. (1) and
Eq. (2). Suppose that they generate identical observational distributions (i.e., p(x) = p̂(x)) and θ
satisfies Condition 4.1 and Condition 4.3. If θ̂ satisfies the following sparse regularization condition:
                                X                           X
                                        [Ĝ](m),(n) ≤               [G](m),(n) 0 ,                     (5)
                                                  0
                           m̸=n∈[M ]                       m̸=n∈[M ]

                     (m)                         (m)
each component zi          and its counterpart ẑπ(i) are equivalent up to an invertible map h(·), i.e.,
 (m)        (m)
ẑπ(i) = h(zi     ) under a permutation π over [d(z(m) )].

Interpretation and proof sketch. The key idea of Theorem 4.4 is that for sparse causal graphs (as
characterized in Condition 4.3), the mixing of latent components in any modality would introduce
unnecessary causal edges connecting the other modalities. As the sparsity regularization Eq. (5)
selects alternative models θ̂ that are not denser than the model θ, the mixing within each modality
                                                             (m)
would be excluded. Consequently, each latent component ẑi is a function of a unique component
 (m)
zj , yielding the desired component-wise identifiability.
Implications. In the context of biomedical applications, Theorem 4.4 indicates that under appro-
                                      (m)
priate constraints, each component ẑi in our estimation uniquely captures the information of an
intrinsic biomedical factor behind the medical measurements (e.g., genetic predisposition). There-
fore, the learned representation enjoys strong interpretability under theoretical guarantees, which is
often lacking in existing biomedical models, as noted in Section 2. Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.4
provide insights for practical model design, which we employ in our architecture in Section 5.

Shared latent variables. Certain applications may involve latent variables that are shared across
modalities. In such scenarios, we can employ contrastive learning objectives and the associated the-
oretical guarantees in previous work (Yao et al., 2023; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Von Kügelgen et al.,
2021) as a pre-processing procedure and treat such shared latent variables as separate modalities in
our implementation. Please refer to Appendix C.3, C.4, and E for detailed discussion and results.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5    E STIMATION M ODEL A RCHITECTURES
Given the identifiability results, we further propose an estimation framework (shown in Figure 4) that
enforces the proposed assumptions as constraints to identify the latent variables in each modality.

                                               Figure 4: Estimation framework. Given multi-
                                               modal observations (x(1) , . . . , x(M ) ), the latent vari-
                                               ables and domain-specific information in modality m
                                               are inferred as ẑ(m) and η̂ (m) by individual encoders.
                                               The observations are then reconstructed with corre-
                                               sponding decoders as x̂(m) . We enforce indepen-
                                               dence conditions
                                                                   by minimizing the KL divergence

                                                               (m) M           d(z)
                                               term DKL [{η̂ }m=1 , {ϵ̂i }i=1 ]||N (0, I) . We en-
                                               force the sparsity constraint by minimizing the L1
                                               norm in the inferred adjacency matrix Â.

Encoder and decoder. Each modality x(m) is given as an input to the corresponding encoder and
outputs the estimated latent ẑ(m) and domain-specific information η̂ (m) . They are then concatenated
and passed to the corresponding decoder to reconstruct the observations as x̂(m) . The reconstruction
                                                                     PM
loss is calculated using the mean squared error (MSE) as LRecon = m=1 ||x(m) − x̂(m) ||22 .

Conditional independence constraints. Given Eq (3), we enforce the conditional independence
condition x(m) ⊥ ⊥ x(n) | z(m) and the independence condition on η (m) ⊥    ⊥ z(m) by enforcing inde-
                                                            d(z)
pendence among components in γ = [{η̂ (m) }M    m=1 , {ϵ̂i }i=1 ]. Such equivalence is shown in Propo-
sitions 5.1 and 5.2, and proofs are provided in Appendix B. Specifically, we minimize the KL diver-
gence loss between the posterior and a Gaussian prior distribution: LInd = DKL (p(γ)||N (0, I)).
Proposition 5.1. [Conditional Independence Condition] Let x(m) and x(n) be two different multi-
modal observations. z(m) ⊂ z are the set of block-identifying latent variables, and η (m) ⊂ η are
domain-specific information in modality m. We have x(m) ⊥ ⊥ x(n) | z(m) ⇐⇒ η (m) ⊥ ⊥ η (n) .
Proposition 5.2. [Independent Noise Condition] Let z and η be the block-identified latent variables
and domain-specific information, respectively, across all modalities. Denote ϵ as the exogenous
variables in the latent causal structure. We have η ⊥
                                                    ⊥ z ⇐⇒ η ⊥
                                                             ⊥ ϵ.

Sparsity regularization. We use flow to estimate the exogenous variables ϵ in Eq. (1) and imple-
ment the causal relations through a learnable adjacency matrix Â. The binary values in Â represent
the causal generation process between latent variables, e.g. Âi,j = 1 indicates ẑj is the parent of ẑi ,
while Âi,j = 0 means ẑj dose not contribute to the generation of ẑi . For each component ẑi , we
select its parents Pa(ẑi ) based on the adjacency matrix, and apply the flow transformation to get ϵ̂i .
To encourage sparsity among the latent variables ẑ, we impose a regularization term on the learned
adjacency matrix. Based on the sparsity assumption, the optimal causal graph should be the minimal
one that still allows the model to accurately match the ground truth generative distribution. To
achieve this, we reduce the dependencies between different components of ẑ by adding a L1 penalty
on the adjacency matrix, s.t., LSp = ||Â||1 .

Optimization. The model parameters are optimized using the combination objective:
                                L = αRecon LRecon + αInd LInd + αSp LSp .                               (6)

6    E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
To evaluate the efficacy of our proposed method, we conduct extensive experiments on (1) numer-
ical, (2) synthetic and (3) real-world datasets. In terms of the baselines, we compare our method
with: (1) BetaVAE (Higgins et al., 2017), which does not consider causal relations in the latent
space. (2) CausalVAE (Yang et al., 2020), which considers the causally related latent variables with


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a single modality. (3) Multimodal contrastive learning (MCL) (Daunhawer et al., 2023), which re-
covers the shared latent factors from multiple modalities. Throughout the experiments, we consider
the following evaluation metrics: (1) Mean Correlation Coefficient (MCC) measures how well the
estimated latent variables match the true ones, with an MCC of 1 indicating perfect identifiability
up to component-wise transformations. (2) R2 measures the proportion of variance in the ground
truth latent that is explained by the estimated latent, with a value of 1 indicating that all variance is
explained. (3) Structural Hamming Distance (SHD) compares graphs by their adjacency matrices,
where a lower SHD indicates stronger similarity between graphs.


(a) Causal comparison between esti- (b) Comparison of the identifiabil- (c) Identifiability result under
mated and true graphs (SHD=0).      ity result in different cases.      different sparsity ratios.


Figure 5: Numerical experiment results. (a) Successful recovery of the inter-modal causal graph.
(b) Baseline comparisons in different cases. (c) Result of sparsity ablation study.


6.1   N UMERICAL DATASET

Setup. In the numerical simulations, we consider three cases with different numbers of modali-
ties and inter-modal causal relations. Case 1: 15-dimensional observations across two modalities,
each with two latent and one exogenous variable. Case 2: 20-dimensional observations across two
modalities, each with three latent and one exogenous variable. Case 3: 30-dimensional observations
across four modalities, each with two latent and one exogenous variable. The nonparametric mixing
function is simulated by a random MLP with LeakyReLU units, and the inter-modal latent variables
are sparse causally related. The detailed data-generation process is provided in Appendix D.1.

Results and ablation. Figure 5 shows the identifiability results in different cases, where the high
MCC indicates the successful recovery of the latent variables. The inter-modal causal relations are
successfully recovered (SHD=0) and the causal comparison result in case 1 is shown in Figure 5(a).
The identifiability comparison results are shown in Figure 5(b) (MCL is not applicable in case 3
due to the two-modality constraint). CausalVAE requires additional supervision signals to establish
identifiability, and MCL assumes content invariance and can only block-identify latent variables. In
general, these baselines neither account for the multimodal setting nor the modality-specific latent
variables, and therefore do not recover the latent variables.
As an ablation study, we further show the consequences of violating the sparsity assumptions to
validate our theorem. Based on case 2, we create four types of datasets with different sparsity
ratios and report the MCC in each scenario in Figure 5(c). The sparsity ratio represents the ratio of
existing causal links to all possible causal links between modality-specific latent variables. A value
of 0 indicates that the latent variables between modalities are fully connected, while higher values
correspond to sparser connections. The result shows that identifiability can be better achieved with
a higher sparsity ratio, and our framework outperforms other baselines in all scenarios.

6.2   S YNTHETIC DATASET: VARIANT MNIST

Setup. We manually create a variant of the MNIST dataset to encode causal relationships between
different modalities, using colored MNIST (Arjovsky et al., 2019) and fashion MNIST (Xiao et al.,
2017) as two different modalities. In colored MNIST, the horizontal position of the digit influences
the image transparency. This horizontal position further serves as a causal factor for the vertical
position of the fashion items in the fashion MNIST, which influences image grayscale. This design
ensures a structured causal dependency across modalities while maintaining a non-deterministic
mapping. Further data descriptions are provided in the Appendix D.2.

                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results. Table 2 presents the results of the           Table 2: The results of MNIST dataset.
identifiability comparison, where higher MCC                MCL BetaVAE CausalVAE Ours
and R2 indicate better performance of our
method. BetaVAE does not explicitly model           R2 0.79 ± 6e-5 0.68 ± 2e-3 0.50 ± 4e-3 0.90 ± 9e-5
                                                   MCC 0.63 ± 2e-6 0.53 ± 1e-3 0.74 ± 2e-3 0.85 ± 3e-5
causal relationships among latent variables, lead-
ing to suboptimal recovery in our setting.
CausalVAE, which relies on additional supervision, fails to recover the latent variables effectively.

6.3   R EAL - WORLD DATASET: H UMAN P HENOTYPE

The human phenotype dataset (Shilo et al., 2021) is a large-scale, longitudinal collection of pheno-
typic profiles from a diverse global population. It includes comprehensive human health data and
provides a comprehensive view of health and disease factors. The dataset contains various types
of participant information, categorized into tabular, time series, and image data. Specifically, it in-
cludes health information across 30 modalities, such as blood tests, anthropometry, fundus imaging,
etc. Detailed data descriptions can be found in the Appendix D.3.


Figure 6: Causal analysis results across different modalities, including hand grip, medical condi-
tions, sleep, and anthropometrics. We ran the causal algorithm on all variables, but for clarity only
report the causal relationships that have direct connections to the estimated latent variables.

In this work, we focus on the time-series sleep monitoring dataset (Sleep) and the fundus imaging
dataset for both left and right eyes (FLeft and FRight) to estimate the latent factors (Z1, Z2, Z3)
underlying each modality. We applied the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001) to discover causal
relationships between the estimated latent variables and other four additional tabular modalities
(A, B, C, D), providing an implicit evaluation on the effectiveness. The result with direct causal
relations is shown in Figure 6, where variables from the same modality have the same color and
different modalities have different colors.
A key finding is that the discovered causal relationships are consistent with findings from medical
research. For example, Sleep 1 shows a direct causal relationship with Oxygen saturation, suggesting
that sleep conditions may influence blood oxygen levels. This observation is consistent with previous
studies (Wali et al., 2020). In addition, the fundus-related latent variables FRight 1 and FLeft 1 have
a direct causal relationship with Age, suggesting that aging plays an important role in changes in
retinal health (Ege et al., 2002; Einbock et al., 2005). Interestingly, the fundus image of the right
eye has a direct causal relationship with the grip strength of the left hand, as recently demonstrated
in biomedical research (Bikbov et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2020).


7     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we develop a theoretically grounded framework for recovering latent causal variables
from multi-modal observations. Extensive experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our approach. Limitations: Empirically, our framework
assumes prior knowledge of the number of latent variables in each modality, which may be unreal-
istic in real-world scenarios. Additionally, a detailed evaluation against the quantitative benchmarks
used in biomedical models remains an area for future exploration.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would also like to acknowledge the support from NSF Award No. 2229881, AI Institute
for Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM), the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Contract
R01HL159805, and grants from Quris AI, Florin Court Capital, and MBZUAI-WIS Joint Program.
The work of L. Kong is supported in part by NSF DMS-2134080 through an award to Y. Chi. P. Sto-
janov was supported in part by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) grant number: K99CA277583-
01, and funding from the Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard.

B IBLIOGRAPHY
Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional causal representa-
  tion learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 372–407. PMLR, 2023.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
M Madan Babu, Nicholas M Luscombe, L Aravind, Mark Gerstein, and Sarah A Teichmann. Struc-
 ture and evolution of transcriptional regulatory networks. Current opinion in structural biology,
 14(3):283–291, 2004.
Jayanth R Banavar, Amos Maritan, and Andrea Rinaldo. Size and form in efficient transportation
  networks. Nature, 399(6732):130–132, 1999.
Mukharram M Bikbov, Rinat M Zainullin, Timur R Gilmanshin, Ellina M Iakupova, Gyulli M
 Kazakbaeva, Songhomitra Panda-Jonas, Azaliia M Tuliakova, Albina A Fakhretdinova, Leisan I
 Gilemzianova, and Jost B Jonas. Hand grip strength and ocular associations: the ural eye and
 medical study. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 107(10):1567–1574, 2023.
Simon Buchholz, Goutham Rajendran, Elan Rosenfeld, Bryon Aragam, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Pradeep Ravikumar. Learning linear causal representations from interventions under general non-
  linear mixing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Daniel M Busiello, Samir Suweis, Jorge Hidalgo, and Amos Maritan. Explorability and the origin
  of network sparsity in living systems. Scientific reports, 7(1):12323, 2017.
Albi Celaj, Alice Jiexin Gao, Tammy TY Lau, Erle M Holgersen, Alston Lo, Varun Lodaya, Christo-
  pher B Cole, Robert E Denroche, Carl Spickett, Omar Wagih, et al. An rna foundation model en-
  ables discovery of disease mechanisms and candidate therapeutics. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–09, 2023.
Ken Chen, Yue Zhou, Maolin Ding, Yu Wang, Zhixiang Ren, and Yuedong Yang. Self-supervised
  learning on millions of pre-mrna sequences improves sequence-based rna splicing prediction.
  bioRxiv, pp. 2023–01, 2023.
Pierre Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept? Signal processing, 36(3):287–314,
  1994.
Hugo Dalla-Torre, Liam Gonzalez, Javier Mendoza Revilla, Nicolas Lopez Carranza, Adam Henryk
  Grzywaczewski, Francesco Oteri, Christian Dallago, Evan Trop, Hassan Sirelkhatim, Guillaume
  Richard, Marcin Skwark, Karim Beguir, Marie Lopez, and Thomas Pierrot. The nucleotide trans-
  former: Building and evaluating robust foundation models for human genomics. bioRxiv, 2023.
  doi: 10.1101/2023.01.11.523679. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2023/01/15/2023.01.11.523679.
Imant Daunhawer, Alice Bizeul, Emanuele Palumbo, Alexander Marx, and Julia E Vogt. Identifi-
  ability results for multimodal contrastive learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Armando D Diaz Gonzalez, Kevin S Hughes, Songhui Yue, and Sean T Hayes. Applying biobert to
  extract germline gene-disease associations for building a knowledge graph from the biomedical
  literature. In Proceedings of the 2023 7th International Conference on Information System and
  Data Mining, pp. 37–42, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bernhard M Ege, Ole K Hejlesen, Ole V Larsen, and Toke Bek. The relationship between age and
  colour content in fundus images. Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica, 80(5):485–489, 2002.
Wilma Einbock, Andreas Moessner, Ute EK Schnurrbusch, Frank G Holz, Sebastian Wolf, and
 FAM Study Group. Changes in fundus autofluorescence in patients with age-related maculopathy.
 correlation to visual function: a prospective study. Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental
 Ophthalmology, 243:300–305, 2005.
Marco Fumero, Florian Wenzel, Luca Zancato, Alessandro Achille, Emanuele Rodolà, Stefano
 Soatto, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Francesco Locatello. Leveraging sparse and shared feature
 activations for disentangled representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36:27682–27698, 2023.
Juan Jose Garau-Luis, Patrick Bordes, Liam Gonzalez, Masa Roller, Bernardo P. de Almeida, Lorenz
  Hexemer, Christopher Blum, Stefan Laurent, Jan Grzegorzewski, Maren Lang, Thomas Pierrot,
  and Guillaume Richard. Multi-modal transfer learning between biological foundation models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14150.
Luigi Gresele, Paul K Rubenstein, Arash Mehrjou, Francesco Locatello, and Bernhard Schölkopf.
  The incomplete rosetta stone problem: Identifiability results for multi-view nonlinear ica. In
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 217–227. PMLR, 2020.
Paul Hager, Friederike Jungmann, Robbie Holland, Kunal Bhagat, Inga Hubrecht, Manuel Knauer,
  Jakob Vielhauer, Marcus Makowski, Rickmer Braren, Georgios Kaissis, et al. Evaluation and mit-
  igation of the limitations of large language models in clinical decision-making. Nature medicine,
  30(9):2613–2622, 2024.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher P Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew M Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. ICLR (Poster), 3, 2017.
Chin-Wei Huang, David Krueger, Alexandre Lacoste, and Aaron Courville. Neural autoregressive
  flows. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2078–2087. PMLR, 2018.
Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature extraction by time-contrastive learning
  and nonlinear ica. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
Boa Jang, Youngbin Ahn, Eun Kyung Choe, Chang Ki Yoon, Hyuk Jin Choi, and Young-Gon
  Kim. A disease-specific foundation model using over 100k fundus images: Release and val-
  idation for abnormality and multi-disease classification on downstream tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.08790, 2024.
Yibo Jiang and Bryon Aragam. Learning nonparametric latent causal graphs with unknown inter-
  ventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:60468–60513, 2023.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoen-
   coders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International conference on artificial intelli-
   gence and statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020a.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Ricardo Monti, Diederik Kingma, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Ice-beem: Identifiable
   conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33:12768–12778, 2020b.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:18661–18673, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ivan Kobyzev, Simon JD Prince, and Marcus A Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction and
  review of current methods. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 43
  (11):3964–3979, 2020.
Lingjing Kong, Shaoan Xie, Weiran Yao, Yujia Zheng, Guangyi Chen, Petar Stojanov, Victor
  Akinwande, and Kun Zhang. Partial identifiability for domain adaptation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.06510, 2023.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Tristan Deleu, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Yoshua Bengio, Simon
   Lacoste-Julien, and Quentin Bertrand. Synergies between disentanglement and sparsity: Gen-
   eralization and identifiability in multi-task learning. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 18171–18206. PMLR, 2023.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodrı́guez López, Yash Sharma, Katie Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexan-
   dre Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Nonparametric partial disentanglement via mecha-
   nism sparsity: Sparse actions, interventions and sparse temporal dependencies. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2401.04890, 2024.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Zachary Levine, Iris Kalka, Dmitry Kolobkov, Hagai Rossman, Anastasia Godneva, Smadar Shilo,
  Ayya Keshet, Daphna Weissglas-Volkov, Tal Shor, Alon Diament, et al. Genome-wide association
  studies and polygenic risk score phenome-wide association studies across complex phenotypes in
  the human phenotype project. Med, 5(1):90–101, 2024.
Loka Li, Haoyue Dai, Hanin Al Ghothani, Biwei Huang, Jiji Zhang, Shahar Harel, Isaac Bentwich,
  Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. On causal discovery in the presence of deterministic relations.
  In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024a.
Loka Li, Ignavier Ng, Gongxu Luo, Biwei Huang, Guangyi Chen, Tongliang Liu, Bin Gu, and Kun
  Zhang. Federated causal discovery from heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13241,
  2024b.
Sizhen Li, Saeed Moayedpour, Ruijiang Li, Michael Bailey, Saleh Riahi, Lorenzo Kogler-Anele,
  Milad Miladi, Jacob Miner, Dinghai Zheng, Jun Wang, et al. Codonbert: Large language models
  for mrna design and optimization. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–09, 2023.
Xiutian Li, Siqi Sun, and Rui Feng. Causal representation learning via counterfactual intervention.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3234–3242, 2024c.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023.
Yang-Yu Liu, Jean-Jacques Slotine, and Albert-László Barabási. Controllability of complex net-
  works. nature, 473(7346):167–173, 2011.
Gongxu Luo, Haoyue Dai, Boyang Sun, Loka Li, Biwei Huang, Petar Stojanov, and Kun Zhang.
  Gene regulatory network inference in the presence of selection bias and latent confounders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2501.10124, 2025.
Muhammad Arslan Manzoor, Sarah Albarri, Ziting Xian, Zaiqiao Meng, Preslav Nakov, and Shang-
 song Liang. Multimodality representation learning: A survey on evolution, pretraining and its
 applications. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications,
 20(3):1–34, 2023.
Haiyi Mao, Hongfu Liu, Jason Xiaotian Dou, and Panayiotis V Benos. Towards cross-modal causal
  structure and representation learning. In Machine Learning for Health, pp. 120–140. PMLR,
  2022.
Ron Milo, Shai Shen-Orr, Shalev Itzkovitz, Nadav Kashtan, Dmitri Chklovskii, and Uri Alon. Net-
  work motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298(5594):824–827, 2002.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G Moran, D Sridhar, Y Wang, and D Blei. Identifiable deep generative models via sparse decoding.
  Transactions on machine learning research, 2022.
Hiroshi Morioka and Aapo Hyvarinen. Connectivity-contrastive learning: Combining causal dis-
  covery and representation learning for multimodal data. In International conference on artificial
  intelligence and statistics, pp. 3399–3426. PMLR, 2023.
Hiroshi Morioka and Aapo Hyvarinen. Causal representation learning made identifiable by grouping
  of observational variables. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Jose C Nacher and Tatsuya Akutsu. Structural controllability of unidirectional bipartite networks.
  Scientific reports, 3(1):1647, 2013.
Eric Nguyen, Michael Poli, Marjan Faizi, Armin Thomas, Callum Birch-Sykes, Michael Wornow,
  Aman Patel, Clayton Rabideau, Stefano Massaroli, Yoshua Bengio, Stefano Ermon, Stephen A.
  Baccus, and Chris Ré. Hyenadna: Long-range genomic sequence modeling at single nucleotide
  resolution, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15794.
Eric Nguyen, Michael Poli, Matthew G Durrant, Armin W Thomas, Brian Kang, Jeremy Sullivan,
  Madelena Y Ng, Ashley Lewis, Aman Patel, Aaron Lou, et al. Sequence modeling and design
  from molecular to genome scale with evo. BioRxiv, pp. 2024–02, 2024.
Juan Miguel Ogarrio, Peter Spirtes, and Joe Ramsey. A hybrid causal search algorithm for latent
  variable models. In Conference on probabilistic graphical models, pp. 368–379. PMLR, 2016.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Soumen Pal, Manojit Bhattacharya, Md Aminul Islam, and Chiranjib Chakraborty. Chatgpt or llm in
  next-generation drug discovery and development: pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies
  can make use of the artificial intelligence-based device for a faster way of drug discovery and
  development. International Journal of Surgery, 109(12):4382–4384, 2023.
Qizhi Pei, Lijun Wu, Kaiyuan Gao, Xiaozhuan Liang, Yin Fang, Jinhua Zhu, Shufang Xie, Tao Qin,
  and Rui Yan. Biot5+: Towards generalized biological understanding with iupac integration and
  multi-task tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17810, 2024.
Alejandro Pérez-Castilla, Amador Garcı́a-Ramos, Beatrı́z Redondo, Fernández-Revelles Andrés,
  Raimundo Jiménez, and Jesús Vera. Determinant factors of intraocular pressure responses to
  a maximal isometric handgrip test: hand dominance, handgrip strength and sex. Current Eye
  Research, 46(1):64–70, 2021.
Zihan Qiu, Wei Wang, Yan Tan, Miao He, Langhua Wang, Yuting Li, Xia Gong, and Wenyong
  Huang. Associations of grip strength with retinal and choroidal thickness in patients with type 2
  diabetes mellitus without retinopathy: a cross-sectional study. BMJ open, 10(7):e036782, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Eric Rawls, Erich Kummerfeld, and Anna Zilverstand. An integrated multimodal model of alcohol
  use disorder generated by data-driven causal discovery analysis. Communications biology, 4(1):
  435, 2021.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
  the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Smadar Shilo, Noam Bar, Ayya Keshet, Yeela Talmor-Barkan, Hagai Rossman, Anastasia Godneva,
  Yaron Aviv, Yochai Edlitz, Lee Reicher, Dmitry Kolobkov, et al. 10 k: a large-scale prospective
  longitudinal study in israel. European journal of epidemiology, 36(11):1187–1194, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yekaterina Shulgina, Marena I Trinidad, Conner J Langeberg, Hunter Nisonoff, Seyone
  Chithrananda, Petr Skopintsev, Amos J Nissley, Jaymin Patel, Ron S Boger, Honglue Shi, et al.
  Rna language models predict mutations that improve rna function. bioRxiv, 2024.
M Slabaugh, P Chen, B Smit, and Glaucoma Today. Cataract surgery and iop. Glaucoma Today, pp.
 17–8, 2013.
Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT press,
  2001.
Nils Sturma, Chandler Squires, Mathias Drton, and Caroline Uhler. Unpaired multi-domain causal
  representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Xin Tang, Jiawei Zhang, Yichun He, Xinhe Zhang, Zuwan Lin, Sebastian Partarrieu, Emma Bou
  Hanna, Zhaolin Ren, Hao Shen, Yuhong Yang, et al. Explainable multi-task learning for multi-
  modality biological data analysis. Nature communications, 14(1):2546, 2023.
Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia,
  Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language model for
  science, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09085.
David C Van Essen, Stephen M Smith, Deanna M Barch, Timothy EJ Behrens, Essa Yacoub,
  Kamil Ugurbil, Wu-Minn HCP Consortium, et al. The wu-minn human connectome project:
  an overview. Neuroimage, 80:62–79, 2013.
Burak Varici, Emre Acarturk, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Abhishek Kumar, and Ali Tajer. Score-
  based causal representation learning with interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08230, 2023.
Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:16451–16467,
  2021.
Julius von Kügelgen, Michel Besserve, Liang Wendong, Luigi Gresele, Armin Kekić, Elias Barein-
  boim, David Blei, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonparametric identifiability of causal represen-
  tations from unknown interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2023.
Siraj Omar Wali, Bahaa Abaalkhail, Ibrahim AlQassas, Faris Alhejaili, David W Spence, and Sei-
  thikurippu R Pandi-Perumal. The correlation between oxygen saturation indices and the standard
  obstructive sleep apnea severity. Annals of thoracic medicine, 15(2):70–75, 2020.
Teng Wang, Wenhao Jiang, Zhichao Lu, Feng Zheng, Ran Cheng, Chengguo Yin, and Ping Luo.
  Vlmixer: Unpaired vision-language pre-training via cross-modal cutmix. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 22680–22690. PMLR, 2022.
Geoffrey B West, Brian J Enquist, and James H Brown. Modelling universality and scaling. Nature,
  420(6916):626–627, 2002.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Danru Xu, Dingling Yao, Sébastien Lachapelle, Perouz Taslakian, Julius von Kügelgen, Francesco
  Locatello, and Sara Magliacane. A sparsity principle for partially observable causal representation
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08335, 2024.
Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Xinwei Shen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Causalvae:
 Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08697,
 2020.
Dingling Yao, Danru Xu, Sébastien Lachapelle, Sara Magliacane, Perouz Taslakian, Georg Martius,
  Julius von Kügelgen, and Francesco Locatello. Multi-view causal representation learning with
  partial observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04056, 2023.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weiran Yao, Yuewen Sun, Alex Ho, Changyin Sun, and Kun Zhang. Learning temporally causal
 latent processes from general temporal data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05428, 2021.
Diana Zagirova, Stefan Pushkov, Geoffrey Ho Duen Leung, Bonnie Hei Man Liu, Anatoly Urban,
  Denis Sidorenko, Aleksandr Kalashnikov, Ekaterina Kozlova, Vladimir Naumov, Frank W Pun,
  et al. Biomedical generative pre-trained based transformer language model for age-related disease
  target discovery. Aging (Albany NY), 15(18):9293, 2023.
Chao Zhang, Zichao Yang, Xiaodong He, and Li Deng. Multimodal intelligence: Representation
  learning, information fusion, and applications. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Pro-
  cessing, 14(3):478–493, 2020.
Jiaqi Zhang, Kristjan Greenewald, Chandler Squires, Akash Srivastava, Karthikeyan Shanmugam,
   and Caroline Uhler. Identifiability guarantees for causal disentanglement from soft interventions.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Kun Zhang, Shaoan Xie, Ignavier Ng, and Yujia Zheng. Causal representation learning from multi-
  ple distributions: A general setting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05052, 2024b.
Lecheng Zheng, Zhengzhang Chen, Jingrui He, and Haifeng Chen. Multi-modal causal structure
  learning and root cause analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02357, 2024a.
Yizhen Zheng, Huan Yee Koh, Jiaxin Ju, Anh TN Nguyen, Lauren T May, Geoffrey I Webb, and
  Shirui Pan. Large language models for scientific synthesis, inference and explanation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.07984, 2023.
Yizhen Zheng, Huan Yee Koh, Maddie Yang, Li Li, Lauren T May, Geoffrey I Webb, Shirui Pan,
  and George Church. Large language models in drug discovery and development: From disease
  mechanisms to clinical trials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04481, 2024b.
Yujia Zheng and Kun Zhang. Generalizing nonlinear ica beyond structural sparsity. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:13326–13355, 2023.
Yujia Zheng, Ignavier Ng, and Kun Zhang. On the identifiability of nonlinear ica: Sparsity and
  beyond. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:16411–16422, 2022.
Yukun Zhou, Mark A Chia, Siegfried K Wagner, Murat S Ayhan, Dominic J Williamson, Robbert R
  Struyven, Timing Liu, Moucheng Xu, Mateo G Lozano, Peter Woodward-Court, et al. A founda-
  tion model for generalizable disease detection from retinal images. Nature, 622(7981):156–163,
  2023.
Zhihan Zhou, Yanrong Ji, Weijian Li, Pratik Dutta, Ramana Davuluri, and Han Liu. Dnabert-
  2: Efficient foundation model and benchmark for multi-species genome, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.15006.
Roland S Zimmermann, Yash Sharma, Steffen Schneider, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel.
  Contrastive learning inverts the data generating process. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 12979–12990. PMLR, 2021.
Klea Ziu, Slavomı́r Hanzely, Loka Li, Kun Zhang, Martin Takáč, and Dmitry Kamzolov. ψ
  dag: Projected stochastic approximation iteration for dag structure learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.23862, 2024.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplementary Materials for “Causal Representation Learning
        from Multimodal Biomedical Observations”

C ONTENTS

A Notation and Terminology                                                                          18

B Constraints in the Estimation Framework                                                           18

C Identifiability Theory                                                                            20
   C.1 Proof for Theorem 4.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
   C.2 Proof for Theorem 4.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
   C.3 Extended Theorem 4.2 and its Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
   C.4 Extended Theorem 4.4 and its Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24

D Experimental Details                                                                              27
   D.1 Numerical Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27
   D.2 Synthetic Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
   D.3 Real-world Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
   D.4 Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
   D.5 Detailed Discussion on Human Phenotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           29

E Extended Experiment                                                                               29

F Implementation Details                                                                            30
   F.1   Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
   F.2   Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31

G Algorithm Pseudocode                                                                              31


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     N OTATION AND T ERMINOLOGY

We summarize the notations used throughout the paper in Table 3.

    Index
    m, n                   Modality index
    i, j                   Variable element index
    I(·)                   Component indices of a given argument
    d(·)                   Dimensionality indices of a given argument
    Variable
    x(m)                   Observation/measurement in each modality
    z(m)                   Causally related latent variables in each modality
    x(m) , x(−m)           One specific observation in modality m, and the rest of others
    z(m) , z(−m)           One specific latent variables in modality m, and the rest of others
    η                      Domain-specific information
    ϵ                      Mutually independent exogenous variables
    ẑi                    Estimated latent variables over zi
    x̂(m)                  Reconstructed observation in modality m
         (m)                                                              (m)
    Pa(zi )                Set of direct cause nodes/parents of variable zi
    Function and Hyperparameter
    gzim                   Causal function among latent variables
    gx(m)                  Nonparametric mixing function in modality m
    h                      Invertible mapping from true latent to the estimated latent
    p                      Distribution function (e.g., pzi is the distribution of zi )
    αRecon , αInd , αSp    Weights in the combination objective

                                      Table 3: List of notations.

Notions of identifiability. Following the literature on ICA (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; Hyvari-
nen et al., 2019; Comon, 1994) and causal representation learning (Yao et al., 2023; Von Kügelgen
et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al., 2023), we assume that the generating function gx(m) (Eq. (2)) is an
invertible map from (z(m) , η (m) ) to x(m) (Condition 4.1). Under this invertibility assumption, given
the value of x(m) , one can perfectly determine the value of z(m) , which is essentially the posterior
p(z|x) (a point mass here). Here, z(m) is a function of x(m) , and the identifiability of g gives rise to
the result that z(m) values can be identified from x(m) .
In statistics, to show identifiability, we start with equal distributions pϕ1 = pϕ2 to derive the equiv-
alence of the parameters ϕ1 = ϕ2 . In our case, since the functions gx(m) , ĝx(m) are invertible, one
can reason about the relation between the two specifications gx(m) and ĝx(m) through a composi-
tion h := ĝx−1 (m) ◦ gx(m) . For instance, h is the identity when the two specifications are identical.
Similarly, in this work, we start with equal values of x to establish the relation between z and ẑ.

B     C ONSTRAINTS IN THE E STIMATION F RAMEWORK

Here we provide the proofs for the constraints utilized in the estimation framework.
Proposition B.1. [Conditional Independence Condition] Let x(m) and x(n) be two different multi-
modal observations. z(m) ⊂ z are the set of block-identifying latent variables, and η (m) ⊂ η are
domain-specific information in modality m. We have

                               x(m) ⊥
                                    ⊥ x(n) | z(m) ⇐⇒ η (m) ⊥
                                                           ⊥ η (n) .                                 (7)

Proof. Given the data generation process in Eq. (2), the following assumptions hold true for any
m, n ∈ [M ]: (1) z(m) ⊥
                      ⊥ η (m) ; (2) z(m) ⊥
                                         ⊥ η (n) ; (3) η (m) ⊥
                                                             ⊥ x(n) .


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sufficient condition. Given LHS of Eq. (7), we have

                         p(x(m) , x(n) | z(m) ) = p(x(m) | z(m) )p(x(n) | z(m) ).

          RHS                                p(x(m) , x(n) , z(m) )   p(η (m) , η (n) , z(m) )     ∂η (m)    ∂η (n)
         ===⇒ p(x(m) , x(n) | z(m) ) =                 (m)
                                                                    =            (m)
                                                                                               |det (m) ||det (n) |
                                                  p(z )                     p(z )                  ∂x        ∂x
                                                                ∂η (m)       ∂η (n)
                                         = p(η (m) , η (n) | z(m) )|det||det        |
                                                                ∂x(m)        ∂x(n)
LHS                                   p(x(m) , z(m) ) p(x(n) , z(m) )
===⇒ p(x(m) | z(m) )p(x(n) | z(m) ) =
                                         p(z(m) )       p(z(m) )
                                             p(η (m) , z(m) )      ∂η (m) p(η (n) , z(m) )      ∂η (n)
                                         =                    |det       |                 |det        |
                                                p(z(m) )           ∂x(m)    p(z(m) )            ∂x(n)
                                                                                  ∂η (m)       ∂η (n)
                                         = p(η (m) | z(m) )p(η (n) | z(n) )|det          ||det        |
                                                                                  ∂x(m)        ∂x(n)
Thus we have
p(η (m) , η (n) |z(m) ) = p(η (m) |z(m) )p(η (n) |z(n) ) ⇒ p(η (m) , η (n) ) = p(η (m) )p(η (n) ) ⇒ η (m) ⊥
                                                                                                          ⊥ η (n)

Necessary condition. Given RHS of Eq. (7) and above conclusion, we have

                                               ∂η (m)                                         ∂η (n)
            p(x(m) | z(m) ) = p(η (m) )|det           |,    p(x(n) | z(m) ) = p(η (n) )|det          |
                                               ∂x(m)                                          ∂x(n)

 M ultiplication                                                  ∂η (m)       ∂η (n)
==========⇒ p(x(m) | z(m) )p(x(n) | z(m) ) = p(η (m) )p(η (n) )|det   (m)
                                                                          ||det (n) |
                                                                  ∂x           ∂x
                          (m)       (n)       (m) (n) (m)           (m)          (n)
                       ∂η        ∂η       p(η    , η  , z )      ∂η           ∂η         p(x(m) , x(n) , z(m) )
= p(η (m) , η (n) )|det (m) ||det (n) | =                   |det        ||det        | =
                       ∂x        ∂x             p(z(m) )         ∂x(m)        ∂x(n)           p(z(m) )
⇒ p(x(m) | z(m) )p(x(n) | z(m) ) = p(x(m) , x(n) | z(m) ) ⇒ x(m) ⊥
                                                                 ⊥ x(n) | z(m)
                                                                                                            (8)



Proposition B.2 (Independent Noise Condition). Let z and η be the block-identified latent variables
and domain-specific information, respectively, across all modalities. Denote ϵ as the exogenous
variables in the latent causal structure. We have
                                             η⊥
                                              ⊥ z ⇐⇒ η ⊥
                                                       ⊥ ϵ.                                                 (9)

                                                                     ∂ϵ
Proof. Given the causal function in Eq. (1), we have p(z) = p(ϵ)|det ∂z |.
Sufficient condition. Suppose (z, η) = h(ϵ, η) and η ⊥
                                                     ⊥ z, we have
                           ∂ϵ                           ∂ϵ               ∂ϵ              ∂ϵ
   p(z, η) = p(ϵ, η)|def      | ⇒ p(z)p(η) = p(ϵ, η)|def | ⇒ p(ϵ)p(η)|det | = p(ϵ, η)|def |
                           ∂z                           ∂z               ∂z              ∂z
                                ⇒ p(ϵ)p(η) = p(ϵ, η) ⇒ η ⊥
                                                         ⊥ϵ
                                                                                           (10)

Necessary condition. Suppose (z, η) = h(ϵ, η) and η ⊥
                                                    ⊥ ϵ, we have
                             ∂ϵ                       ∂ϵ
     p(z, η) = p(ϵ, η)|def      | ⇒ p(z, η) = p(ϵ)|def |p(η) ⇒ p(z, η) = p(z)p(η) ⇒ η ⊥
                                                                                      ⊥z
                             ∂z                       ∂z
                                                                                                           (11)



                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     I DENTIFIABILITY T HEORY
C.1   P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.2

We present the proof for Theorem 4.2. For ease of reference, we duplicate Condition 4.1 and Theo-
rem 4.2 below.
Condition 4.1 (Subspace Identifiability Conditions).

A1 [Smoothness & Invertibility]: The generating functions gx(m) and g̃ (m) are smooth and have
   smooth inverse functions.
A2 [Linear Independence]: The generating function g̃x(−m) is smooth and its Jacobian columns
   corresponding to z(m) (i.e., [Jg̃x(−m) ]:,I(z(m) ) ) are linearly independent almost anywhere.
Theorem 4.2 (Subspace Identifiability). Let θ := {gx(m) , g̃z(−m) , p(ϵ(m) ), p(ϵ̃(−m) )}M   m=1 and
                ˆ             (m)   ˆ
θ̂ := {ĝx(m) , g̃z(−m) , p(ϵ̂ ), p(ϵ̃ (−m) M
                                           )}m=1 be two specifications of the data-generating process
in Eq. (3). Suppose that they generate identical observational distributions (i.e., p(x) = p̂(x)), θ
satisfies Condition 4.1, and θ̂ satisfies Condition 4.1-A1. The latent subspace ẑ(m) for any group m
and its counterpart z(m) are equivalent up to an invertible map h(m) (·), i.e., ẑ(m) = h(m) (z(m) ).

Proof. Given the generating processes in Eq. (2) and Eq. (1), we can express any observed group
x(m) and its complement x(−m) := x \ x(m) as two views of the latent variables of group m:
                                                 x(m) := g (m) (z(m) , η (m) ),                                                     (12)
                                              (−m)            (−m)        (m)          (−m)
                                             x         := g          (z         , η̃          ), ,                                  (13)
where η (m) stands for exogenous variables for the group x(m) and η̃ (−m) represents all the infor-
mation necessary to generate the complement group x(−m) beyond z(m) .
Following the classic definition of identifiability, we define two specifications θ =
{gx(m) , gz(m) , p(ϵ(m) )}M
                          m=1 and θ̂ := {ĝx(m) , ĝz(m) , p̂(ϵ
                                                                (m) M
                                                                   )}m=1 that fit the observation distri-
bution p(x). To show the identifiability in terms of the functions in θ and θ̂, we show that given the
same x(m) value the identifiability between z(m) and ẑ(m) .
Thus, the subspace identification is equivalent to show that for each group m, the estimated latent
variable ẑ(m) and the true counterpart are related via an invertible map h, i.e., ẑ(m) = h(z(m) ).
Eq. (12) and the invertibility of the map (z, η (m) , η̃ (−m) ) 7→ (x(m) , x(−m) ) (Condition 4.1-A1)
                                                      ˆ (−m) ) 7→ (z(m) , η m , η̃ (−m) ).
give rise to an invertible map h̃ : (ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) , η̃
The matched observed distribution between the true and the estimated models for the generating
process Eq. (13) yields that
                                                                                  ˆ (−m) ).
                                      g (−m) (z(m) , η̃ (−m) ) = ĝ (−m) (ẑ(m) , η̃                                                (14)

Plugging in h̃ gives
                                                          h                            i
           ĝ   (−m)
                       (ẑ   (m)     ˆ (−m) ) = g (−m)
                                   , η̃                                        ˆ (−m)
                                                           h̃ ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) , η̃                                               .   (15)
                                                                                                     I(z(m) ),I(η̃ (−m) )

where we adopt I(·) to indicate the indices of its argument.
                                                                                                                (m)
For any i ∈ [d(x(m) )] and j ∈ [d(η̂ (m) )], we take partial derivative w.r.t. η̂j                                    on both sides of
Eq. (15):
                                                   ∂[ĝ (−m) ]i   ∂[g (−m) ]i
                                                                =             .                                                     (16)
                                                    ∂[η̂ (m) ]j   ∂[η̂ (m) ]j
                                                   | {z }
                                                        =0


The left-hand side of Eq. (15) equals to zero because ĝ (−m) is not a function of η̂ (m) .


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, expanding the right-hand side of Eq. (15) gives:
                X              ∂[g (−m) ]i    ∂[h̃]k          X        ∂[g (−m) ]i    ∂[h̃]k
                                           ·      (m)
                                                         =                         ·      (m) ]
                                                                                                  = 0.    (17)
            (−m)        (−m)
                                 ∂[ h̃] k    ∂[η̂     ]j        (−m)
                                                                         ∂[ h̃]k     ∂[η̂       j
       k∈I(z     )∪I(η̃      )                             k∈I(z     )


The first equality in Eq. (17) is due to the fact that η̃ (−m) is a function of x(−m) and varying η̂ (m)
                                                                                                     (−m)
doesn’t vary x(−m) (η̂ (m) is a function of x(m) thanks to the invertibility of ĝ (m) ), i.e., ∂[η̃       ]k
                                                                                                 ∂[η̂ (m) ]j
                                                                                                              =
0.
                                                (−m)
Condition 4.1-A2 implies that the matrix ∂[g∂[h̃] ]i            has a full column rank. Therefore, its
                                                          k       i,k
                                                                                                    (m)
null space contains only a zero vector, which, together with Eq. (17), implies that ∂[z     ]k
                                                                                    ∂[η̂ (m) ]j
                                                                                                = 0.
Consequently, given the generating process Eq. (12) and the invertibility of g (m) and ĝ (m) (Condi-
tion 4.1-A1), the estimated latent variable ẑ(m) and the true latent variable z(m) are related via an
invertible map, as desired.



C.2    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.4

We present the proof for Theorem 4.4. For ease of reference, we duplicate Condition 4.3 and Theo-
rem 4.4.
Condition 4.3 (Component Identifiability Conditions). Over the domain of (z, ϵ), for any modality
m and any T ̸∈ P(d(z)), we have
                    X                                  X
                              −1
                            Tm   [G](m),(n) Tn >               [G](m),(n) .                   (4)
                                                          0                              0
                       m̸=n∈[M ]                                  m̸=n∈[M ]


Theorem 4.4 (Component-wise Identifiability). Let θ := ({gx(m) , gz(m) , p(ϵ(m) )}M      m=1 ) and θ̂ :=
({ĝx(m) , ĝz(m) , p̂(ϵ(m) )}M
                              m=1 ) be two specifications of the data-generating process in Eq. (1) and
Eq. (2). Suppose that they generate identical observational distributions (i.e., p(x) = p̂(x)) and θ
satisfies Condition 4.1 and Condition 4.3. If θ̂ satisfies the following sparse regularization condition:
                                X                          X
                                        [Ĝ](m),(n) ≤               [G](m),(n) 0 ,                    (5)
                                                     0
                            m̸=n∈[M ]                         m̸=n∈[M ]

                      (m)                          (m)
each component zi           and its counterpart ẑπ(i) are equivalent up to an invertible map h(·), i.e.,
 (m)         (m)
ẑπ(i) = h(zi      ) under a permutation π over [d(z(m) )].


Proof. Given Theorem 4.2, Condition 4.1 implies that the estimated group-wise latent variable ẑ(m)
is related to the true variable z(m) through an invertible transformation h(m) , i.e.,

                                             ẑ(m) = h(m) (z(m) ).                                        (18)

It follows that the Jacobian matrix T ∂ẑ can be arranged into a block-diagonal matrix, in which
                                      ∂z
diagonal block m corresponds to a Jacobian matrix T ∂ẑ(m) . Then, the goal is to prove that these
                                                                  ∂z(m)
diagonal blocks are actually generalized permutation matrices, whose each column only contains
one nonzero entry.
We divide the proof into several steps for the sake of exposition. At step 1, we derive an equiv-
alence relation between the estimation model (ĝz , ĝx ) and the true model (gz , gx ). At step 2, we
apply Theorem 4.2 to the equivalence to characterize the relation between the true and the estimated
graph structure. At step 3, we leverage the sparsity condition (Condition 4.3) to reason about the
                                   (m)
identifiability of each component zi for m ∈ [M ] and i ∈ [d(z (m) )].


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 1. The generating process in Eq. (1) and the subspace identification Eq. (18) imply
                                                         ĝz (ẑ, ϵ̂) = h ◦ gz (z, ϵ),                                                                (19)
where h is defined as the Cartesian product of individual h(m) functions.
Taking partial derivatives w.r.t, zi of both sides of Eq. (19) yields:
                                                     T ∂ẑ


                                     G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ       ∂z
                                                              = T ∂ẑ G ∂z .                                                                          (20)
                                       ∂ẑ    ∂ ϵ̂   T ∂ ϵ̂       ∂z    ∂z
                                                                               ∂z

Each T matrix is the Jacobian matrix consisting of the corresponding partial derivatives. We use
G ∂z to denote the derivatives from the function gz which encodes the dependence structure among
   ∂z
z components. The same applies to G ∂ẑ . As discussed above, the matrix T ∂ẑ has a block-diagonal
                                                         ∂ẑ                                                               ∂z
structure (after proper permutations) with block m corresponding to the Jacobian matrix of h(m) .
Moreover, the matrix T ∂ẑ is strictly diagonal due to the generating function Eq. (1).
                                 ∂ ϵ̂



Step 2. In this step, we simplify Eq. (20) to derive the relation between the estimated graph struc-
tures and true graph structures encoded in G ∂ẑ and G ∂z respectively.
                                                                    ∂ẑ                ∂z

First, we note that the T ∂ ϵ̂ is also block-diagonal w.r.t. the groups. To see this, we compute the
                                    ∂z
                                                            (m)                (m)      (m)
                                                         ∂ϵ̂i             ∂ϵ̂i     ∂ z̃ˆi
partial derivatives therein as follows:                    (n)     =           (m)      (n) , where we denote that output of ĝz with
                                                         ∂zj              ∂ z̃ˆ
                                                                            i      ∂z      j
                                                                                                                                (m)             (m)
                                                                               ∂ z̃ˆ  ∂ ẑ
ẑ˜ in the derivative. Due to the equivalent relation z = z̃ (Eq. (1)), we have i(n) = i(n) which is
                                                                                                                           ∂zj             ∂zj
zero for distinct groups m ̸= n (Eq. (18)). It follows that
                                                                 (m)
                                                           ∂ϵ̂i
                                                                 (n)
                                                                       = 0, m ̸= n.                                                                   (21)
                                                           ∂zj
Therefore, we have shown that T ∂ ϵ̂ is block-diagonal w.r.t. the groups.
                                               ∂z

This structure allows us to simplify Eq. (20) to directly characterize the relation between the two
graphical structures G ∂ẑ and G ∂z . In particular, since T ∂ ϵ̂ is block-diagonal and T ∂ẑ is diagonal,
                       ∂ẑ           ∂z                      ∂z                            ∂ ϵ̂
the off-diagonal blocks on the left-hand side of Eq. (20) are determined by G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ . Therefore, it
                                                                                    ∂ẑ ∂z
follows from Eq. (20):
                           h             i      h          i
                             G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ      = T ∂ẑ G ∂z             , m ̸= n,                      (22)
                                         ∂ẑ   ∂z   (m),(n)                 ∂z        ∂z       (m),(n)

where we adopt subscripts (m) to denote the block for group m.
On account of the block-diagonal structure of T ∂ẑ , the left-hand side of Eq. (22) can be expressed
                                                ∂z
as follows:
            h            i     h      i     h       i         h    i        h       i
             G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ     = G ∂ẑ          T ∂ẑ        = G ∂ẑ            T ∂ẑ      .       (23)
                     ∂ẑ   ∂z   (m),(n)              ∂ẑ    (m),:          ∂z       :,(n)           ∂ẑ      (m),(n)         ∂z       (n),(n)

Analogously, the right-hand side of Eq. (22) can be expressed as:
         h            i         h     i     h      i      h     i                                                        h     i
           T ∂ẑ G ∂z         = T ∂ẑ         G ∂z      = T ∂ẑ                                                           G ∂z                  .     (24)
                    ∂z     ∂z   (m),(n)             ∂z     (m),:          ∂z     :,(n)             ∂z     (m),(m)            ∂z       (m),(n)

It follows from Eq. (22), Eq. (23), and Eq. (24) that
                    h      i       h       i        h    i                                               h          i
                     G ∂ẑ           T ∂ẑ       = T ∂ẑ                                                     G ∂z
                                 ∂ẑ    (m),(n)      ∂z        (n),(n)                ∂z       (m),(m)         ∂z       (m),(n)
                                        =⇒
                           h            i          h      i                      h     i                  h     i
                            G ∂ẑ                 = T ∂ẑ                         G ∂z                     T ∂z                   .                   (25)
                                 ∂ẑ    (m),(n)             ∂z     (m),(m)              ∂z      (m),(n)        ∂ẑ      (n),(n)
                                                         h     i
Eq. (25) relates the true off-diagonal (m ̸= n) structure G ∂z         and its estimated counterpart
                                                            ∂z (m),(n)
h       i
  G ∂ẑ        .
    ∂ẑ   (m),(n)


                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 3. We now reason about the component-wise identifiability within each modality through the
sparsity of the off-diagonal regions.
                                                                              h      i
The component-wise identifiability is equivalent to that each block sub-matrix T ∂ẑ       is a
                                                                                                           ∂z   (m),(m)
generalized permutation matrix, each row/column of which contains only one nonzero element.
Suppose that this was not the case, then it would follow from Eq. (25) and Condition 4.3 that
       X       h       i               X       h       i     h      i      h     i
                 G ∂ẑ           =               T ∂ẑ         G ∂z         T ∂z
                      ∂ẑ   (m),(n) 0                        ∂z   (m),(m)           ∂z   (m),(n)   ∂ẑ   (n),(n) 0
      m̸=n∈[M ]                            m̸=n∈[M ]
                                                        X         h          i                                             (26)
                                            >                         G ∂z                   ,
                                           |{z}                         ∂z       (m),(n) 0
                                        Condition 4.3 m̸=n∈[M ]

which would violate the sparsity constraint Eq. (5).
                               (m)                                                                                         (m)
That is, the component ẑîcannot functionally influence components in U (m) other than zi .
                                                    h     i
Therefore, we have shown that each block sub-matrix T ∂ẑ        is a generalized permutation
                                                        ∂z (m),(m)
                                            (m)    (m) (m)
matrix. Consequently, we have a bijection ẑî  = hî (zi ). Since this holds for any group m
and any component i, we have arrived at the desired conclusion.



C.3     E XTENDED T HEOREM 4.2 AND ITS P ROOF

We restate Theorem C.5 from Yao et al. (2023), which we invoke in our Theorem C.7. We drop
the entropy regularization term in Yao et al. (2023), since we assume the invertibility of estimated
functions ĝ (m) directly.
Definition C.1 (View-Specific Encoders). The view-specific encoders R := {rk : Xk → ZSk }k∈V
consist of smooth functions mapping from the respective observation spaces to the view-specific
latent space, where the dimension of the k th latent space |Sk | is assumed known for all k ∈ V .
Definition C.2 (Selection). A selection ⊘ operates between two vectors a ∈ {0, 1}d , b ∈ Rd s.t.
                                          a ⊘ b := [bj : aj = 1, j ∈ [d]]
Definition C.3 (Content Selectors). The content selectors Φ := {ϕ(i, k)}Vi ∈V,k∈Vi with ϕ(i,k) ∈
          (m)
{0, 1}|d(z )| perform selection C.2 on the encoded information: for any subset Vi ⊂ [M ] and view
                                                                                                                ′
k ∈ Vi we have the selected representation: ϕ(i, m) ⊘ ẑ(m) with ϕ(i,k) 0 =                               ϕ(i,k )        for all
                                                                                                                     0
             ′
Vi ∈ V, k, k ∈ Vi .
Definition C.4 (Information-Sharing Regularizer).PThe following regularizer penalizes the ℓ0 -
norm ∥·∥0 of the content selectors Φ: Reg(Φ) := − Vi ∈V k∈Vi ϕ(i,k) 0 .
                                                       P

Theorem C.5 (View-Specific Encoder for Identifiability (Yao et al., 2023)). Let R := {ĝ(m) }M m=1
and Φ respectively be the generating functions and content selectors (Definition C.3) that solve the
following constrained optimization problem:
                  min Reg(Φ)             subject to:         R, Φ ∈ arg min Lalignment (R, Φ) ,                            (27)

where
                      X         X            h                                                                                 i
Lalignment (R, Φ) =                      E       ϕ(i, m1 ) ⊘ [ĝ (m1 ) ]−1 (xk ) − ϕ(i, m2 ) ⊘ [ĝ m2 ]−1 (xm2 )
                                                                                                                           2
                      Vi ∈V m1 ,m2 ∈Vi
                              k<k′
                                                                                                 (28)
Then for any subset of modalities Vi ⊂ [M ] and any modality m ∈ Vi , ϕ(i, m) ⊘ [ĝ (m) ]−1 identifies
the shared subspace z(∩m∈Vi m) .
Definition C.6 (Reconstruction Loss). The following loss penalizes the deviation of the estimate x̂
and its corresponding true counterpart x in ℓ2 Lrecons := Ex (x − x̂) .


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additional notations. We slightly abuse the notation to denote both sets and vectors with bold
symbols z. Let z(m∩n) be the set of latent components shared by modality m and n, i.e., z(m∩n) :=
z(m) ∩ z(n) . Analogously, let z(m\n) be the set of latent components in modality m that are not
shared by n, i.e., z(m\n) := z(m) \ z(n) .
Theorem C.7 (Generalized Subspace Identifiability). Let {(gx(m) , g̃x(−m) )}M           m=1     and
{(ĝx(m) , g̃ˆx(−m) )}M
                      m=1 be two specifications of the generating process Eq.  (3) with potentially
shared variables z(m∩n) over any two modalities m and n. Suppose that they both match the
observational distribution p(x) = p̂(x) and satisfy Condition 4.1. Then any subspace ẑ(m) , shared
subspace ẑ(m∩n) and their counterparts z(m) , z(m∩n) are equivalent up to invertible maps.

Proof. We note that the latent model with shared latent variables across modalities can still be cast
into Equation (3) and satisfies Condition 4.1. As a consequence, Theorem 4.2 gives us the subspace
identification for each modality as in the disjoint case. Moreover, we can identify any blocks among
modalities thanks to Theorem C.5. This concludes the proof.



C.4    E XTENDED T HEOREM 4.4 AND ITS P ROOF

Additional notations and discussion. The participation of multiple modalities requires a new
definition of the shared blocks in z since the sharing structure could be nested and various numbers
of modalities could share one partition. We partition the entire latent space z into disjoint blocks
{z(b) }b∈B , whose components z have exactly the same modality membership M(z) := {m ∈
[M ] : z ∈ z(m) }. We define the zH(b) as the smallest (the least components) identified block
in z that contains z(b) . In the two-modal case, we have B = {(m ∩ n), (m \ n), (n \ m)} and
zH(m\n) = z(m) .
We denote z(b1 ) ≺ z(b2 ) if block z(b1 ) is shared by a strict subset of modalities that share z(b2 ) ,
i.e., M(z(b1 ) ) ⊊ M(z(b2 ) ). Therefore, we have either zH(b) = z(b) (it is identifiable itself) or
z(b) ≺ zH(b) \ z(b) (it is not identifiable by itself but belongs to an identifiable block zH(b) together
                                                                                                    +
with a more deeply shared block zH(b) \ z(b) ). We denote former blocks as b+ ∈ B + , i.e., zH(b ) =
    +
z(b ) , and the latter blocks as b− ∈ B − = B \ B + . In the two-modal case, the modal-specific
blocks z(m\n) , z(n\m) are not identifiable themselves, and we have z(m\n) ≺ z(m∩n) and z(n\m) ≺
z(m∩n) , and B + = {(m ∩ n)} and B − = {(m \ n), (n \ m)}.
                                      +
We note that all shared blocks z(b ) are identified. Thus their bijective indeterminacies are w.r.t,
                          +         +
themselves, i.e., z(b ) 7→ ẑ(b ) , which implies the square shape of their indeterminacy matrices
                                                                 −
[T ∂ẑ ](b+ ),(b+ ) . In contrast, the unidentifiable blocks ẑ(b ) can potentially receive the influence
  ∂z
                                                     −                   −
from all other blocks in its minimal block zH(b ) . However, z(b ) do not influence the comple-
                    −           −              −           −        −
ment block ẑH(b ) \ ẑ(b ) , since z(b ) ≺ zH(b ) \ z(b ) . For instance, ẑ(m\n) may receive influ-
                 (m∩n)           (m\n)
ences from z              and z           . Consequently, their associated non-trivial indeterminacy matrices
are [T ∂ẑ ](b− ),H(b− ) (e.g., [T ∂ẑ ](m\n),(m) ). Thus, the indeterminacy matrix T can be expressed as
       ∂z                              ∂z
T := Ton + Toff , where The matrix Ton contains all the on-diagonal square invertible matrices
                   1            (|B|)
Ton := diag(Ton      , . . . , Ton ) and Toff contains all the off-diagonal elements potentially nonzero
in the regions (b, H(b) \ b) for b ∈ B. We denote this class of matrix T as T . We denote a set
of blocks E(b) whose memberships                                                          with b’s membership
                                               are either a strict superset or do not nest
                       (b)        (b̃)          (b)         (b̃)        (b̃)        (b)
E(b) := {b̃ ∈ B|z ≺ z ∨ M(z ̸⊂ M(z ) ∧ M(z ̸⊂ M(z ) }. In the two-modality
case, we have E(m \ n) = {(m ∩ n), (n \ m)}. The regions {(E(b), b)}b∈B in the alternative
graph Ĝ reveal identifiability of the latent variables. With these notations, we state the generalized
component identification result in Theorem C.9.
Condition C.8 (Generalized Component Identifiability Conditions). Over the domain of (z, ϵ), for
any modality m, for T ∈ T and T ̸∈ P(d(z)), we have
              X                                                       X
                        [T −1 ](b̃),H(b̃) [G]H(b̃),(b) [T ](b),(b) >           [G](b̃),(b) .       (29)
                                                                0                             0
            b∈B,b̃∈E(b)                                              b∈B,b̃∈E(b)


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notice that at the absence of the shared block (m ∩ n), Condition C.8 recovers Condition 4.3 where
E(m) = B \ {m} and H(m \ n) = m, and H(n \ m) = n.
Theorem         C.9      (Generalized     Component-wise        Identifiability). Let   θ         :=
({gx(m) , gz(m) , p(ϵ(m) )}M
                           m=1 ) and θ̂ := ({ĝx(m) , ĝz(m) , p̂(ϵ
                                                                    (m) M
                                                                       )}m=1 ) be two specifications
of the data-generating process in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) with potentially shared variables z(m∩n)
over any modalities m and n. Suppose that they generate identical observational distributions
(i.e., p(x) = p̂(x)) and θ satisfies Condition 4.1 and Condition C.8. If θ̂ satisfies the following
condition:
                             X                         X
                                      [Ĝ](b̃),(b) ≤              [G](b̃),(b) ,                 (30)
                                                         0                                    0
                              b∈B,b̃∈E(b)                         b∈B,b̃∈E(b)
                        (m)                            (m)
each component zi             and its counterpart ẑπ(i) are equivalent up to an invertible map h(·), i.e.,
 (m)           (m)
ẑπ(i) = h(zi        ) under a permutation π over [d(z(m) )].

Proof. This proof closely follows that of Theorem 4.4. We illustrate the key discrepancies as fol-
lows.
We start with only two modalities z(m) and z(n) for simplicity and then move on to general cases.

The structure of the indeterminacy matrix T ∂ẑ . Identical to Equation 20, we have the relation-
                                                ∂z
ship between Jacobian matrices:
                                                T ∂ẑ


                                 G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ       ∂z
                                                         = T ∂ẑ G ∂z .                      (31)
                                   ∂ẑ   ∂ ϵ̂   T ∂ ϵ̂       ∂z    ∂z
                                                              ∂z

The presence of the shared block z(m∩n) alters the indeterminacy matrix T ∂ẑ – instead of the disjoint
                                                                                              ∂z
diagonal-block shape, T ∂ẑ , the columns belonging to the shared variables z(m∩n) (shared between
                               ∂z
two modalities) are possibly nonzero over rows belonging to z(m∩n) . That is, the shared variables
z(m∩n) can still mix in the estimates of the two individual parts ẑ(m\n) and ẑ(n\m) . However,
since we have identified the subspace of z(m∩n) , its estimates would not contain information of the
                                                               (m∩n)            (m∩n)
individual blocks z(m\n) and z(n\m) , rendering the blocks ∂ẑ
                                                             ∂z(m\n)
                                                                     = 0 and ∂ẑ
                                                                             ∂z(n\m)
                                                                                      = 0.

The sparse connection among modalities. The reasoning in Step 2 in the proof of Theorem 4.4
implies that the structure of the matrix T ∂ ϵ̂ is consistent with that of the matrix T ∂ẑ . That is, they
                                           ∂z                                           ∂z
have zero block matrices at the same positions. In particular, since the subspace identifiability in
Theorem C.7 implies that the estimated shared variable ẑ(m∩n) and the modality-specific variable
ẑ(n\m) are not influenced by the other modality-specific variables z(m\n) , the same applies to the
estimated exogenous variable ϵ̂(m∩n) and ϵ̂(m\n) . This structure permits us to disregard T ∂ẑ (an
                                                                                                    ∂ ϵ̂
identity matrix) and T ∂ ϵ̂ on the left-hand side of Eq. (31) when computing a sub-matrix of the
                        ∂z
right-hand side product:
                            h            i            h          i
                             G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ            = T ∂ẑ G ∂z             .                           (32)
                                     ∂ẑ    ∂z   (n),(m\n)          ∂z   ∂z     (n),(m\n)

We further divide the block [(n), (m \ n)] into two blocks along their rows: [(m ∩ n), (m \ n)] and
[(n \ m), (m \ n)] that represent the influence from z(m\n) to ẑ(m∩n) and ẑ(n\m) .
Expressing the block [(m ∩ n), (m \ n)] on the left-hand side of Eq. (32) gives:
h            i            h     i        h      i          h     i             h       i
 G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ            = G ∂ẑ           T ∂ẑ         = G ∂ẑ                  T ∂ẑ                                  .
    ∂ẑ   ∂z   (m∩n),(m\n)            ∂ẑ   (m∩n),:     ∂z   :,(m\n)             ∂ẑ   (m∩n),(m\n)   ∂z   (m\n),(m\n)
                                                                                                                  (33)

Analogously, this block on the right-hand side of Eq. (32) can be expressed as:
h           i              h     i       h      i           h    i             h     i
 T ∂ẑ G ∂z             = T ∂ẑ            G ∂z          = T ∂ẑ                G ∂z                                    .
   ∂z     ∂z   (m∩n),(m\n)           ∂z     (m∩n),:    ∂z    :,(m\n)            ∂z     (m∩n),(m∩n)   ∂z   (m∩n),(m\n)
                                                                                                                  (34)


                                                             25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Thus, we have the equality for the block [(m ∩ n), (m \ n)]:
         h      i             h      i             h    i                                              h            i
          G ∂ẑ                T ∂ẑ            = T ∂ẑ                                                    G ∂z
                 ∂ẑ   (m∩n),(m\n)         ∂z      (m\n),(m\n)                  ∂z    (m∩n),(m∩n)             ∂z        (m∩n),(m\n)
                       =⇒
            h          i              h      i                             h     i                         h     i
             G ∂ẑ                   = T ∂ẑ                                G ∂z                            T ∂z                               .   (35)
                 ∂ẑ   (m∩n),(m\n)                ∂z    (m∩n),(m∩n)              ∂z       (m∩n),(m\n)         ∂ẑ       (m\n),(m\n)

 This graphical relation is identical to that in Eq. (25).
 However, the relation for the block [(n \ m), (m \ n)] between two modality-specific parts varies,
 due to the potential mixing of the shared part into these blocks, which may increase the inbound
 edges (not outbound edges), as we show below.
 For the block [(n \ m), (m \ n)] on the left-hand side of Eq. (32) gives:
  h            i            h      i        h       i        h     i                                                     h           i
   G ∂ẑ T ∂ẑ            = G ∂ẑ             T ∂ẑ       = G ∂ẑ                                                            T ∂ẑ                     .
      ∂ẑ   ∂z   (n\m),(m\n)               ∂ẑ     (n\m),:      ∂z    :,(m\n)                ∂ẑ   (n\m),(m\n)                 ∂z        (m\n),(m\n)
                                                                                                                                                   (36)

 Unlike previous cases, the right-hand side of Eq. (32) for the block involves more than atomic blocks
 (i.e., it involves the entire modality (n)):
    h            i              h      i      h      i         h     i         h     i
      T ∂ẑ G ∂z               = T ∂ẑ          G ∂z         = T ∂ẑ            G ∂z           . (37)
      ∂z    ∂z   (n\m),(m\n)               ∂z      (n\m),:       ∂z   :,(m\n)                ∂z    (n\m),(n)             ∂z      (n),(m\n)


 Then, it follows from Eq. (36) and Eq. (37) that
               h      i          h       i                                  h      i                   h           i
                G ∂ẑ              T ∂ẑ                                   = T ∂ẑ                         G ∂z
                       ∂ẑ   (n\m),(m\n)           ∂z   (m\n),(m\n)                   ∂z   (n\m),(n)          ∂z       (n),(m\n)
                             =⇒
                 h           i               h      i                      h          i             h     i
                  G ∂ẑ                     = T ∂ẑ                            G ∂z                  T ∂z                                 .        (38)
                       ∂ẑ   (n\m),(m\n)                ∂z   (n\m),(n)           ∂z    (n),(m\n)        ∂ẑ   (m\n),(m\n)


 We can observe that the existence of the shared variables z(m∩n) divides the latent space into finer
 blocks z(m\n) , z(n\m) , and z(m∩n) . Eq. (35) and Eq. (38) reveal that the bijectiveh indeterminacy
                                                                                             i
 relation hold over these finer blocks, exception for the non-square transition matrix T ∂ẑ
                                                                                                                                          ∂z   (n\m),(n)
 on the right-hand side of Eq. (38). This is because that the shared part z(m∩n) can potentially mix
 in ẑ(n\m) , so ẑ(n\m) may receive edges inbound to z(m∩n) .

 Interplay among multiple modalities. In light of the graphical condition for the two-modality
 case (Eq. (35) and Eq. (38)), we can derive the conditions for the multi-modality case.
 Specifically, we classify the blocks in the estimation graph Ĝ ∂ẑ into the following categories for
                                                                 ∂ẑ
 two distinct atomic blocks b1 and b2 .

Region 1 : Blocks b1 and b2 do not have nested memberships, i.e., M(z(b1 ) ) ̸⊂ M(z(b2 ) ) and
         M(z(b2 ) ) ̸⊂ M(z(b1 ) );

Region 2 : Block b1 has fewer memberships than block b2 : z(b1 ) ≺ z(b2 ) ;

Region 3 : Block b1 has more memberships than block b2 : z(b2 ) ≺ z(b1 ) .

 Eq. (35) and Eq. (38) reveal that the sparsity for Region 1 and Region 2 is informative, whereas
 Region 3 is not. This is because in these the inherent indeterminacy from the subspace identifiability
 within each modality (Theorem 4.2) will engage the product T ∂ẑ T ∂ ϵ̂ in Eq. (31) in addition to the
                                                                  ∂ ϵ̂ ∂z
 sparsity in the estimated graph G ∂ẑ .
                                                 ∂ẑ


                                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Overall conditions.     Consolidating all the considerations above, we re-define objects in Condi-
tion 4.3 as follows.

1. The indeterminacy matrix T := Ton + Toff is not strictly block-diagonal: The matrix Ton contains
   all the on-diagonal square invertible matrices Ton := diag(Tb1 , . . . , Tb|B| ) and Toff contains all
   the off-diagonal elements potentially
                                  h                                    i \ b) for b ∈ B. Also, the
                                        inonzerohin thei regions h(b, H(b)
    matrix multiplication becomes T ∂ẑ                   G ∂z                 T ∂z              as a unified expression
                                       ∂z   (b̃),H(b̃)        ∂z   H(b̃),(b)     ∂ẑ   (b),(b)
    of Eq. (35) and Eq. (38).
2. The sub-matrices on which we impose the sparsity controls are exactly the union of Region 2 and
   Region 1, i.e., the complement of Region 3. We denote such a region as the function of the block
   index (E(b), b) for each b ∈ B.

With these modifications, the rest of the proof follows exactly from that of Theorem 4.4.



D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
D.1    N UMERICAL DATASET

We use six numerical datasets in this paper, including three multimodal datasets that satisfy our
assumptions and three that slightly violate the sparsity assumptions in the proposed theorems.

Multi-modality settings We generate n = 10000 samples according to Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). Fol-
lowing prior work (Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021; Zimmermann et al., 2021), we
generate observations using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Specifically, the mixing function g
is modeled as a three-layer MLP with randomly initialized weights and leaky ReLU activations,
enabling g to represent a general nonparametric mixing function. The causal noise terms ϵ are inde-
pendently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), and the exogenous variables are mutually independent.
Sparse inter-modality causal dependencies are randomly generated, ensuring that each modality’s
latent variables maintain at least one causal connection with another modality.

Ablation settings For the ablation study, we generate two modality observations under different
sparsity ratios. Each observation is generated from three causally related latent variables and one
exogenous variable. The sample size for each dataset is set to n = 10000, and the dimensionality
of the observations in each modality is d(x) = 20. The sparsity ratio determines the extent of inter-
modality connections among these latent variables. A higher sparsity ratio leads to a sparser causal
structure, meaning fewer causal connections between latent variables. Conversely, a lower sparsity
ratio yields a denser causal matrix with more causal dependencies. For example, a sparsity ratio of
0% indicates that all inter-modality latent variables are fully connected, whereas a sparsity ratio of
50% implies that half of the possible causal edges are removed.

D.2    S YNTHETIC DATASET

Variant MNIST In real-world scenarios, the ground-truth latent processes are often unknown,
making it challenging to evaluate model performance. To address this, we construct a synthetic
dataset based on the real image dataset MNIST (LeCun, 1998) with known causal relationships,
which supports the setting considered in our work. Our synthetic dataset consists of two modalities,
each with latent variables that exhibit causal relationships. The design is flexible. The modalities
could correspond to different MNIST variants, such as colored MNIST (Arjovsky et al., 2019) or
fashion MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017). The causally related latent variables could be, for example, digit
identity, image color, clothing category, image rotation, etc.
In order to make the synthetic setting more intuitive, we introduce an alternative setting: object
position acts as a latent variable that influences the appearance of MNIST images. Across differ-
ent modalities, such causal influence may vary. Furthermore, position in modality 1 may causally
influence position in modality 2, which aligns with the data generation process in our work. For


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


example, the horizontal position of a digit — such as the six — directly influences the transparency
of the MNIST image. This horizontal position then serves as a causal factor for the vertical position
of shoes in the fashion MNIST, which in turn affects the grayscale intensity of the shoe image. To
systematically evaluate the performance of our algorithm under different observational conditions,
we consider three variations in colored MNIST, where the digits are assigned one of three colors:
red, green, or blue. These relationships are visually illustrated in Figure 7 (a) for clarity.

D.3   R EAL - WORLD DATASET

In this paper, we consider three types of datasets, including image, time series, and tabular data.
Visualizations of the image and time-series datasets are shown in Figure 7 (b-c).


Figure 7: Visualization on the datasets: (a) Synthetic dataset: Variant MNIST. (b) Real-world
dataset: Fundus imaging shows the interior surface of the eyes. (c) Real-world dataset: Sleep moni-
toring shows the time-series recording of sleep-related metrics overnight.

Fundus imaging is the visualization of the interior surface of the fundus, which includes structures
such as the optic disc, retina, and retinal microvasculature. High-resolution images of the back of
the eye are essential for the diagnosis and monitoring of a variety of eye diseases and conditions.
For example, the retinal microvasculature, which consists of small blood vessels that supply blood to
the retina, provides valuable information about eye health. Moreover, fundus imaging can improve
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of various eye diseases. It serves as a non-invasive tool
to assess the overall health of the microvascular circulation health and provides a direct view of part
of the central nervous system.
Sleep monitoring is a time-series dataset collected over three consecutive nights that records various
metrics including sleep stage, body position, respiratory events, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and
snoring. This dataset focuses on obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a sleep disorder in which a person’s
breathing is interrupted during sleep due to the relaxation of throat muscles, causing upper airway
obstruction. These interruptions often lead to loud snoring, reduced blood oxygen levels, stress
responses, awakenings, and fragmented sleep.
This dataset is collected from a Home Sleep Apnea Test (HSAT), a non-invasive diagnostic method
for sleep apnea. Patients wear a portable device overnight to monitor their breathing patterns, heart
rate, oxygen levels, snoring, and other sleep patterns. The dataset includes multiple channels, such as
ACTIGRAPH for movement, HEARTRATE DIST for heart rate, SPO2 WRIST for blood oxygen
saturation, and SBORE WP for snoring, capturing key aspects of physical activity and sleep patterns
during the HSAT. The device calculates apnea-related indices, including the Apnea/Hypopnea Index
(AHI), Respiratory Disturbance Index (RDI), and Oxygen Desaturation Index (ODI), as well as
indices for diagnosing conditions such as atrial fibrillation.

D.4   E VALUATION M ETRICS

MCC: Mean Correlation Coefficient MCC is a standard metric used to evaluate the recovery of
latent factors in causal representation learning. It measures the alignment between the ground-truth


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


factors and the estimated latent variables. Specifically, MCC first computes the absolute values of
the correlation coefficients between each ground-truth factor and each estimated latent variable. To
account for possible permutations of the latent variables, the metric solves a linear sum assignment
problem on the computed correlation matrix in polynomial time, ensuring optimal matching between
the factors and their corresponding latent representations.

R2: Coefficient of Determination R2 is a standard metric used to evaluate the goodness of fit in
regression models. It measures the proportion of variance in the dependent variable that is explained
by the independent variables in the model. Specifically, R2 compares the residual sum of squares of
the model with the total sum of squares and returns a value between 0 and 1. A higher R2 indicates
that the model explains a larger portion of the variance in the data, with 1 representing a perfect fit
and 0 indicating that the model explains none of the variability.

SHD: Structural Hamming Distance SHD is a widely used metric for evaluating the accu-
racy of graph structure recovery in causal discovery. It quantifies the difference between the true
causal graph and the estimated graph. Specifically, SHD counts the number of edge modifica-
tions—additions, deletions, or reversals—required to transform the estimated graph into the ground-
truth graph. This metric provides a simple yet effective measure of structural similarity, with a lower
SHD indicating a closer alignment between the estimated and true causal structures.

D.5    D ETAILED D ISCUSSION ON H UMAN P HENOTYPE

Without learning such latent variables, we cannot provide a causal explanation between different
modalities. The estimated model shows all causal influences involved, suggests the existence of
hidden causal variables, and illustrates their relationships with each other and with observable data.
Asymptotically, the learned adjacency matrix A corresponds to a graph within the Markov equiva-
lence class given by the PC algorithm.
To interpret the learned hidden variables, we primarily refer to the existing medical literature, which
supports their alignment with background knowledge, thereby adding validity to our results. For
example, the latent variable FRight3 relates handgrip strength to fundus imaging, consistent with
findings showing that handgrip strength correlates with intraocular pressure (IOP) (Pérez-Castilla
et al., 2021). In addition, the association between the cataract and changes in IOP (Slabaugh et al.,
2013) is consistent with the findings of the model. These connections underline the physiological
relevance of the learned hidden variable. Similarly, FRight1 and FLeft1, associated with fundus
imaging and age estimation, are consistent with studies demonstrating age-related changes in fun-
dus image color content (Ege et al., 2002). Another latent variable Sleep1 associated with oxygen
saturation and sleep metrics aligns with findings that oxygen saturation is a strong predictor of
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) severity (Wali et al., 2020). This indicates that the model’s latent
variable effectively captures critical factors related to sleep disorders.

E     E XTENDED E XPERIMENT

To further assess the robustness, scalability, and applicability of our proposed method, we conducted
a series of extended experiments under more complex scenarios. These experiments aim to evaluate
the performance under diverse latent variable configurations, varying sample sizes, and different
structural assumptions, including non-DAG settings and shared latent variables.

Performance in complex scenarios. To evaluate the scalability and generalizability of our method
to complex causal structures, we conducted additional experiments on higher-dimensional simu-
lated tasks with diverse configurations of latent variables and modalities. These setups introduce
significantly more complex causal relationships between variables. Specifically, we consider three
extended scenarios: (1) Five-mods, with 30-dimensional observations from five modalities with two
latent variables and one exogenous variable per modality. (2) Six-mods, with 30-dimensional obser-
vations from six modalities with two latent variables and one exogenous variable per modality. (3)
Eight-mods, involving 30-dimensional observations from eight modalities with two latent variables
and one exogenous variable per modality. The results, summarized in Table 4, show that our method
consistently delivers robust performance under these challenging conditions.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Impact of the number of latent variables. In real-world applications, the true number of latent
variables is typically unknown, and arbitrarily predefining this number may introduce bias and de-
grade model performance. In this section, we discuss how our method can eliminate the redundant
effect of the latent variables, and introduce a cross-validation-based method to determine the ap-
propriate number of latent nodes. By manually setting a range for the number of latent variables
and selecting the one with the lowest validation loss, we ensure a principled approach that is both
simple and widely applicable (Khemakhem et al., 2020b). Here we conduct synthetic experiments
to validate its effectiveness. We followed the data generation process in Section D.1, where the
ground-truth number of latent variables is two per modality. The results, as shown in Figure 8(a),
demonstrate that our approach accurately recovers the correct number of latent variables.

Impact of sample size. To investigate the impact of sample size on model performance, we con-
ducted an additional experiment evaluating the MCC as the number of data samples increased. Fol-
lowing the data generation process described in Section D.1, where the ground-truth number of
latent variables is two for two modalities. We systematically increased the sample size from 10,000
to 40,000 and measured MCC and R2 accordingly. The results, presented in Figure 8(b), show a
consistent improvement in MCC as the sample size increases. This finding confirms the hypothesis
that greater data availability enhances the model’s ability to recover the underlying causal structure.


                              (a)                                  (b)

Figure 8: (a) Comparison of loss across different latent dimensions. (b) The effect of sample size.


Evaluation under non-DAG assumptions. The theoretical results in this paper do not strictly
require the assumption of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) for latent variable structures within
or across modalities. To evaluate our method under non-DAG settings, we conducted synthetic
experiments where cycles were introduced within and across modalities. Specifically, we followed
the data generation process in Section D.1, and considered: (1) cyclic influence within modality; and
(2) cyclic influence across modalities. Empirical results in Table 4 demonstrate that the presence of
cycles does not hinder the identification of latent variables.

Discussion on the shared latent variables. We present how to preprocess the current framework
to accommodate shared variables across modalities and provide empirical results. The extended
framework incorporates an additional mechanism to estimate the shared latent variable. Inspired by
previous works (Yao et al., 2023; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021), we incor-
porate an additional contrastive loss to enforce similarity in the shared latent representations. To
evaluate the effectiveness of this extension, we modify the data generation process in Section D.1
and allow for the existence of a shared variable across modalities. The results, summarized in Ta-
ble 4, show that our method accurately recovers both shared and modality-specific latent variables
across different scenarios, confirming the theoretical guarantees of the extended framework.


F    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we provide details of the network architecture, including the optimization scheme
and hyperparameter setting.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Complex Scenarios                   Non-DAG Settings            Shared Latent Variables
 Metric
          Five mods    Six mods     Eight mods   Cyclic within   Cyclic across   Two mods      Three mods
 R2       0.89± 1e-4   0.97± 8e-7   0.83± 1e-3    0.95± 1e-5      0.94± 2e-4      0.86± 5e-4    0.90± 1e-4
 MCC      0.84± 3e-4   0.82± 4e-4   0.91± 5e-4    0.89± 2e-4      0.92± 1e-5     0.83±± 7e-4    0.83± 4e-6


            Table 4: Extended experiment results across different experimental settings.


F.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

We summarize our network architecture below and describe it in detail in Table 5.

• (1,2) Encoder and Decoder: The encoder transforms raw observations into latent representations,
  while the decoder reconstructs the inputs from the latent variables. The encoder-decoder design
  varies depending on the downstream task. For synthetic data, MLPs with leaky ReLU activation
  were used. For image data, CNN was used as the encoder, and ConvTranspose2D as the decoder.
  LSTMs were used for time series data. Based on the universal approximation theorem, the model
  is theoretically able to approximating the underlying mixing function.
• (3) Learnable Adjacency Matrix: The causal relationships are embedded in the learned adja-
  cency matrix, where the binary elements indicate whether specific pairs of vertices contribute
  to the generation of components. It initializes a learnable matrix that captures these dependen-
  cies. During the forward pass, the matrix is processed to ensure a directional structure where
  only certain connections are allowed based on a threshold. This allows the model to learn sparse,
  meaningful relationships between the latent variables.
• (4) Flow-based Transformation: The flow-based transformation is implemented using an MLP
  to process the latent variable and a flow model for the transformation. The MLP first extracts
  features from the latent variable, which are then used as input to the flow model, which applies an
  invertible transformation to the latent space, allowing the model to estimate the noise distribution.


F.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

Optimization Scheme. The estimation framework was trained using the Adam optimizer on GPU,
and the StepLR scheduler was used to reduce the learning rate periodically. The training process ran
for a maximum of 10000 epochs, with early stopping applied if the validation loss does not improve
for 20 consecutive epochs. Random seeds were used to ensure reproducibility, and results were
averaged across experiments, with variance reported.
The training loss combines multiple components.

• Reconstruction loss: Mean squared error between reconstructed inputs and original data.
• KL divergence loss: Encourages estimated variables to follow a standard normal prior.
• Sparsity loss: An L1-norm penalty is applied to the adjacency matrix to enforce sparsity.

Hyperparameter. The hyperparameters α = [αInd , αSp , αRecon ] represent the weights assigned to
each term in the composite objective function. For each dataset, they were tuned within appropriate
logarithmic intervals, ensuring a balance between independence, sparsity, and reconstruction. For
the experiments, the following settings were applied: α = [1e−1, 1e−2, 1] for the synthetic dataset,
α = [1e − 2, 1e − 3, 2] for the MNIST dataset, and α = [1e − 1, 1e − 2, 1] for the phenotype dataset.

G     A LGORITHM P SEUDOCODE
The pseudocode for the proposed algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Configuration               Description                             Output
 1.1 MLP-Encoder             Encoder for numerical data
 Input                       Multi-modality observations             BS × d x
 Dense                       h dim neurons, LeakyReLU                BS × h dim
 Dense                       h dim neurons, LeakyReLU                BS × h dim
 Dense                       Latent embeddings                       BS × l dim
 2.1 MLP-Decoder             Decoder for numerical data
 Input                       Latent embeddings                       BS × l dim
 Dense                       h dim neurons, LeakyReLU                BS × h dim
 Dense                       h dim neurons, LeakyReLU                BS × h dim
 Dense                       Reconstructed observations              BS × d x
 1.2 Image-Encoder           Encoder for image data
 Input                       Image input                             BS × 3 × H × W
 ResNet18                    ResNet backbone, LeakyReLU              BS × h dim
 Dense                       Latent embeddings                       BS × l dim
 2.2 Image-Decoder           Decoder for image data
 Input                       Latent embeddings                       BS × l dim
 Dense                       h dim neurons                           BS × h dim × H’ × W’
 ConvTranspose2D             Reconstructed observations              BS × 3 × H × W
 1.3 Time-series Encoder     Encoder for time-series data
 Input                       Multi-channel time-series data          BS × seq len × n channel
 LSTM                        Sequences into hidden representations   BS × h dim
 Output                      Latent representation                   BS × l dim
 2.3 Time-series Decoder     Decoder for time-series data
 Input                       Latent representation                   BS × l dim
 LSTM                        Sequence into output features           BS × seq len × h dim
 Output                      Reconstructed time-series data          BS × seq len × n channel
 3. Adjacency Matrix         Sparsity regularization
 Input                       Latent variables from encoders          BS × z all
 Masking                     Lower triangular mask                   z all × z all
 Thresholding                Retain entries exceeding threshold      z all × z all
 Output                      Learned causal adjacency matrix         z all × z all
 4. Flow Transformation      Estimate the noise term
 Input                       Latent variables across modalities      BS × z all
 Condition Input             Apply adjacency matrix to latent        BS × z all × z all
 Flow Transformation         Apply transformation to latent          BS × z all
 Output                      Estimated noise variables               BS × z all

Table 5: Architecture details. BS: batch size, d x: input dimension, l dim: latent dimension
in each modality, z all: latent dimensions across all modalities, h dim: hidden dimension, H/W:
height/width of the input image, seq len: sequence length, n channel: number of channels.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for the proposed algorithm.
 1: Input: Grouped observations {x(m) }M   m=1
 2: Output: Estimated latent variables {ẑ(m) }Mm=1
 3:
 4: # Random Initialization
 5: Initialize encoders {En(m) }M
                                m=1 and decoders {De
                                                       (m) M
                                                           }m=1 for each group
 6:
 7: # Encoder
 8: Input: Grouped observations {x(m) }M  m=1
 9: Output: Estimated latent variables ẑ(m) for each group m
10: for each group m = 1 to M do
11:    Encode the current group latent and exogenous variables: ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) = En(m) (x(m) )
12: end for
13: Concatenate latent representations: {ẑ(m) }M
                                                m=1 = ẑ
                                                         (1)
                                                             ⊕ ẑ(2) ⊕ . . . ⊕ ẑ(M )
14: return Estimated latent variables and exogenous variables {ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) }M m=1
15:
16: # Flow-based Noise Estimation
17: Input: Estimated latent variables for each group {ẑ(m) }Mm=1
                                       d(z)
18: Output: Estimated noise term ϵ̂i=1
19: Initialize adjacency matrix Â
20: Select the parents of latent variable based on the adjacency matrix
21: Pass through flow model to obtain estimated residuals ϵ̂i
22: Update the estimated causal graph based on the adjacency matrix with threshold
23: Compute sparsity loss based on L1 norm
                                                              d(z)
24: Compute the KL divergence between [{η̂ (m) }M
                                                m=1 , ϵ̂i=1 ] and Gaussian prior
                                     d(z)
25: return Estimated noise term ϵ̂i=1
26:
27: # Decoder
28: Input: Estimated latent and exogenous variables in each group {ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) }M      m=1
29: Output: Reconstructed grouped features {x̂(m) }M      m=1
30: for each group m = 1 to M do
31:   Decode (ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) ) to reconstruct features x̂(m) : x̂(m) = De(m) (ẑ(m) , η̂ (m) )
                                                       (m)
32:   Compute reconstruction loss using MSE: LRecon = MSE(x̂(m) , x(m) )
33: end for


                                                     33
