Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O MNI E DIT: B UILDING I MAGE E DITING G ENERALIST
M ODELS T HROUGH S PECIALIST S UPERVISION
   Cong Wei∗ , 2,3 Zheyang Xiong* , 1,3 Weiming Ren, 4 Xinrun Du, 1,4 Ge Zhang, 1,3 Wenhu Chen
 1,3
 1
  University of Waterloo, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3 Vector Institute, 4 M-A-P
 cong.wei@uwaterloo.ca, zheyang@cs.wisc.edu, wenhuchen@uwaterloo.ca


Figure 1: Editing high-resolution multi-aspect images with O MNI -E DIT. O MNI -E DIT is an
instruction-based image editing generalist capable of performing diverse editing tasks across dif-
ferent aspect ratios and resolutions. It accurately follows instructions while preserving the original
image’s fidelity. We suggest zooming in for better visualization.

                                                 A BSTRACT
              Instruction-guided image editing methods have demonstrated significant poten-
              tial by training diffusion models on automatically synthesized or manually an-
              notated image editing pairs. However, these methods remain far from practical,
              real-life applications. We identify three primary challenges contributing to this
              gap. Firstly, existing models have limited editing skills due to the biased synthesis
              process. Secondly, these methods are trained with datasets with a high volume
              of noise and artifacts. This is due to the application of simple filtering methods
              like CLIP-score. Thirdly, all these datasets are restricted to a single low resolu-
              tion and fixed aspect ratio, limiting the versatility to handle real-world use cases.
              In this paper, we present O MNI -E DIT, which is an omnipotent editor to handle
     ∗
         First authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               seven different image editing tasks with any aspect ratio seamlessly. Our con-
               tribution is in four folds: (1) O MNI -E DIT is trained by utilizing the supervision
               from seven different specialist models to ensure task coverage. (2) we utilize im-
               portance sampling based on the scores provided by large multimodal models (like
               GPT-4o) instead of CLIP-score to improve the data quality. (3) we propose a new
               editing architecture called EditNet to greatly boost the editing success rate, (4) we
               provide images with different aspect ratios to ensure that our model can handle
               any image in the wild. We have curated a test set containing images of different
               aspect ratios, accompanied by diverse instructions to cover different tasks. Both
               automatic evaluation and human evaluations demonstrate that O MNI -E DIT can
               significantly outperform all the existing models. Our code, dataset and model will
               be available at https://tiger-ai-lab.github.io/OmniEdit/


1      I NTRODUCTION
Image editing, particularly when following user instructions to apply semantic transformations to
real-world photos, has seen significant advancements. Recently, text-guided image editing (Brooks
et al., 2023) has gained prominence over traditional methods such as mask-based or region-based
editing (Meng et al., 2022). With the rise of diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024a; Sauer et al., 2024), numerous diffusion-based image editing techniques
have emerged. Generally, they can be roughly divided into two types: (1) Inversion-based meth-
ods (Parmar et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al.,
2023; Tsaban & Passos, 2023) propose to perform zero-shot image editing by inverting the diffusion
process and manipulating the attention map in the intermediate diffusion steps to achieve desired
editing goal. (2) End-to-end methods (Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; Sheynin et al., 2024;
Zhao et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024) propose to fine-tune an existing diffusion model on large-scale
image editing pairs to learn the editing operation in an end-to-end fashion. End-to-end methods have
generally achieved better performance than inversion-based methods and gained higher popularity.

Table 1: Comparison of O MNI -E DIT with all the existing end-to-end image editing models. The
scores are based on a preliminary studies on around 50 prompts.
    Property        InstructP2P   MagicBrush       UltraEdit        MGIE           HQEdit   CosXL   O MNI -E DIT
                                                  Training Dataset Properties
    Real Image?         ✗             ✓                ✓              ✓              ✗        ✗          ✓
    Any Res?            ✗             ✗                ✗              ✗              ✗        ✗          ✓
    High Res?           ✗             ✗                ✗              ✗              ✓        ✗          ✓
                                               Fine-grained Image Editing Skills
    Obj-Swap          ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Obj-Add           ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Obj-Remove        ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Attribute         ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Back-Swap         ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Environment       ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
    Style             ⋆⋆⋆           ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆             ⋆⋆⋆            ⋆⋆⋆      ⋆⋆⋆       ⋆⋆⋆
Despite their effectiveness, end-to-end methods face a significant limitation: the scarcity of human-
annotated image editing pairs. As a result, all current end-to-end approaches depend on syn-
thetic training data. For instance, existing datasets are synthesized using techniques such as
Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023) or mask-based editing models like SD-Inpaint (Rombach et al.,
2022), and DALLE-2/3 (Ramesh et al., 2022; Betker et al., 2023). However, these synthetic data
generation pipelines exhibit significant biases, resulting in the following limitations:
Limited Editing Capabilities: The synthetic data is heavily influenced by the underlying generation
models. For example, Prompt2Prompt struggles with localized edits, such as adding, removing, or
swapping objects, while SD-Inpaint and DALLE-2 are ineffective at global edits, such as style or
background changes. As a result, models trained on such data inherit these limitations.
Poor Data Quality Control: Most approaches use simplified filtering mechanisms like CLIP-
score (Radford et al., 2021) or DINO-score (Caron et al., 2021) to automatically select training
samples. However, recent studies (Ku et al., 2024) show that these metrics exhibit poor correlation
with actual data quality, leading to suboptimal training data that negatively impacts the model.


                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lack of Support for Varying Resolutions: All current models are trained on square image editing
pairs, making their generalization to non-square images poor.
In our preliminary studies, we curate a few prompts for seven different desired tasks to observe their
success rate across the board. We show our findings in Table 1. This show that these models are
truly biased in their skills caused by the underlying synthesis pipeline.
In this paper, we introduce O MNI -E DIT, a novel model designed to address these challenges through
four key innovations:
1. Specialist-to-Generalist Supervision: We propose learning a generalist editing model, O MNI -
E DIT, by leveraging supervision from multiple specialist models. Unlike previous approaches that
rely on a single expert, we conduct an extensive survey and construct (or train) seven experts, each
specializing in a different editing task. These specialists provide supervisory signals to O MNI -E DIT.
2. Importance Sampling: To ensure high-quality training data, we employ large multimodal
models to assign quality scores to synthesized samples. Given the computational cost of GPT-
4o (Achiam et al., 2023), we first distill its scoring ability into InternVL2 (Chen et al., 2024b)
through medium-sized samples. Then we use the InternVL2 model for large-scale scoring.
3. EditNet Architecture: We introduce EditNet, a novel diffusion-transformer-based architec-
ture (Peebles & Xie, 2022) that facilitates interaction between the control branch and the original
branch via intermediate representations. This architecture enhances O MNI -E DIT ’s ability to com-
prehend diverse editing tasks.
4. Support for Any Aspect Ratio: During training, we incorporate a mix of images with varying
aspect ratios as well as high resolution, ensuring that O MNI -E DIT can handle images of any aspect
ratio with any degradation in the output quality.
We curate an image editing benchmark O MNI -E DIT-B ENCH, which contains diverse images of dif-
ferent resolutions and diverse prompts that cover all the listed editing skills. We perform comprehen-
sive automatic and human evaluation to show the significant boost of O MNI -E DIT over the existing
baseline models like CosXL-Edit (Boesel & Rombach, 2024), UltraEdit (Zhao et al., 2024), etc.

2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion models (Song et al., 2021;R Ho et al., 2020) are a class of latent variable models parameter-
ized by θ, defined as pθ (x0 ) := pθ (x0:T ) dx1:T , where x0 ∼ q(x0 ) represents the original data,
and x1 , . . . , xT are progressively noisier latent representations of the input image x0 . Through-
out the process, the dimensionality of x0 and the latent variables x1:T remains consistent, with
x0:T ∈ Rd , where d corresponds to the product of the image’s height, width, and channels. The
forward (diffusion) process, denoted as q(x1:T |x0 ), is a predefined Markov chain that incrementally
adds Gaussian noise to the data according to a pre-defined schedule {βt }Tt=1 . The process of forward
diffusion is defined as:
                             T
                             Y                                               p
            q(x1:T |x0 ) =         q(xt |xt−1 ),   q(xt |xt−1 ) := N (xt ;       1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),   (1)
                             t=1

where N denotes a Gaussian distribution, and βt controls the amount of noise added at each step.
The objective of diffusion models is to reverse this diffusion process by learning the distribution
pθ (xt−1 |xt ), which enables the reconstruction of the original data x0 from a noisy latent xt . This
reduces to a denoising problem where the model ϵθ is trained to denoise the sample xt ∼ q(xt |x0 )
back into x0 . The maximum log-likelihood training objective breaks down to minimizing the
weighted mean squared error between the model’s prediction x̂θ (xt , c) and the true data x0 :
             arg max log pθ (x0 |c) = arg min E(x0 ,c)∼D Eϵ,t wt · ∥x̂θ (xt , c) − x0 ∥22 ,

                                                                                                   (2)
                 θ                             θ

where (x0 , c) pairs come from the dataset D, with c representing the text prompt. The term wt is
a weighting factor applied to the loss at each timestep t. For simplicity, prior papers (Song et al.,
2021; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2022) will set wt to be 1.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2      I NSTRUCTION -BASED I MAGE E DITING IN S UPERVISED L EARNING

Instruction-based image editing can be formulated as a supervised learning problem. Existing meth-
ods (Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a) often adopt a paired training dataset of text editing
instructions and images before and after the edit. An image editing diffusion model is then trained
on this dataset. The latent diffusion objective is defined as:
            arg max log pθ (x′0 |x0 , c) = arg min E(x′0 ,x0 ,c)∼D Eϵ,t ∥x̂θ (xt , c) − x′0 ∥22 ,

                                                                                                  (3)
                      θ                             θ

where (x′0 , x0 , c) triples are sampled from the dataset D with x0 denoting the source image, c
denoting the editing instruction and x′0 denoting the target image.



                                  Object-Swap
                                                                                          Object-Addition
                                  Specialist
                                                                                          Specialist


                                  Object-Removal
                                  Specialist
                                                                                         Object-Removal
                                                                                         Specialist
                                  Style-Transfer
                                  Specialist


                                  Background-Swap                                        Object-Property
                                  Specialist                                             Specialist


                     + captions
                                                                                         Object-Swap
                                                                                         Specialist
    Any Resolution


                                                        Semantic Consistency Score: 10
                                                        Perceptual Quality Score: 10
                                                        Confidence score: 𝝀𝟏

                                                                           Confidence Scoring
                                     𝝀𝟏                                    function

                                            𝝀𝟐          Semantic Consistency Score: 10
                                                        Perceptual Quality Score: 8
                                                        Confidence score: 𝝀𝟐


Figure 2: Overview of the O MNI -E DIT training pipeline. The pipeline consists of four stages: (1)
task-specific specialist models are trained for diverse editing tasks; (2) these specialist models are
used to generate a large, high-resolution, multi-aspect-ratio dataset; (3) a cost-efficient distilled large
multi-modal model (LMM) assigns importance weights to each pair of image-editing data; and (4)
the final generalist model is trained on the weighted dataset.



3      L EARNING WITH S PECIALIST S UPERVISION
In this section, we introduce the entire specialist-to-generalist learning framework to build O MNI -
E DIT. We describe the overall learning objective in subsection 3.1. We then describe how we
learn the specialists in subsection 3.2 and the importance weighting function in subsection 3.3. In
Figure 2, we show the overview of the O MNI -E DIT training pipeline.

3.1      L EARNING O BJECTIVE

We assume there is a groundtruth editing model p(x′ |x, c), which can perform any type of editing
tasks perfectly according to the instruction c. Our goal is to minimize the divergence between
pθ (x′ |x, c) with p(x′ |x, c) by updating the parameters θ:
                  X                                       XX
        L(θ) :=       DKL (p(x′ |x, c)∥pθ (x′ |x, c)) = −    p(x′ |x, c) log pθ (x′ |x, c) + C (4)
                     x,c                                             x,c     x′


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            PQ:
                            { reasoning: ….There are no visible distortions…The lighting and shadows are consistent,
                            score: 10 }
                            SC:
                            { reasoning: …The edited image perfectly follows this instruction. The rugby player is
                            completely replaced by an astronaut in a space suit... The editing is effective and matches the
                            instruction without any overediting…,
                            score: [10, 10]}



                            PQ:
                            {reasoning: The image has some notable distortions, especially in body
                            proportions, as the legs and arms of the individuals appear unnaturally elongated…,
                            score: 4}
                            SC:
                            {reasoning: The editing partially follows the instruction by adding padded suits that
                            slightly resemble space suits, but it doesn’t convincingly replace the players with
                            astronauts… The players’ bodies, poses, and proportions remain largely intact, making
                            it feel like an incomplete transformation.
                            score: [5, 6]}

Figure 3: InternVL2 as a scoring function before (top right) and after (bottom right) fine-tuning on
GPT-4o’s response. On the top right, the original InternVL2 fails to identify the unusual distortions
in the edited image it also does not spot the error when the edited image fails to meet the specified
editing instructions. On the bottom right, finetuned-InternVL2 successfully detects such failures and
serve as a reliable scoring function.


where C is a constant, which we leave out in the following derivation. However, since we don’t
have access to p(x′ |x, c), we adopt importance sampling for approximation:
                              XX                  p(x′ |x, c)
                  L(θ) = −            q(x′ |x, c)             log pθ (x′ |x, c)
                               x,c x′
                                                  q(x′ |x, c)
                                                                                           (5)
                         ≈ −E(x,c)∼D Ex′ ∼q(x′ |x,c) [λ(x′ , x, c) log pθ (x′ |x, c)]


                         ≈ −E(x,c)∼D Ex′ ∼qs (x′ |x,c) [λ(x′ , x, c) log pθ (x′ |x, c)]


where q(x′ |x, c) is the proposal distribution and λ(·) is the importance function. To better approx-
imate the groundtruth distribution p(x′ |x, c), we propose to use an ensemble model q(x′ |x, c). In
essence, q(x′ |x, c) := qs (x′ |x, c), where qs is a specialist distribution decided by the type of the
instruction c (e.g. object removal, object addition, stylization, etc). Combing with Equation 3, our
objective can be rewritten as:
      arg min L(θ) = arg min E(x,c)∼D Ex′ ∼qs (x′ |x,c) λ(x′ , x, c) Eϵ,t ∥x̂θ (xt , x, c) − x′ ∥22 . (6)

            θ                 θ

The whole process can be described as: we first sample a pair from dataset D, and then choose the
corresponding specialist qs to sample demonstrations x′ for the our editing model x̂θ (xt , x, c) to
approximate with an importance weight of λ(x′ , x, c). We formally provide the algorithm in 1. In
our specialist-to-generalist framework, we need to have a series of specialist models {qs (·)}s and an
importance function λ(·). We describe them separately in subsection 3.2 and subsection 3.3.

3.2   C ONSTRUCTING S PECIALIST M ODELS

We group the image editing task into 7 categories as summarized in Table 2. For each category,
we train or build a task specialist ps (x′ | x, c) to generate millions of examples. Table 2 provides
detailed information on task groups and example editing instructions c. In this section, we briefly
summarize each specialist, with details available in Appendix A.1.
Object Replacement. We trained an image-inpainting model to serve as the specialist qobj replace
for object replacement. Given a image x and an object caption cobj and a object mask Mobj . The
qobj replace can fill the content indicated by the mask with an object in cobj . We then generate an object
replacement sample by masking out an existing object and fill the image with a new object.
Object Removal. We trained an image inpainting model to serve as the specialist qobj removal for
object removal. We use a similar procedure as in the object replacement but use a predicted back-
ground content caption to inpaint the masked image.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Table 2: Task Definitions and Examples
 Editing Tasks            Definition                                                                   Instruction c Example

 Object Swap              c describes an object to replace by specifying both the object to remove     Replace the black cat with a brown dog in the
                          and the new object to add, along with their properties such as appear-       image.
                          ance and location.

 Object Removal           c describes which object to remove by specifying the object’s properties     Remove the black cat from the image.
                          such as appearance, location, and size.

 Object Addition          c describes a new object to add by specifying the object’s properties        Add a red car to the left side of the image.
                          such as appearance and location.

 Attribute Modification   c describes how to modify the properties of an object, such as changing      Change the blue car to a red car.
                          its color and facial expression.

 Background Swap          c describes how to replace the background of the image, specifying           Replace the background with a space-ship inte-
                          what the new background should be.                                           rior.

 Environment Change       c describes a change to the overall environment, such as the weather,        Change the scene from daytime to nighttime.
                          lighting, or season, without altering specific objects.

 Style Transfer           c describes how to apply a specific artistic style or visual effect to the   Apply a watercolor painting style to the image.
                          image, altering its overall appearance while keeping the content the
                          same.


Object Addition. We treat object addition as the inverse task of object removal.
Attribute Modification. We adopt the Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) (Hertz et al., 2023) pipeline to gen-
erate examples. To enable precise modification, we adapt the method from Sheynin et al. (2024)
where we provide a mask Mobj for the object and force P2P to only make edits inside the mask.
Background Swap. We use a similar procedure as in the object replacement but use an inverse
mask of the object to indicate the background and guide the inpainting.
Environment Modification. For environment modification, we use P2P pipeline to generate origi-
nal and edited image.
Style Transfer. We use CosXL-Edit (Boesel & Rombach, 2024) as the specialist model as its train-
ing data contains a large number of style transfering examples. We provide CosXL-Edit with (x, c),
and let it generates the edited image x′ .

3.3     I MPORTANCE WEIGHTING

The importance weighting function λ takes as input a tuple of source image, edited image, and edit-
ing prompt. Its purpose is to assign higher weights to data points that are more likely to be sampled
from the ground truth distribution, and lower weights to the unlikely ones. This is essentially a qual-
ity measure to up-weight high-quality samples. Unlike previous work, we do not use CLIP score
because prior work (Jiang et al., 2024) has shown its low correlation with human judges. Instead,
we propose to use large multimodal models (LMMs) to approximate the weighting function, as they
demonstrate strong image understanding. Following VIEScore (Ku et al., 2024), we designed a
prompting template for GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023) to evaluate the image editing pairs and output
a score on a scale from 0 to 10. We then filter out data with a score greater than or equal to 9, so the
LMM essentially serves as a binary weighting function:

                                          1, if LMM(prompt, x′ , x, c) ≥ 9

                         λ(x′ , x, c) =
                                          0, otherwise
Details of the prompt template are provided in the Appendix.
While the GPT-4o is an effective choice for this task, scoring large-scale datasets with millions of
examples is extremely costly and time-consuming. Therefore, we employ knowledge distillation
from GPT-4o to a smaller 8B model, InternVL2 (Chen et al., 2024b). For each task, we sample
50K data points and instruct GPT-4o to output both a score and a score rationale. We fine-tune
InternVL2 on these GPT-4o-generated examples. After fine-tuning, InternVL2 performs as an ideal
scoring function due to its smaller size and efficiency. A comparison of the model’s performance
before and after fine-tuning is presented in the Appendix. Finally, we apply the fine-tuned InternVL2
model to filter data across a dataset with millions of samples. Only examples with a score of ≥ 9
are retained, resulting in a curated training dataset of 1.2M examples. We visualize InternVL2’s
response as a scoring function before and after fine-tuning in Figure 3. We observe that fine-tuning
InternVL2 on GPT-4o’s response effectively turns InternVL2 into a realiable scoring function and
it can identify unusual distortions or unsuccessful edit that does not follow the editing instruction.
Additional dataset statistics are detailed in the Appendix.


                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Noisy Latent                     Condition    Noisy Latent                         Condition    Noisy Latent    Condition
                 Text token                                        Text token                                                 Text token
    token                        Image token      token                            Image token      token       Image token


                                                                                                        Channel-wise
                                                                                                        concatenation

    self-attention
                  ❄️        self-attention🔥
                                                  self-attention
                                                                ❄️            self-attention🔥
                          (trainable copy)                                  (trainable copy)
                                                                                                                self-attention
                                                                                                                                   🔥


                                          N                                                 N                                          N



                (a) EditNet                                   (b) ControlNet                            (c) InstructPix2Pix
Figure 4:         Architecture Comparison between EditNet(ours),              ControlNet and
InstructPix2Pix(Channel-wise concatenation) for DiT models. Unlike ControlNet’s parallel
execution, EditNet allows adaptive adjustment of control signals by intermediate representations
interaction between the control branch and the original branch. EditNet also updates the text
representation, enabling better task understanding.

4     E DIT N E T

We found that directly fine-tuning a pre-trained high-quality diffusion model like SD3 using channel-
wise image concatenation methods (Brooks et al., 2023) compromises the model’s original repre-
sentational capabilities (see Figure 10 and Section 5.2 for details comparison).
To enable a diffusion transformer to perform instruction-based image editing while preserving its
original capabilities, we introduce EditNet to build O MNI -E DIT. EditNet can effectively transform
common DIT models like SD3 into editing models. As illustrated in Figure 4, we replicate each
layer of the original DIT block as a control branch. The control branch DIT blocks allow interaction
between the original DIT tokens, conditional image tokens, and the editing prompts. The output of
the control branch tokens is then added to the original DIT tokens and editing prompts. Since the
original DIT blocks are trained for generation tasks and are not aware of the editing instructions
specifying which contents to modify and how to modify them, this design allows the control branch
DIT to adjust the representations of the original DIT tokens and editing prompts according to the
editing instruction, while still leveraging the strong generation ability of the original DIT. Com-
pared to ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023), our approach offers two key advantages that make it more
suitable for image editing tasks: First, ControlNet does not update text representations, making it
challenging to execute editing tasks based on instruction, particularly object removal, as it fails to
understand the “removal” intent (see Figure 11). Secondly, ControlNet’s control branch operates in
parallel without access to the original branch’s intermediate representations. This fixed precompu-
tation of control signals restricts the overall representation power of the network. We provide an
ablation study on the O MNI -E DIT architecture design in Section 5.2.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first provide statistics of the O MNI -E DIT training set and test set in Table 5. Then
we introduce the human evaluation protocol in Section 5, and comparative baseline system in 5. We
present the main results in Section 5.1, highlighting the advantages of O MNI -E DIT in tacking multi-
aspect ratio, multi-resolution, and multi-task image editing. In Section 5.2, we study the advantages
of importance sampling for synthetic data. In Section 5.2, we perform an analysis to study the design
of O MNI -E DIT.
O MNI -E DIT Training Dataset. We constructed the training dataset D by sampling high-resolution
images with a minimum resolution of 1 megapixel from the LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022)
and OpenImageV6 (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) databases. The images cover a range of aspect ratios
including 1:1, 2:3, 3:2, 3:4, 4:3, 9:16, and 16:9. For the task of object swap, we employed a spe-
cialist model to generate 1.5 million entries. We then applied InternVL2 for importance weighting,
retaining samples with scores of 9 or higher, resulting in a dataset of 150K entries for this task. Sim-
ilarly, we generate 250k-1M samples for each task, then keep the top 10% as the final dataset. The
final training dataset comprises 1.2M entries, with detailed information provided in Appendix 4.
O MNI -E DIT-Bench. To create a high-resolution, multi-aspect ratio, multi-task benchmark for
instruction-based image editing, we manually collected 62 images from pexels (2024) and LAION-


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Original Image                OmniEdit (Ours)   CosXL-Edit       UltraEdit   InstructPix2Pix   MagicBrush


         “Replace the Green Lantern
       shirt with a NASA logo T-shirt.”


            “Remove his watch.”


             “Add a red bird on
             the branch above.”


         “Change the color of the
          green bandana to red.”


  Figure 5: Qualitative comparison between baselines and O MNI -E DIT on a subset of the test set.

5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022). These images cover a variety of aspect ratios, including 1:1, 2:3, 3:2,
3:4, 4:3, 9:16, and 16:9. We ensured that the images feature a diverse range of scenes and object
counts, from single to complex compositions. Additionally, we selected images with a relatively
high aesthetic score to better align with the practical use cases of image editing. For each image, we
tasked the model with performing 7 tasks as outlined in Table 2. This results in a total of 434 edits.
O MNI -E DIT implementation details. The O MNI -E DIT model is built upon Stable diffusion 3
Medium(Esser et al., 2024) with EditNet architecture. The stable diffusion 3 has 24 DiT layers.
Each layer has a corresponding EditNet layer. We train O MNI -E DIT on the 1.2M O MNI -E DIT train-
ing dataset for 2 epochs on a single node with 8 H100 GPUs.
Baseline models. We compare O MNI -E DIT with 8 other text-guided image editing baselines: Mag-
icBrush (Zhang et al., 2024a), InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), UltraEdit(SD3) (Zhao et al.,
2024), DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022), SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022), CosXL-Edit (Boesel & Rom-
bach, 2024), HIVE (Zhang et al., 2024b) and HQ-Edit (Hui et al., 2024).
Evaluations Protocol We conduct both human evaluation and automatic evaluation. For the human
evaluation, we follow the procedure from Ku et al. (2023) to rate in two criteria: Semantic Consis-
tency (SC) and Perceptual Quality (P Q). Both scores are in {0, 0.5, 1}. For SC, the human subject
is asked to rate the consistency between 1) the edited image and the editing instruction (whether the
editing instruction is reflected on the edited image) and between 2) the source image and the edited
image (whether the model makes the edit that is beyond the editing instruction). For P Q, √the subject
is asked to rate on the quality of edited image). We then calculate a overall score O = SC × P Q
that measures the overall quality of the edit. We also calculate the accuracy of the edit, which is
defined by the percentage of SC = 1 among all examples. We recruit four human raters and require
them to evaluate all the editing examples. For LMMs’ evaluation, we follow the procedure from Ku
et al. (2024) where models (in particular, we chose GPT4o and Gemini) are also asked to give SC
and P Q scores but on a scale of 0-10. We then normalize the scale to 0-1.

5.1   M AIN R ESULTS

We provide a qualitative comparison with baseline models in Figure 5. We show the top 4 baselines
with O MNI -E DIT on a subset of the O MNI -E DIT-Bench. We provide more results in Figure 8 and
Figure 9. Our main results are detailed in Table 3, where we provide the VIEScore and conduct
human evaluation on the Top2 baselines and O MNI -E DIT. In Figure 1, O MNI -E DIT demonstrates
its capability to handle diverse editing tasks across various aspect ratios and resolutions. The results
are notably sharp and clear, especially in the addition/swap task, where new content is seamlessly
integrated. This underscores the effectiveness of the Edit-Net design in preserving the original image


                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Main evaluation results on Omni-Edit-Bench. In each column, the highest score is bolded,
and the second-highest is underlined.
      Models                  VIEScore (GPT4o)               VIEScore (Gemini)                       Human Evaluation
                          P Qavg ↑   SCavg ↑   Oavg ↑    P Qavg ↑   SCavg ↑     Oavg ↑    P Qavg ↑   SCavg ↑   Oavg ↑   Accavg ↑
                                                        Inversion-based Methods
      DiffEdit              5.88      2.73      2.79       6.09         2.01      2.39       -          -        -         -
      SDEdit                6.71      2.18      2.78       6.31         2.06      2.48       -          -        -         -
                                                         End-to-End Methods
      InstructPix2Pix       7.05      3.04      3.45       6.46         1.88      2.31        -          -        -         -
      MagicBrush            6.11      3.53      3.60       6.36         2.27      2.61        -          -        -         -
      UltraEdit(SD-3)       6.44      4.66      4.86       6.49         4.33      4.45      0.72       0.52     0.57      0.20
      HQ-Edit               5.42      2.15      2.25       6.18         1.71      1.96      0.80       0.27     0.29      0.10
      CosXL-Edit            8.34      5.81      6.00       7.01         4.90      4.81      0.82       0.56     0.59      0.35
      HIVE                  5.35      3.65      3.57       5.84         2.84      3.05        -          -        -         -
      O MNI -E DIT         8.38       6.66      6.98       7.06         5.82      5.78     0.83       0.71     0.69       0.55
      ∆ - Best baseline    +0.04      +0.85    +0.98      +0.05         +0.92     +0.97    +0.01      +0.15    +0.10     +0.20

generation capabilities of the base text-image generative model. Similarly, in Figure 5, O MNI -E DIT
uniquely adds a clean and distinct NASA logo onto a T-shirt. Table 3 corroborates this with O MNI -
E DIT achieving the highest Perceptual Quality (PQ) score among the models evaluated.
We highlight the efficacy of our proposed specialist-to-generalist learning framework. Unlike base-
line models that utilize a single method for generating synthetic data—often the prompt-to-prompt
method—This method typically alters the entire image, obscuring task-specific data. In contrast,
O MNI -E DIT leverages task-specific data curated by experts, resulting in a clearer task distribution
and improved adherence to editing instructions. Both the VIEScore and human evaluations in Ta-
ble 3 demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the best baseline in following editing
instructions accurately and minimizing over-editing. For instance, baseline models frequently mis-
understand the task intent as illustrated in Figure 5, where the CosXL-Edit model fails to recognize
the removal task and incorrectly interprets a bird addition as a swap between a panda and a bird.
Lastly, baseline models often produce blurry images on the O MNI -E DIT-Bench, as they are trained
at resolutions limited to 512x512 or even 256x256, and they perform poorly on non-square aspect
ratios. For example, with a 3:4 aspect ratio, the baselines struggle to perform editing. O MNI -E DIT,
trained on data with multiple aspect ratios, maintains robust editing capabilities across the diverse
aspect ratios encountered on the Omni-Bench, as evidenced in Figure 5.

5.2      A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, We provide an ablation study w.r.t importance weighting and EditNet.
Ablation study on the importance sampling. We study a baseline that utilizes the same archi-
tecture as O MNI -E DIT, but instead of applying importance scoring and filtering, we sample 1.2M
examples directly from the 5M pre-filtering dataset as specified in Table 4 and compare it with
O MNI -E DIT. As shown in Table 6, we observe a significant decrease in VIEScores for both PQ and
SC metrics.
Ablation Study on O MNI -E DIT Architecture Design. We conducted an analysis of O MNI -E DIT
’s architectural design in comparison to two baseline models: O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet and O MNI -
E DIT-ControlNet-TextControl and show the result in Table 7. O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet represents
the SD3-ControlNet architecture trained on the O MNI -E DIT dataset, where the source image serves
as the conditioning image for the control branch. O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet-TextControl is a variant
of O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet with an added modification: at each layer, we incorporate the text-token
output from the control branch into the text-token in the main image generation branch. So this
baseline can update the text representation in the main branch but doesn’t have the intermediate
representation interaction design in EditNet.
Our analysis, as shown in Figure 11, reveals that O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet struggled to accurately
capture task intent. This is primarily because the ControlNet branch does not update the text repre-
sentation. For instance, in object removal tasks, prompts like “Remove ObjA” are common, yet the
original DIT block remains unchanged, causing it to mistakenly generate an image of “ObjA.” On
the other hand, although O MNI -E DIT-ControlNet-TextControl successfully updates the text repre-
sentation, it still encounters difficulties in content removal. The substantial VIEScores gap between
O MNI -E DIT-Controlnet-TextControl and O MNI -E DIT in Table 7 underscores the importance of the


                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


intermediate representation interaction design in EditNet. We also compared O MNI -E DIT with the
channel-wise token concatenation method used in InstructPix2Pix (see Figure 4). Channel-wise To-
ken concatenation requires fine-tuning the entire network, which can distort the network’s original
representations. As illustrated in Figure 10, after fine-tuning an SD3 channel-wise concatenation
model on O MNI -E DIT training set, the representation of Batman is altered. In contrast, EditNet
preserves the original representation of Batman while still learning the object swap task.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Image Editing via Generation. Editing real images according to specific user requirements has
been a longstanding research challenge (Crowson et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2022; Ling et al., 2021; Wasserman et al., 2024; Ju et al., 2024). Since the introduction of
large-scale diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024),
significant progress has been made in tackling image editing tasks. SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022)
introduced an approach that adds noise to the input image at an intermediate diffusion step, followed
by denoising guided by the target text description to generate the edited image. Subsequent methods,
such as Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023) and Null-Text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2023), have
focused on manipulating attention maps during intermediate diffusion steps for image editing. Other
techniques like Blended Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022) and DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022) utilize
masks to blend regions of the original image into the edited output. More recently, the field has
seen a shift towards supervised methods, such as InstructP2P (Brooks et al., 2023), HIVE (Zhang
et al., 2024b), and MagicBrush (Zhang et al., 2024a), which incorporate user-written instructions
in an end-to-end framework. Our work follows this direction to develop end-to-end editing models
without inversion.
Image Editing Datasets. Due to the difficulty of collecting expert-annotated editing pairs, existing
approaches rely heavily on synthetic data to train editing models. InstructP2P (Brooks et al., 2023)
was the first to curate large-scale editing datasets using prompt-to-prompt filtering with CLIP scores.
MagicBrush (Zhang et al., 2024a) subsequently improved data quality by incorporating a human-
in-the-loop annotation pipeline based on DALLE-2. However, DALLE-2, primarily an inpainting-
based method, struggles with global editing tasks such as style transfer and attribute modification.
More recently, HQ-Edit (Hui et al., 2024) utilized DALLE-3 to curate editing pairs, although the
source and target images lack pixel-to-pixel alignment, which is critical for preserving fine-grained
details. Emu Edit (Sheynin et al., 2024) scaled up the training dataset to 10 million proprietary pairs,
resulting in strong performance, but the lack of public access to their model checkpoints or API
makes direct comparison difficult. UltraEdit (Zhao et al., 2024) proposed another inpainting-based
approach, avoiding the use of DALLE-2 or DALLE-3 for data curation. However, like MagicBrush,
it still faces limitations in handling complex global edits. Our work is the first to leverage multiple
specialists to significantly expand the range of editing capabilities. Additionally, we are the first to
use more reliable large multimodal models, for quality control in the editing process.

7   D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we identify the imbalanced skills in the existing end-to-end image editing methods and
propose a new framework to build more omnipotent image editing models. We surveyed the field
and chose several approaches as our specialists to synthesize candidate pairs and adopt weighted loss
to supervise the single generalist model. Our approach has shown significant quality boost across
the broad editing skills. Throughout the experiments, we found that the output quality is highly
influenced by the underlying base model. Due to the weakness of SD3, our approach is still not
achieving its highest potential. In the future, we plan to use Flux or other more capable base models
to see how much further we can reach with the current framework.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022.
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving image generation with better captions. Computer
  Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf, 2(3):8, 2023.
Frederic Boesel and Robin Rombach. Improving image editing models with generative data refine-
  ment. In The Second Tiny Papers Track at ICLR 2024, 2024.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Junsong Chen, YU Jincheng, GE Chongjian, Lewei Yao, Enze Xie, Zhongdao Wang, James Kwok,
  Ping Luo, Huchuan Lu, and Zhenguo Li. Pixart-alpha: Fast training of diffusion transformer
  for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024a.
Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong
  Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning
  for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 24185–24198, 2024b.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11427, 2022.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 88–105, 2022.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Tsu-Jui Fu, Wenze Hu, Xianzhi Du, William Yang Wang, Yinfei Yang, and Zhe Gan. Guid-
  ing instruction-based image editing via multimodal large language models. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Mude Hui, Siwei Yang, Bingchen Zhao, Yichun Shi, Heng Wang, Peng Wang, Yuyin Zhou, and
 Cihang Xie. Hq-edit: A high-quality dataset for instruction-based image editing. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2404.09990, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dongfu Jiang, Max Ku, Tianle Li, Yuansheng Ni, Shizhuo Sun, Rongqi Fan, and Wenhu Chen. Genai
  arena: An open evaluation platform for generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04485,
  2024.
Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan, and Qiang Xu. Brushnet: A plug-and-
  play image inpainting model with decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In European Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 150–168. Springer, 2024.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Max Ku, Tianle Li, Kai Zhang, Yujie Lu, Xingyu Fu, Wenwen Zhuang, and Wenhu Chen. Im-
 agenhub: Standardizing the evaluation of conditional image generation models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.01596, 2023.
Max Ku, Dongfu Jiang, Cong Wei, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. VIEScore: Towards ex-
 plainable metrics for conditional image synthesis evaluation. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins,
 and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12268–12290, Bangkok, Thailand, Au-
 gust 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.663. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.663.
Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Sha-
  hab Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. The open images
  dataset v4: Unified image classification, object detection, and visual relationship detection at
  scale. International journal of computer vision, 128(7):1956–1981, 2020.
Huan Ling, Karsten Kreis, Daiqing Li, Seung Wook Kim, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Ed-
  itgan: High-precision semantic image editing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Xihui Liu, Zhe Lin, Jianming Zhang, Handong Zhao, Quan Tran, Xiaogang Wang, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Open-edit: Open-domain image manipulation with open-vocabulary instructions. In
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
  Proceedings, Part XI 16, pp. 89–106. Springer, 2020.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–11, 2023.
William S Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. 2023 ieee. In CVF
 International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), volume 4172, 2022.
pexels. Pexels, 2024. URL www.pexels.com.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=di52zR8xgf.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Tim Dockhorn, Andreas Blattmann, Patrick Esser, and Robin Rom-
  bach. Fast high-resolution image synthesis with latent adversarial diffusion distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.12015, 2024.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Yuval Kirstain, Amit Zohar, Oron Ashual, Devi Parikh,
  and Yaniv Taigman. Emu edit: Precise image editing via recognition and generation tasks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8871–8879, 2024.
Yichun Shi, Xiao Yang, Yangyue Wan, and Xiaohui Shen. Semanticstylegan: Learning compo-
  sitional generative priors for controllable image synthesis and editing. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11254–11264, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models.            In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Linoy Tsaban and Apolinário Passos. Ledits: Real image editing with ddpm inversion and semantic
  guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00522, 2023.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features
  for text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1921–1930, June 2023.
Navve Wasserman, Noam Rotstein, Roy Ganz, and Ron Kimmel. Paint by inpaint: Learning to add
  image objects by removing them first. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18212, 2024.
Sihan Xu, Yidong Huang, Jiayi Pan, Ziqiao Ma, and Joyce Chai. Inversion-free image editing with
  natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04965, 2023.
Fred Zhang. stable-diffusion-prompts-2.47m, 2024. URL https://huggingface.co/
  datasets/FredZhang7/stable-diffusion-prompts-2.47M?row=19.
Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Magicbrush: A manually anno-
  tated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024a.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Shu Zhang, Xinyi Yang, Yihao Feng, Can Qin, Chia-Chih Chen, Ning Yu, Zeyuan Chen, Huan
  Wang, Silvio Savarese, Stefano Ermon, et al. Hive: Harnessing human feedback for instructional
  visual editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 9026–9036, 2024b.
Haozhe Zhao, Xiaojian Ma, Liang Chen, Shuzheng Si, Rujie Wu, Kaikai An, Peiyu Yu, Minjia
  Zhang, Qing Li, and Baobao Chang. Ultraedit: Instruction-based fine-grained image editing at
  scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05282, 2024.


                                               13
