Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M AM KO: M AMBA - BASED KOOPMAN OPERATOR FOR
MODELING AND PREDICTIVE CONTROL

 Zhaoyang Li1 , Minghao Han2 , Xunyuan Yin1,2,∗
 1 School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Nanyang Technological University
 2 Nanyang Environment and Water Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University
 LIZH0082@e.ntu.edu.sg; minghao.han@ntu.edu.sg; xunyuan.yin@ntu.edu.sg



                                                A BSTRACT

             The Koopman theory, which enables the transformation of nonlinear systems into
             linear representations, is a powerful and efficient tool to model and control nonlin-
             ear systems. However, the ability of the Koopman operator to model complex sys-
             tems, particularly time-varying systems, is limited by the fixed linear state-space
             representation. To address the limitation, the large language model, Mamba, is
             considered a promising strategy for enhancing modeling capabilities while pre-
             serving the linear state-space structure. In this paper, we propose a new frame-
             work, the Mamba-based Koopman operator (MamKO), which provides enhanced
             model prediction capability and adaptability, as compared to Koopman models
             with constant Koopman operators. Inspired by the Mamba structure, MamKO
             generates Koopman operators from online data; this enables the model to ef-
             fectively capture the dynamic behaviors of the nonlinear system over time. A
             model predictive control system is then developed based on the proposed MamKO
             model. The modeling and control performance of the proposed method is evalu-
             ated through experiments on benchmark time-invariant and time-varying systems.
             The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach.
             Additionally, we perform ablation experiments to test the effectiveness of indi-
             vidual components of MamKO. This approach unlocks new possibilities for in-
             tegrating large language models with control frameworks, and it achieves a good
             balance between advanced modeling capabilities and real-time control implemen-
             tation efficiency.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning methods have made promising achievements in modeling large and complex systems
with collected datasets (Wang et al., 2024). The time-series prediction tasks can be well achieved
with existing learning technologies and applied to various fields, including weather forecasting
(Verma et al., 2024) and traffic prediction (Li et al., 2023). These data-driven methods, especially for
deep learning methods, have proven to be highly capable of modeling dynamic systems and provide
strong support for advanced control applications.
The Koopman operator theory (Koopman, 1931) has emerged as a promising data-driven method
in recent years. The Koopman operator can represent the dynamics of nonlinear systems by linear
state-space model (SSM) (Kalman, 1960) by lifting the states from the original space to a higher-
dimensional space through a series of observable functions. Based on the theory, extended dynamic
mode decomposition (EDMD) (Williams et al., 2015) with manually selected observable functions
is proposed. With the advent of deep learning, neural networks (NNs) have been employed to serve
as the observable functions in the Koopman operator framework. Advanced deep learning methods,
such as autoencoders (Takeishi et al., 2017), probabilistic NNs (Han et al., 2021), and graph NNs (Li
et al., 2020), have been integrated with the Koopman operator to enhance the prediction accuracy of
the model. The linear controller based on the Koopman model, including linear quadratic regulator
(Han et al., 2023), can be efficiently designed from the concise linear model. Although the Koopman
model mentioned above shows relatively accurate prediction results, due to the parameter capacity
    ∗
        Corresponding author: Xunyuan Yin.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of the Koopman framework, challenges still exist in modeling real-world systems, especially for
time-varying systems.
Large language models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023) are deep learning models that leverage a large-
scale number of parameters to comprehend and generate human language. The internal architecture
of the model enables it to link and reason through contextual information. The most typical structure
inside the large language model is Transformer (Wolf et al., 2020). Although the nonlinear function
and attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) primarily improve the approximation capacity, the
intricate structures pose challenges for model-based controller design. The Mamba structure (Gu
& Dao, 2023) based on SSM is developed for LLMs. Within the structure of Mamba, the similar
linear SSM from Koopman operator theory is interpreted as a particular form that integrates features
from both recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Dao &
Gu, 2024). Selection mechanisms from Mamba are implemented to improve the modeling ability
of linear SSM by generating matrix sequences, which can also be a potential solution for improving
the capacity of the Koopman model.
In this work, we propose a Mamba-based Koopman operator (MamKO) by integrating the matrices
generation network from Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023) with the original Koopman model to enhance
the modeling accuracy. The structure can generate the Koopman operators according to the historical
data and construct the SSM accordingly. Using the linear SSM, the MPC problem is formulated as
a convex optimization problem. The proposed methods are then evaluated against existing represen-
tative approaches across various settings. The results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
framework in both modeling and control performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. The
contributions of this work are summarized as follows:

    • We propose a novel Mamba-based Koopman operator (MamKO) modeling method, which
      leverages matrices generated from the Mamba structure to model complex nonlinear systems.
    • We further enhance the matrix generation structure of Mamba to accommodate unstable and
      time-varying systems.
    • We develop an MPC scheme based on the MamKO model to achieve computationally efficient
      optimal control of nonlinear systems.
    • Experiments are conducted on benchmark time-invariant and time-varying systems to illustrate
      the efficacy and superiority of the proposed framework.


2    R ELATED WORKS

Koopman Operators Koopman operator theory (Koopman, 1931) has been regarded as a powerful
tool for dynamic system analysis (Brunton et al., 2022). In (Schulze et al., 2022), the scope of
Koopman operator theory is extended from autonomous systems to controlled systems, enabling the
design of corresponding controllers. Methods with manually selected observable functions show
promising results in both modeling and control (Zhang et al., 2023). However, the time consumption
to find appropriate observable functions is a significant drawback of this approach. An alternative
method using NNs to automatically construct the observable functions can bypass this problem. This
kind of Koopman model has been effectively applied in areas such as fluid physics (Morton et al.,
2018), robotics (Shi & Meng, 2022), chemical engineering (Han et al., 2024a), and vehicle systems
(Chen & Lv, 2024), where the neural network-based model serves as a powerful predictor.
Although the Koopman model has received much attention and is well-studied both in the field
of modeling and control, challenges still exist when facing complex systems, especially for time-
varying systems. (Zhang et al., 2019) has developed an online dynamic mode decomposition strat-
egy for time-varying systems with slowly changing parameters. With the online collected data, (Hao
et al., 2022) designs an adjusting algorithm to tune the parameters in the observable functions. Inte-
grating with the Fourier filter to disentangle and exploit time-invariant and time-varying dynamics,
the Koopman operators are updated in (Liu et al., 2023) to accommodate the time-varying dynam-
ics. While these methods have shown promising results, the optimization process within the online
updating framework can be time-consuming and may lead to infeasible solutions. In contrast, our
approach directly generates the Koopman operators from historical data, enabling real-time produc-
tion of the time-varying SSM.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mamba Structure Previous works on Mamba are based on the research of state-space model (Gu
et al., 2020; 2022b) for continuous data processing and applied to the field of audio and vision (Goel
et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2022). The structured state-space sequence models (S4) (Gu et al., 2022a)
are expanded to selective state-space models (S6) in (Gu & Dao, 2023) by adding the selection
mechanism. The mechanism inside the Mamba structure transfers the time-invariant model to the
time-varying model by generating the matrices of SSMs using the input data, which can facilitate the
modeling of time-varying tasks. The modeling ability has largely increased with this mechanism,
and a corresponding hardware-aware algorithm has been proposed to boost computational efficiency
further. The Mamba structure has been applied in the fields including language processing (Lieber
et al., 2024), image segmentation (Zhu et al., 2024; Ruan & Xiang, 2024), video processing (Li
et al., 2024). Notably, while the Mamba structure is based on a linear SSM, it is not directly suitable
for controller design due to nonlinear functions within the selection mechanism. Modifications have
been introduced to adapt the system to fit within the control framework.
Model-based Learning Control With the development of data-driven methods, the modeling ac-
curacy has increased, facilitating the application of model-based learning control methods. In the
field of model-based reinforcement learning, multiple algorithms have been proposed to train the
control strategy inside the established model (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020;
2023). From the perspective of MPC, the computational burden for optimization problems is an
important issue for model-based learning control. Some machine learning methods are preferred for
lightweight use. Stochastic MPC based on Gaussian regression are discussed in (Hewing et al., 2019;
2020). Gaussian regression is applied to learn unknown disturbances inside the systems, which im-
proves the robustness of the controller. From the collected input-output trajectories, a linear model
can be constructed in the form of the Hankel matrix and helps to generate optimal control output
(Berberich et al., 2020). Neural network-based models have also been integrated into the MPC
framework (Chen et al., 2019; Nubert et al., 2020). However, the computational burden becomes a
significant concern as the modeling accuracy improves from the intricate structures. In this work, we
incorporate the Mamba structure and Koopman operator theory to balance modeling performance
with control efficiency.

3     M ODELING
In this section, the basic concepts of the Koopman operator will first be introduced. Then, the
derivation of the Mamba-based Koopman operator (MamKO) is presented.

3.1   T HE KOOPMAN OPERATOR

In typical Koopman-based approaches, a general time-invariant controlled nonlinear system is con-
sidered presented as:
                                      xk+1 = f (xk , uk )                                     (1)
where xk ∈ X ⊂ Rn is the state vector at time instant k; uk ∈ U ⊂ Rm denotes the input vector
of the system at time instant k; f is a nonlinear function describing the dynamic behavior of the
nonlinear system. The Koopman theory proposed in Koopman (1931) shows that there exists an
infinite-dimensional Koopman operator K : H → H acting on the observable functions such that
the dynamics of the nonlinear process in (1) can be linearly represented, which can be formulated
as:
                             Kψ(xk , uk ) = ψ ◦ f (xk , uk ) = ψ(xk+1 )                       (2)
where ψ denotes the observable functions and ◦ represents function composition. From an applica-
tion point of view, it is favorable to approximate Koopman operators on a finite-dimensional function
space H ⊂ H. Considering the Koopman operator design in (Korda & Mezić, 2018), the system in
(1) modeled by Koopman operator can be formulated as:
                                        zk+1 = Azk + Buk
                                                                                                   (3)
                                          x̂k = Czk

where zk = ψ(xk ) denotes the shifted state vector in H via the observable function ψ : Rn → RN .
The corresponding finite-dimensional Koopman operator is split into A ∈ RN ×N and B ∈ RN ×m .
The details for learning the Koopman operator are included in Appendix A.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   M AMBA - BASED KOOPMAN O PERATOR

For real-world applications, the formulation in (1) could fail in modeling systems where the future
states are not only dependent on the current state and inputs but also on time. The parameters or
structures of the systems can change over time. A more general form considering the influence of
time can be formulated as:
                                       xk+1 = f (xk , uk , k),                                  (4)
At a given time instant k, the time-varying nonlinear system in (4) can be regarded as a time-invariant
system in (1). Thus, the dynamics at each time instant can be represented by the Koopman model
in (3), which implies that a distinct set of matrices {A, B, C} can capture the dynamics at a specific
time instant. However, as time proceeds, the matrices {A, B, C} for the previous instant will not
be sufficient for describing the dynamics at the current instant. An effective approach to model
this time-varying system involves identifying a set of matrices Ak , Bk , Ck for each time instant k,
which adapts to the changing dynamics. The corresponding linear time-varying SSM can capture
the dynamics of the system for each time instant, which can be formulated as:
                                         zk+1 = Ak zk + Bk uk
                                                                                                    (5)
                                            x̂k = Ck zk
where zk = ψ(xk ) represents the shifted state vector. Some parameters from observable function
ψk and Koopman operators Ak , Bk , and Ck should be updated online to accommodate time-varying
systems. Some research has been dedicated to updating parameters in ψk , Ak , Bk , and Ck using
online-collected datasets. In (Hao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2019), the Koopman
operators or observable functions are optimized online to approximate the dynamics reflected in the
newly collected data. Although these methods can provide good performance, solving the corre-
sponding online optimization problems can be time-consuming and even infeasible. Instead, in our
approach, we resort to the Mamba structure, which contains a generative framework for matrices, to
enable timely real-time updates of the Koopman matrices.
Mamba Structure Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023), a large language model based on the state-space
model, provides a promising frame for modeling time-varying systems. Compared with the S4
framework (Gu et al., 2022a) for time-invariant systems, the selection mechanism is included to
generate matrices from the input sequence, which formulated the time-varying SSM.
Inspired by the SSM model from the Mamba framework, we aim to develop a generative approach
to compute the time-varying Koopman operators over the prediction horizon. However, directly
applying the Mamba framework for the modeling and predictive control task is impractical. When
considering the system in (5), the Mamba framework only focuses on the inputs u in the form of
the word sequence, while states in the LLMs do not have exact meaning. However, for a controlled
system in (4), the states and inputs with physical meaning should all be considered. Meanwhile,
in (5), as Bk is generated from the input sequence containing uk , the bilinear term Bk uk can lead
to a non-convex optimization problem for in the control part. As a substitute, we generate the
matrices from the historical data. The differences between the proposed framework and the Mamba
framework are discussed in Appendix B.
Matrices Generation Inspired by the Mamba framework, we utilize discretization to generate ma-
trices efficiently. Given the matrices A, B in the continuous system and the sampling period T , the
discrete matrices Ā, B̄ can be calculated by the zero-order hold (ZOH) as:
                                         Ā = eAT
                                              Z T                                                  (6)
                                         B̄ =     eAt dt · B
                                                0
The matrix A is set as a diagonal matrix, facilitating the discretization process. In the Mamba
framework, the diagonal elements of A are constrained to be negative through a negative exponential
function to promote the stability of the SSM. However, not all real-world systems are inherently
stable, such as the oscillator system (Elowitz & Leibler, 2000). This constraint can significantly
compromise modeling accuracy. In our work, we address this problem by substituting the negative
exponential function with a negative continuously differentiable exponential linear unit (CELU)
(Barron, 2017). The formulation of CELU can be presented as:
                                                                   x
                          CELU (x) = max(0, x) + min(0, α(e( α ) − 1))                             (7)


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



     Historical States                                                                                  Forward Prediction


                                                                   Observable
                                                                   Function
                                                                                           Observable
                                                                                           Function


     Historical Inputs


                                                               One-dimensional
     --8
       8   --6
             6   --4
                   4   --2
                         2        2   4   6   8


                                                               convolution
                             -2
                              2


                             -4
                              4


                             -6
                              6


                             -8
                              8
                                                                                                  Koopman Operator Sequence
                                                                      F
                                                                      C   Discretization
                                                                      N                                  …
                                                                      N

                                                    Matrices Generation


Figure 1: Structure of the MamKO. With the matrices generation network and the observable func-
tion, the linear time-varying SSM can be established. By transforming the initial state to the shifted
state through the observable function ψ, the linear time-varying SSM can produce a sequence of the
future states.


where α = 1 in this paper. The CELU is continuously differentiable, which can lead to smooth
gradient updates. As CELU can generate negative output, the negative CELU allows for the exis-
tence of positive eigenvalues, thereby facilitating the representation of unstable systems. The new
diagonal matrix activated by CELU is denoted as Ã, with the eigenvalues limited in the range of
[−∞, 1].
At time instant k, the historical state sequence xk−H:k−1 from the past H steps is shifted to space
H through the observable function ψ, obtaining the shifted state sequence zk−H:k−1 . The com-
bination of shifted state sequence and historical input sequence forms the historical data sequence
  T                     T
 zk−H:k−1 , uTk−H:k−1 . One-dimensional convolution is implemented in the historical data se-
quence to extract the temporal information inside. The extracted feature ci can be calculated by:


                                                          T                   T
                                                  ci = w zi:i+h−1 , uTi:i+h−1 + b, i = k − H, . . . , k − h                   (8)



where w and b are the weight and bias parameters in the convolution network, and h is the ker-
nel size. The matrix sequences Bk:k+H−1 and Ck:k+H−1 and the sampling periods sequence
Tk:k+H−1 are encoded from the extracted features using fully connected NNs (FCNNs). Discretiz-
ing Ã, Bk:k+H−1 using sampling periods sequence Tk:k+H−1 by (6), the obtained matrix sequences
Āk:k+H−1 , B̄k:k+H−1 and Ck:k+H−1 are applied to the Koopman framework to accomplish multi-
step-ahead prediction tasks via the model in (5) recursively. The structure of the proposed MamKO
is presented in Figure 1.
Optimization Procedure The observable function that projects the state vector to finite-dimensional
function space is denoted as ψ(·|θψ ) with trainable parameters θψ . The matrices generation net-
works can be denoted as ϕ(·|θϕ ) with trainable parameters θϕ . The networks take the data sequence
  T                   T
 zk−H:k−1 , uTk−H:k−1 and trainable matrix A as input, and produce matrix sequence Āk:k+H−1|k ,
B̄k:k+H−1|k and Ck:k+H−1|k . To effectively train the matrix A, parameters θψ and θϕ , the op-
timization problem for multi-step-ahead prediction tasks should be designed. Given the dataset


                                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{xj , uj }j=k−H,··· ,k+H , the optimization can be formulated as follows:
                                                          k+H
                                                        1 X
                                                   min        ∥x̂j|k − xj ∥22                         (9a)
                                               A,θψ ,θϕ H
                                                              j=k+1

                                             s.t. ẑj+1|k = Āj|k ẑj|k + B̄j|k uj                    (9b)
                                                    ẑk|k = ψ(xk |θψ )                                (9c)
                                                    x̂j|k = Cj|k ẑj|k                                (9d)
                                                         Ã = −CELU (A)                               (9e)
                                                         zj = ψ(xj |θψ ), j = k − H, · · · , k − 1    (9f)
              Āk:k+H−1|k , B̄k:k+H−1|k , Ck:k+H−1|k = ϕ(Ã, zk−H:k−1 , uk−H:k−1 |θϕ )                (9g)
where ẑj|k represents the predicted shifted state vector for time instant j at time instant k; x̂j|k
represents the state vector for time instant j predicted at time instant k; H represents the length of
the model’s prediction horizon. Āk:k+H−1|k , B̄k:k+H−1|k and Ck:k+H−1|k are the generated matrix
sequences from the historical data sequence. To minimize the prediction loss in (9a), all parameters
are updated with gradient descent using ADAM (Kingma, 2014).

4   C ONTROL
In this section, for the time-varying system in (4), we propose a model predictive control framework
that is inspired by Korda & Mezić (2018) based on the MamKO model.
At each time instant k, the matrix sequences Āk:k+H−1|k , B̄k:k+H−1|k and Ck:k+H−1|k for predic-
tion are generated previously with the historical data. With the matrix sequence, the optimization
problem for MPC is formulated as follows:
                      k+H−1
                       X
       min                       ∥Cj|k ẑj|k − xs ∥2Q + ∥uj|k − uj−1|k ∥2R + ∥Ck+H|k ẑk+H|k − xs ∥2P
 u∗
  k|k
        ∗
      ,...,uk+H−1|k
                       j=k+1
                                                                                                     (10a)
       s.t.    zj+1|k = Āj|k ẑj|k + B̄j|k uj|k                                                     (10b)
                 ẑk|k = ψ(xk )                                                                      (10c)
               C ẑj|k ∈ X                                                                           (10d)
                 uj|k ∈ U, j = k + 1, . . . , k + H − 1                                              (10e)
where u∗k|k , . . . , u∗k+N −1|k denotes the trajectory of optimal control signals determined given the
                             2
current time instant k; ∥·∥Q denotes a vector’s squared weighted Euclidean norm, which is computed
        2
by ∥x∥Q = xT Qx; Q, R and P are positive-definite weighting matrices; ∥Cj|k ẑj|k − xs ∥2Q and
∥Ck+H|k ẑk+H|k − xs ∥2P are used to reduce tracking errors; ∥uj|k − uj−1|k ∥2R is set to improve the
smoothness of the control inputs; (10b) serves as the model constraint; (10c) provides the initial
condition in the shifted state-space; (10d) and (10e) are state and input constraints, respectively. At
time instant k ≥ 0, the optimal control input trajectory is calculated and the first element of the
trajectory, u∗k|k is applied to the nonlinear process in (4) as the control input for the current time
instant. The convex optimization problems derived from linear SSMs can be efficiently solved.

5   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we will evaluate the performance of the MamKO model in terms of modeling and
control. Specifically, we evaluate the following aspects: (a) Convergence of the proposed train-
ing algorithm on different systems with random parameter initialization. (b) Model accuracy of
the MamKO compared to other methods in time-invariant and time-varying systems. (c) Control
performance of the MPC based on the MamKO compared to other methods in time-invariant and
time-varying systems.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Five benchmark systems are included to evaluate the modeling and control performance of the
MamKO. The CartPole balancing system is included as a benchmark system for the controller de-
sign task, which has been widely used in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) research (Lillicrap,
2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Correspondingly, a time-varying CartPole balancing system described
in (Hao et al., 2022) is considered to test the performance of MamKO on the time-varying system.
Moreover, we apply the MamKO to the biological gene regulatory networks (GRN) (Elowitz &
Leibler, 2000). The complex nonlinear systems in the chemical engineering field are also consid-
ered. The reactor-separator chemical process (Yin & Liu, 2019) comprising two continuous stirred
tank reactors and a flash tank separator is chosen as a benchmark chemical process, denoted as the
reactor-separator chemical process (RSCP) system. We also simulate the reactor-separator process
with time-varying parameters (Nikravesh et al., 2000), denoted as the time-varying RSCP system.
For the modeling performance evaluation, we compare the proposed method with two competitive
baseline methods. (1) The Deep Koopman Operator (DKO) (Lusch et al., 2018; Han et al., 2020) is
a Koopman method that employs deep NNs in constructing the observable functions. Different from
the generative Koopman operators from MamKO, the Koopman operators in the DKO are invariant.
(2) The Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP) (Chua et al., 2018), based on multilayer fully connected NNs,
is implemented as a baseline for modeling the systems.
For the control performance evaluation, we compare the MamKO-based MPC with three state-of-
the-art baseline methods: (1) The DKO-based MPC (Lusch et al., 2018; Han et al., 2020); (2)
MLP-based MPC, which utilizes the NNs as predictive models and solves a nonlinear optimization
with the help of Casadi (Andersson et al., 2019) and Interior Point Optimizer, pronounced eye-pea-
Opt (IPOPT) (Wächter & Biegler, 2006); (3) Soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018), which
is a state-of-the-art model-free reinforcement learning algorithm. Despite the higher sample com-
plexity of model-free methods compared to model-based ones, SAC often achieves superior control
performance. SAC updates the controller to minimize cumulative stage costs, thereby implicitly
optimizing for a stabilizing controller.
For each environment, trajectories of state and action samples are gathered, generating a training set
of 36, 000 samples, a validation set of 4, 000 samples, and a test set of 4, 000 samples. Specifically,
actions are uniformly sampled from the action space for each time instant for the CartPole system,
the time-varying CartPole system, and the GRN system. For the RSCP and time-varying RSCP
systems, actions are determined using a step function with added random noise. Details of the
experimental setup are provided in Appendix C. The methods are trained to predict state sequences
over a 30-step horizon. Hyperparameters for each method are listed in Appendix D. For the SAC
control task, each environment undergoes training with 1000k steps of state-action-reward pairs.


5.1   M ODELING EVALUATION

The losses for the modeling task are calculated by the average prediction error of each step on the test
set. For each system, we run ten model training trials with different datasets and randomly initial-
ized parameters to test the convergence of the algorithms. The results for each system are presented
in Figure 2 (a-e). In comparison to DKO, MamKO demonstrates superior modeling accuracy across
all environments. Especially for the two time-varying systems, the MamKO outperforms the other
two methods. Notably, with the nonlinear structures from the NNs, the MLP has fewer prediction
errors in GRN and RSCP. Nonetheless, the inherent nonlinearities of the MLP model may compli-
cate optimization tasks, leading to reduced computational efficiency and suboptimal behavior. The
experiments in the next section will show the possible limitations of MLP in controller design.
Performance on the rapidly changing dynamics For the time-varying CartPole system in (Hao
et al., 2022), a time-varying coefficient of the friction of the cart is added to the system in the form
of sine waves. Based on the example, we compare the modeling performance of the three methods
with different frequencies of the sine waves. The time-varying Cartpole system described before has
the angular frequency of 1 rad/s. Two time-varying Cartpole systems with the angular frequencies of
0.1 rad/s and 10 rad/s are added. The results are shown in Figure 2 (f), illustrating that as the angular
frequency of the time-varying parameters increases, the advantages of using MamKO become more
pronounced. The generative matrices provide a more accurate representation of the system with
rapidly changing parameters, as different matrices approximate the dynamics of systems at each
time instant.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  0.5                                                                            1                                                                                 0.5
                                                                 MLP                                                                               MLP                                                                                               MLP
                                  -0.5                           DKO                                             0                                 DKO                                        -0.5                                                   DKO
                                                                 MamKO                                                                                                                                                                               MamKO


  Test Loss


                                                                                                                                                                 Test Loss
                                                                                                                                                   MamKO


                                                                                    Test Loss
                                                                                                                -1
                                  -1.5                                                                                                                                                        -1.5
                                                                                                                -2
                                  -2.5                                                                                                                                                        -2.5
                                                                                                                -3

                                  -3.5                                                                          -4                                                                            -3.5
                                           0   100     200      300      400                                         0       100       200        300    400                                                0                   100       200       300        400
                                                      Epoch                                                                           Epoch                                                                                              Epoch
                                               (a) CartPole                                                                        (b) GRN                                                                                            (c) RSCP
                                  0.5                                                                           1                                                                             0.10
                                                                 MLP                                                                               MLP                                                                     MLP
                                                                 DKO                                                                               DKO                                        0.08                         DKO
                                                                                                                0
                                                                 MamKO
 Test Loss


                                                                                                                                                                 Mean loss
                                  -0.5                                                                                                             MamKO                                                                   MamKO


                                                                                  Test Loss
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.06
                                                                                                                -1                                                                                                  10-3

                                                                                                                                                                                              0.04              2


                                  -1.5                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.02              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8    1   1.2


                                  -2.5                                                                          -3                                                                                      0
                                           0   100     200      300     400                                          0       100      200         300    400                                                    0.1 rad/s                1 rad/s    10 rad/s
                                                      Epoch                                                                          Epoch                                                          Angular frequencies of the sine waves
                                       (d) Time-varying CartPole                                                         (e) Time-varying RSCP                 (f) Time-varying CartPole with dif-
                                                                                                                                                               ferent parameters
Figure 2: Average prediction error on the test set (a-e) and average prediction error for the time-
varying CartPole with different coefficients (f). In (a-e), the Y-axis indicates the average mean-
squared prediction error in log space for the 30-step-ahead prediction task, and the X-axis indicates
the training epochs. The shaded area represents the confidence interval (0.5 times the standard
deviation)
 across ten training trials. In (f), the Y-axis indicates the average loss after training for 400 epochs.


5.2                                        C ONTROL EVALUATION

The control performance of the four methods is evaluated and compared in the five systems. The
time-varying CartPole with the angular frequency of 10 rad/s is included to evaluate the control
performance for the system with rapidly changing dynamics. The control task for each environment
is set-point tracking, and the details can be found in Appendix C. The weighting parameters Q, R,
and P for the MPCs are carefully adjusted to reach the best performance of each baseline method.
The prediction horizon is set as 30 for all MPCs.
 Average cost in log space


                                                                               Average cost in log space


                                                                                                                                                                  Average cost in log space


                             -1                                                                                 1                                                                                  0.5

                             -2                                                                            -0                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.5
                             -3                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                              -1.0
                             -4                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                                              -1.5
                             -5                                                                            -3                                                                                 -2.0
                                   0           5        10      15       20                                         0        100       200        300    400                                             0                      0.5        1.0      1.5        2.0
                                                     Time (s)                                                                       Time (a.u.)                                                                                          Time (h)

                                               (a) CartPole                                                                        (b) GRN                                                                                            (c) RSCP
      Average cost in log space


                                                                                                                                                                       Average cost in log space
                                                                                    Average cost in log space


                                  3                                                                             1.0                                                                                1

                                  1                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                     0
                                  -1
                                                                                                                -0.5                                                                               -3
                                  -3
                                                                                                                -1.0
                                  -5                                                                            -1.5                                                                               -5
                                       0       5        10      15        20                                             0    0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0                                          0                       5           10       15         20
                                                     Time (s)                                                                         Time (h)                                                                                           Time (s)

                                       (d) Time-varying CartPole                                                         (e) Time-varying RSCP                   (f) Time-varying CartPole with
                                                                                                                                                                 rapidly changing parameters
                                                          SAC         MLP-based MPC                                            DKO-based MPC               MamKO-based MPC
                                           3
Figure 3: Average cost based on track error. The Y-axis indicates the average cost in log space for
ten experiments with random initial states. The shaded area represents the confidence interval (0.3
times the standard deviation) over the ten experiments.
                                           1
                                                                                                                                      8
                        e cost
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The cost trajectories are shown in Figure 3. The state trajectories can be found in Appendix F.
As shown in Figure 3, the MamKO-based MPC achieves the best control performance for all five
systems. In comparison with DKO-based MPC, the MamKO-based MPC reduces the cost of the
five systems by 5.05%, 3.70%, 92.10%, 6.56%, 14.19%, 84.74%, respectively. A significant im-
provement is observed in the time-varying CartPole with rapidly changing parameters. Although
MLP achieves better modeling performance on GRN and RSCP systems, the corresponding control
performance is not as good as its modeling performance, which can be attributed to suboptimal so-
lutions from the non-convex optimization problems. Compared with the SAC, the two Koopman
model-based MPCs can all achieve a relatively stable control performance for the time-varying sys-
tem. Although it can be hard to construct a time-varying model, the Koopman operator in DKO can
construct an average Koopman operator that accommodates various time-varying parameters in the
systems, which can provide relatively good results.

5.3                     E VALUATION ON THE ACTIVATION FUNCTION

As we simplify A as a diagonal matrix, the eigenvalues of the matrix become the trainable param-
eters directly. Compared to the Mamba framework, which sets the eigenvalues to be negative, we
replace the original negative exponential function with the negative CELU function. In this section,
we will compare the modeling performance of MamKO using the negative exponential function, the
negative CELU function, and no activation function on the CartPole system, the GRN system, and
the RSCP system. As observed in Figure 4, the MamKO with CELU function has the best modeling
performance.
             1.5                                                      1.5                                                    1
                                                 CELU                                                   CELU                                                 CELU
             0.5                                 Exp                  0.5                               Exp                  0                               Exp


                                                                                                                 Test Loss
                                                 None                                                   None                                                 None
 Test Loss


                                                          Test Loss


             -0.5                                                     -0.5
                                                                                                                             -1
             -1.5                                                     -1.5
                                                                                                                             -2
             -2.5                                                     -2.5

             -3.5                                                     -3.5                                                   -3
                    0       100    200     300      400                      0    100     200     300      400                    0   100       200    300      400
                                  Epoch                                                  Epoch                                                 Epoch

                            (a) CartPole                                            (b) GRN                                             (c) RSCP
Figure 4: Evaluation on the activation function for the eigenvalues. For the CartPole system, the
MamKO with the negative CELU function performs slightly better than the one without the activa-
tion function and largely better than the one with the negative exponential function. For the GRN
and RSCP systems, the MamKO with the negative CELU has the smallest mean loss and lowest
variance. Compared with the MamKO with no activation function, the improvement of the MamKO
with the negative CELU is not significant. However, the initiation of A of the MamKO with no
activation function should be carefully adjusted since no constraint is added to the eigenvalues. Oth-
erwise, too large eigenvalues may result in unstable gradient descent.


5.4                     A BLATION ON THE DISCRETIZATION

We also evaluate the impact of discretization on modeling performance. The benefit of generating
the sequence of the Koopman operator through the method in (6) is demonstrated in this subsection.
We compare the performance of this modeling approach with another method that applies the same
discretization technique to matrix B as to matrix A, which is B̄ = eBT . The pipeline is named as
M ultiplication. The modeling results for each environment are presented in Table 1. From Table 1,
we can find that with the discretization on the matrices following (6), the modeling accuracy can be
significantly improved, which validates the effect of the discretization.


                                           Table 1: Results of the ablation on the discretization.
                        Method       CartPole             GRN                       RSCP         Time-varying CartPole                      Time-varying RSCP
                                             −4                              −3             −3                               −4
              Discretization       6.50 × 10        1.91 × 10                     2.92 × 10             4.31 × 10                              9.67 × 10−3
              Multiplication       8.30 × 10−4      3.52 × 10−3                   7.60 × 10−3           9.11 × 10−4                            1.19 × 10−2


                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.5    E VALUATION ON THE COMPUTATION TIME

In this subsection, we evaluate the computation time of the control methods on different benchmark
systems. The online control implementation of the control methods is conducted on a computer
equipped with an Intel Core i9-13900K CPU and 128 GB DDR4 RAM. The computation times of
the MamKO-based MPC and baselines during control on the benchmark systems are presented in
Table 2. Compared with the MLP-based MPC, the MamKO-based MPC reduces the computation
time by 98.38%, 83.39%, 99.21%, 90.34%, 99.17% for the five benchmark systems, respectively. To
further demonstrate the computational efficiency of the proposed method, the sampling periods of
the systems are presented in Table 3. A comparison of the sampling periods and computation times
demonstrates that the proposed MamKO-based MPC method can reliably ensure online implementa-
tion for each of the considered systems. The efficient online implementation of the proposed method
stems from the use of a linear state-space model within the proposed framework, which facilitates
the formulation of an optimal control problem that requires solving convex optimization despite the
nonlinearity in the dynamics of the considered systems.


        Table 2: Results of the computational time of each method in the benchmark systems.
         Method           CartPole         GRN              RSCP          Time-varying CartPole   Time-varying RSCP
     MLP-based MPC      7.43 × 10−1 s   1.09 × 10−1 s        3.31 s           1.74 × 10−1 s             3.45 s
     DKO-based MPC      7.35 × 10−3 s   1.41 × 10−2 s    1.06 × 10−2 s        7.63 × 10−3 s         1.28 × 10−2 s
    MamKO-based MPC     1.02 × 10−2 s   1.81 × 10−2 s    2.62 × 10−2 s        1.68 × 10−2 s         2.95 × 10−2 s
         SAC            2.67 × 10−4 s   3.23 × 10−4 s    3.41 × 10−4 s        2.68 × 10−4 s         3.32 × 10−4 s


                          Table 3: Sampling periods of the benchmark systems.
         Method          CartPole       GRN      RSCP        Time-varying CartPole            Time-varying RSCP
      Sampling period      0.02 s        1s       18 s                   0.02 s                      18 s


The results also indicate that the extended computation time required by the MLP-based MPC,
which is due to the need to solve nonlinear optimization problems, poses challenges for its online
implementation. This limitation is particularly critical for systems with fast dynamics and short
sampling periods, and for larger-scale systems with numerous control inputs and state variables to
optimize.


6     C ONCLUDING REMARKS

In this paper, a new modeling and control framework called Mamba-based Koopman Operator
(MamKO) was proposed by seamlessly integrating the Koopman operator with the large language
model Mamba. The matrices generation network from Mamba was adapted to construct the linear
time-varying state-space model based on the Koopman modeling concept. The MamKO model can
effectively predict the future states of nonlinear systems with time-varying parameters. A model pre-
dictive controller was formulated based on the established MamKO model. Both time-invariant and
time-varying benchmark systems were leveraged to evaluate the modeling and control performance
of the proposed method. The experiments demonstrated the superior performance of the MamKO
model in both modeling and control tasks. Future work will focus on applying the MamKO model
to large-scale systems to further evaluate its modeling capabilities.
Future research directions include the formal analysis of the convergence and stability of the pro-
posed MamKO-based control approach and the utilization of the MamKO-based modeling frame-
work for energy optimization of energy-intensive industrial systems, for example, through inte-
grating the proposed modeling framework with Koopman-based economic model predictive control
(Han et al., 2024b). We also plan to investigate the application of the MamKO-based control meth-
ods to industrial systems of larger scales and more complex dynamics for efficient and robust system
operations.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and PUB, Singapore’s
National Water Agency under its RIE2025 Urban Solutions and Sustainability (USS) (Water) Centre
of Excellence (CoE) Programme, awarded to Nanyang Environment & Water Research Institute
(NEWRI), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (NTU). This research is also supported by
Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its Academic Research Fund Tier 1 (RS15/21 & RG63/22).
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not reflect the views of the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and PUB,
Singapore’s National Water Agency.

R EFERENCES
Jens Alex, Lorenzo Benedetti, JB Copp, KV Gernaey, Ulf Jeppsson, Ingmar Nopens, MN Pons, Leiv
  Rieger, Christian Rosen, JP Steyer, et al. Benchmark simulation model no. 1 (BSM1). Report by
  the IWA Taskgroup on benchmarking of control strategies for WWTPs, 1, 2008.
Joel A. E. Andersson, Joris Gillis, Greg Horn, James B. Rawlings, and Moritz Diehl. CasADi – A
  software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control. Mathematical Programming
  Computation, 11(1):1–36, 2019.
Jonathan T Barron. Continuously differentiable exponential linear units.           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.07483, 2017.
Julian Berberich, Johannes Köhler, Matthias A Müller, and Frank Allgöwer. Data-driven model
  predictive control with stability and robustness guarantees. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
  Control, 66(4):1702–1717, 2020.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Steven L Brunton, Marko Budišić, Eurika Kaiser, and J Nathan Kutz. Modern Koopman theory for
  dynamical systems. SIAM Review, 64(2):229–340, 2022.
Hao Chen and Chen Lv. Incorporating ESO into deep Koopman operator modeling for control
  of autonomous vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 32(5):1854–1864,
  2024.
Tianze Chen, Yongqiang Huang, and Yu Sun. Accurate pouring using model predictive control
  enabled by recurrent neural network. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
  and Systems, pp. 7688–7694. IEEE, 2019.
Zhong Chen, Xiaofang Chen, Jinping Liu, Lihui Cen, and Weihua Gui. Learning model predictive
  control of nonlinear systems with time-varying parameters using Koopman operator. Applied
  Mathematics and Computation, 470:128577, 2024.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Tri Dao and Albert Gu. Transformers are SSMs: Generalized models and efficient algorithms
  through structured state space duality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21060, 2024.
Michael B Elowitz and Stanislas Leibler. A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional regula-
 tors. Nature, 403(6767):335–338, 2000.
Karan Goel, Albert Gu, Chris Donahue, and Christopher Re. It’s Raw! Audio generation with state-
  space models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 7616–7633.
  PMLR, 2022.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 1474–1487, 2020.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Albert Gu, Isys Johnson, Aman Timalsina, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. How to train your
  HiPPO: State space models with generalized orthogonal basis projections. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.12037, 2022b.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
  crete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Minghao Han, Jacob Euler-Rolle, and Robert K Katzschmann. Desko: Stability-assured robust
 control with a deep stochastic Koopman operator. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
 resentations, 2021.
Minghao Han, Kiwan Wong, Jacob Euler-Rolle, Lixian Zhang, and Robert K. Katzschmann. Robust
 learning-based control for uncertain nonlinear systems with validation on a soft robot. IEEE
 Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–15, 2023.
Minghao Han, Zhaojian Li, Xiang Yin, and Xunyuan Yin. Robust learning and control of time-
 delay nonlinear systems with deep recurrent Koopman operators. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
 Informatics, 20(3):4675–4684, 2024a.
Minghao Han, Jingshi Yao, Adrian Wing-Keung Law, and Xunyuan Yin. Efficient economic model
 predictive control of water treatment process with learning-based Koopman operator. Control
 Engineering Practice, 149:105975, 2024b.
Yiqiang Han, Wenjian Hao, and Umesh Vaidya. Deep learning of Koopman representation for
  control. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 1890–1895. IEEE, 2020.
Wenjian Hao, Bowen Huang, Wei Pan, Di Wu, and Shaoshuai Mou. Deep Koopman learning of
 nonlinear time-varying systems. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2210, 2022.
Lukas Hewing, Juraj Kabzan, and Melanie N Zeilinger. Cautious model predictive control using
  Gaussian process regression. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 28(6):2736–
  2743, 2019.
Lukas Hewing, Kim P Wabersich, Marcel Menner, and Melanie N Zeilinger. Learning-based model
  predictive control: Toward safe learning in control. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and
  Autonomous Systems, 3(1):269–296, 2020.
Rudolph Emil Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. 1960.
Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014.
Bernard O Koopman. Hamiltonian systems and transformation in Hilbert space. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 17(5):315–318, 1931.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Milan Korda and Igor Mezić. Linear predictors for nonlinear dynamical systems: Koopman operator
 meets model predictive control. Automatica, 93:149–160, 2018.
Fuxian Li, Jie Feng, Huan Yan, Guangyin Jin, Fan Yang, Funing Sun, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li.
  Dynamic graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic prediction: Benchmark and solution.
  ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, 17(1):1–21, 2023.
Kunchang Li, Xinhao Li, Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. VideoMamba:
  State space model for efficient video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06977, 2024.
Yunzhu Li, Hao He, Jiajun Wu, Dina Katabi, and Antonio Torralba. Learning compositional Koop-
  man operators for model-based control. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2020.
Opher Lieber, Barak Lenz, Hofit Bata, Gal Cohen, Jhonathan Osin, Itay Dalmedigos, Erez Safahi,
  Shaked Meirom, Yonatan Belinkov, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, et al. Jamba: A hybrid Transformer-
  Mamba language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19887, 2024.
TP Lillicrap.    Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning.             arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Jinfeng Liu, David Muñoz de la Peña, Benjamin J Ohran, Panagiotis D Christofides, and James F
   Davis. A two-tier architecture for networked process control. Chemical Engineering Science, 63
   (22):5394–5409, 2008.
Yong Liu, Chenyu Li, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Koopa: Learning non-stationary time
  series dynamics with Koopman predictors. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 36, pp. 12271–12290, 2023.
Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Deep learning for universal linear embeddings
  of nonlinear dynamics. Nature Communications, 9(1):4950, 2018.
Jeremy Morton, Antony Jameson, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Freddie Witherden. Deep dynamical
   modeling and control of unsteady fluid flows. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Eric Nguyen, Karan Goel, Albert Gu, Gordon Downs, Preey Shah, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, and
  Christopher Ré. S4nd: Modeling images and videos as multidimensional signals with state spaces.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 2846–2861, 2022.
M Nikravesh, AE Farell, and TG Stanford. Control of nonisothermal CSTR with time varying
 parameters via dynamic neural network control (DNNC). Chemical Engineering Journal, 76(1):
 1–16, 2000.
Julian Nubert, Johannes Köhler, Vincent Berenz, Frank Allgöwer, and Sebastian Trimpe. Safe and
  fast tracking on a robot manipulator: Robust MPC and neural network control. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 5(2):3050–3057, 2020.
Jiacheng Ruan and Suncheng Xiang. VM-UNet: Vision Mamba UNet for medical image segmen-
   tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02491, 2024.
Jan C Schulze, Danimir T Doncevic, and Alexander Mitsos. Identification of MIMO Wiener-type
  Koopman models for data-driven model reduction using deep learning. Computers & Chemical
  Engineering, 161:107781, 2022.
Haojie Shi and Max Q-H Meng. Deep Koopman operator with control for nonlinear systems. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(3):7700–7707, 2022.
Aivar Sootla, Natalja Strelkowa, Damien Ernst, Mauricio Barahona, and Guy-Bart Stan. On periodic
  reference tracking using batch-mode reinforcement learning with application to gene regulatory
  network control. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 4086–4091, 2013.
Natalja Strelkowa and Mauricio Barahona. Switchable genetic oscillator operating in quasi-stable
  mode. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 7(48):1071–1082, 2010.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Naoya Takeishi, Yoshinobu Kawahara, and Takehisa Yairi. Learning Koopman invariant subspaces
  for dynamic mode decomposition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 30, 2017.
Peter Van Overschee and BL0888 De Moor. Subspace identification for linear systems: The-
  ory—Implementation—Applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Yogesh Verma, Markus Heinonen, and Vikas Garg. Climode: Climate and weather forecasting with
  physics-informed neural odes. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Andreas Wächter and Lorenz T Biegler. On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-
  search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, 106(1):
  25–57, 2006.
Kun Wang, Hao Wu, Yifan Duan, Guibin Zhang, Kai Wang, Xiaojiang Peng, Yu Zheng, Yuxuan
  Liang, and Yang Wang. Nuwadynamics: Discovering and updating in causal spatio-temporal
  modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Matthew O Williams, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, and Clarence W Rowley. A data–driven approxima-
 tion of the Koopman operator: Extending dynamic mode decomposition. Journal of Nonlinear
 Science, 25:1307–1346, 2015.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, 2020.
Xunyuan Yin and Jinfeng Liu. Subsystem decomposition of process networks for simultaneous
  distributed state estimation and control. AIChE Journal, 65(3):904–914, 2019.
Jing Zeng and Jinfeng Liu. Economic model predictive control of wastewater treatment processes.
   Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 54(21):5710–5721, 2015.
Hao Zhang, Clarence W Rowley, Eric A Deem, and Louis N Cattafesta. Online dynamic mode
  decomposition for time-varying systems. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 18(3):
  1586–1609, 2019.
Xuewen Zhang, Minghao Han, and Xunyuan Yin. Reduced-order Koopman modeling and predictive
  control of nonlinear processes. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 179:108440, 2023.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
Lianghui Zhu, Bencheng Liao, Qian Zhang, Xinlong Wang, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Vi-
  sion Mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state space model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.09417, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    KOOPMAN O PERATOR
According to the approach discussed in (Korda & Mezić, 2018), a state vector incorporating both
                                                 T
state and input can be defined as Xk = xTk , uTk . Defining a left shift operator S such that Suk =
uk+1 , the dynamics of this augmented state vector can be expressed as follows:

                                               f (xk , uk )        f (xk , uk )
                          Xk+1 = F(Xk ) :=                    :=                                (11)
                                                  Suk                 uk+1
The Koopman operator KF : HF → HF for (11) governs the dynamics of the augmented vector X
in a linear fashion:
                              KF Ψ(Xk ) = Ψ ◦ F(Xk ) = Ψ(Xk+1 ).                                (12)
The observable functions inside Ψ transfer the original states into the higher-dimensional space.
In (Korda & Mezić, 2018), only the states are lifted to a higher-dimensional space, while no trans-
formations are applied to the inputs. Specifically, the observable functions Ψ are defined as follows:
                                                                      T
                               Ψ(Xk ) = Ψ(xk , uk ) = ψ T (xk ), uTk

                                                                                                  (13)
where ψ : Rn → RN is the observable function that transforms the original states.
For real-world applications, a finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator, denoted
as KNϕ , needs to be identified. Since future inputs are not considered, only the elements in the first
N rows of the KNϕ need to be identified. The formulation of KNϕ can be expressed as:

                                                    A B
                                         KNϕ =                                                    (14)
                                                    ∗ ∗
where A ∈ RN ×N , B ∈ RN ×m . To capture the dynamics of Xk , it is sufficient to identify only the
matrices A and B in (14), while the blocks denoted by ∗ can be ignored.

B    M AMBA FRAMEWORK
The matrices generation network in MamKO is inspired by the Mamba. It is worth noting that there
are differences between our methods and the Mamba structure.
Firstly, the Mamba structure is designed for LLM with word sequences as inputs and generates cor-
responding word sequences. Instead, our method attempts to model real-world systems containing
both states and inputs. Compared with LLM, our MamKO model is closer to the concept (Ha &
Schmidhuber, 2018), which contains the interaction between states and actions.
Secondly, the matrices generation network of Mamba utilizes the information in the whole input
sequence. Given the sequence Uk = {uj }j=k,··· ,k+H−1 , the matrices Ak , Bk and Ck in (5) are
obtained from the nonlinear neural networks, which can be denoted as Ak = fAk (Uk ), Bk =
fBk (Uk ). Ck = fCk (Uk ). The SSM from Mamba can be formulated as:
                                 zk+1 = fAk (Uk )zk + fBk (Uk )uk
                                                                                                  (15)
                                   x̂k = fCk (Uk )zk
The nonlinear functions fAk , fBk , fCk and the bilinear terms fAk (Uk )zk , fBk (Uk )uk make the
relationship between zk and uk no longer linear. Applying MPC for this nonlinear system can
cause non-convex optimization problems, which may reduce the control efficiency. In our work,
the matrices are generated from historical data, which have no direct relationship between zk and
uk . The linear relationship between zk and ck allows for the construction of convex optimization
problems.
Lastly, the SSMs in the Mamba structure are separately generated for each channel of the input
sequence. For the input u ∈ Rm with m channels, m pairs of SSMs with Ak ∈ RN ×N , Bk ∈ RN ×1 ,
Ck ∈ R1×N matrices are generated at time instant k. The multiple pairs of SSMs are not directly
applicable to MPC. In our framework, the SSMs are designed to describe the dynamics of all the
input channels (features), which can be formulated as Ak ∈ RN ×N , Bk ∈ RN ×m , Ck ∈ Rn×N for
each time instant.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Figure 5: CartPole system.


                           𝑭𝒓                𝑭𝟐𝟎                                                     𝑭𝒑


        𝑭𝟏𝟎                 𝑻𝟏                𝑭𝟏           𝑻𝟐              𝑭𝟐        𝑻𝟑


                             CSTR 1                        CSTR 2                    Separator
                          𝑨→𝑩→𝑪                         𝑨→𝑩→𝑪

                                                                                                       𝑭𝟑
              𝑸𝟏                              𝑸𝟐                     𝑸𝟑



                                 Figure 6: Time-invariant RSCP system (Liu et al., 2008).

C     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
The experiments are set based on OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). Part of the environments
are presented in Figure 5 and Figure 6.

C.1     C ART P OLE - I NVERTED P ENDULUM ON A C ART
We modified the CartPole system described in (Brockman et al., 2016) using a continuous action
space instead of a discrete one. The system consists of a cart that moves horizontally with an
inverted pendulum attached to it. While the cart is fully actuated, the pendulum remains unactuated.
In this experiment, the controller aims to keep the pendulum upright and vertical. The control input
is the horizontal force applied to the cart (a ∈ [−20, 20]). xthreshold and θthreshold represents the
maximum of position and angle, respectively, xthreshold = 10 and θthreshold = 20◦ . The episode ends
if |θ| > θthreshold and the episodes end in advance. The episodes for control evaluation are of length
1000. For time-varying CartPole, the model is based on a modified system in (Hao et al., 2022),
which can be presented as:

             Ft + ml θ̄˙t2 sin θ̄t − θ̄¨t cos θ̄t − µct sgn (ẋt )
    ẍt =
                                    mc + m
                      h                                       i                                             (16)
             cos θt                ˙
                          −Ft − mlθ̄t2 sin θt + µct sgn (ẋt ) / (mc + m)                       ˙
                                                                                 g sin θt − µp θ̄/ml
    θ̄¨t =                     4                                          +   4
                            l 3 − m cos2 θ̄t / (mc + m)                     l 3 − m cos2 θ̄t / (mc + m)
where µct = 0.0005 + cos(ωt) is time-varying coefficient of friction of cart on the track; ω is the
angular frequency of the sine wave; xt is the distance to the initial position; θ̄t is the offset angle;
ẋt , ¯˙θt is the velocity and the angular velocity respectively; Ft is the continuous control input. The
parameters are set the same as the time-invariant CartPole, which can be presented as:
                                          mc = 1.0 kg, m = 0.1 kg, l = 0.5 m
For the time-varying Cartpole system, the angular frequency is set as ω = 1; for the rapidly changing
dynamics, the angular frequency is set as ω = 0.1, ω = 1, ω = 10, respectively.


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notably, the control tasks for the two systems include position control and angular control. The
controller should stabilize the CartPole in the state that xt = 0 and θt = 0. The cost designed for
the two CartPole systems is defined as:
                                                             x2t      θ2
                                 costcartpole (xt , θt ) =       + 180 t                            (17)
                                                             100      π

C.2   S YNTHETIC B IOLOGY G ENE R EGULATORY N ETWORKS

The gene regulatory networks (GRNs) discussed in this paper function at the nanoscale, demon-
strating unique physical properties that distinguish them from other examples. Notably, these GRNs
exhibit intriguing oscillatory behavior.
In this example, we focus on a classical dynamical system from systems and synthetic biology,
specifically addressing a reference tracking task. The GRN under consideration is a synthetic three-
gene regulatory network, where the dynamics of mRNAs and proteins inside the network exhibit
oscillatory behavior. A detailed description of the network’s mechanisms can be found in (Elowitz
& Leibler, 2000). The discrete-time mathematical model of the GRNs can be represented by the
following equations:

                                                                a1
                x1 (t + 1) = x1 (t) + dt · −γ1 x1 (t) +                 +  u  1   + ξ1 (t),
                                                          K1 + x26 (t)

                                                                a2
                x2 (t + 1) = x2 (t) + dt · −γ2 x2 (t) +                 +  u  2   + ξ2 (t),
                                                          K2 + x24 (t)

                                                                a3                              (18)
                x3 (t + 1) = x3 (t) + dt · −γ3 x3 (t) +            2    + u3 + ξ3 (t),
                                                          K3 + x5 (t)
                x4 (t + 1) = x4 (t) + dt · [−c1 x4 (t) + β1 x1 (t)] + ξ4 (t),
                x5 (t + 1) = x5 (t) + dt · [−c2 x5 (k) + β2 x2 (t)] + ξ5 (t),
                x6 (t + 1) = x6 (t) + dt · [−c3 x6 (t) + β3 x3 (t)] + ξ6 (t).
In this context, x1 , x2 , x3 represent the concentrations of the mRNA transcripts, and x4 , x5 , x6 rep-
resent the concentrations of the corresponding proteins for genes 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The terms
ξi , for all i, are independent and identically distributed. Uniform noise variables are drawn from
the range [−δ, δ]. For the simulations described in Section 5, δ is set to 0, while for the robustness
tracking task in F.6, δ is set to 0.5. The parameters a1 , a2 , and a3 indicate the highest promoter
strengths for the respective genes. The symbols γ1 , γ2 , and γ3 represent the degradation rates of
mRNA, whereas c1 , c2 , and c3 correspond to the degradation rates of proteins. Moreover, β1 , β2 ,
and β3 denote the protein synthesis rates, and K1 , K2 , and K3 are the associated dissociation con-
stants. The equations in (18) present a network structure in which gene 1 is inhibited by gene 2,
gene 2 is suppressed by gene 3, and gene 3, in turn, is repressed by gene 1. The discretization time
step is denoted by dt. The protein concentrations are observable and are typically measured using
fluorescent markers, such as green fluorescent protein (GFP) or red fluorescent protein (mCherry).
The control inputs ui are applied via light control signals, which activate photo-sensitive promoters
to induce gene expression. In line with the standard practice of GRN models in (Elowitz & Leibler,
2000), we simplify the system dynamics by assuming that the parameters regulating mRNA and
protein dynamics are uniform across all genes. Further details on the mathematical modeling and
control of synthetic gene regulatory networks can be found in (Strelkowa & Barahona, 2010; Sootla
et al., 2013). In the simulations mentioned in this paper, the parameters are chosen as follows:
                   ∀i : Ki = 1, ai = 1.6, γi = 0.16, βi = 0.16, ci = 0.06, dt = 1
For the tracking task for x4 , the cost function for the GRN system is defined as:
                                      costGRN (x4 ) = (x4 − 6)2                                     (19)


C.3   R EACTOR - SEPARATOR PROCESS
A reactor-separator process, consisting of two continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) and a flash
tank separator (Liu et al., 2008), is considered in this paper. A schematic of the process is shown in


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6. The process consists of two chemical reactions: firstly, the reactant A is transformed into
the desired product B, followed by a secondary reaction where a fraction of B is further converted
into the byproduct C. The system starts with the pure reactant A being fed into the first reactor
(CSTR 1) at a flow rate of F10 . The output stream from CSTR 1, with a flow rate of F1 , together
with an additional fresh supply of pure A at a rate of F20 , enters CSTR 2. The outflow from CSTR
2 is then directed to the separator at a flow rate of F2 . Within the separator, a recycle stream with a
flow rate of Fr is redirected back to the first reactor for further conversion. All three vessels (CSTR
1, CSTR 2, and the separator) are equipped with a jacket to provide or remove heat, with a heating
input rate Qi , where i = 1, 2, 3. The system’s ordinary differential equations can be expressed as
follows (Liu et al., 2008; Yin & Liu, 2019):
                                                        −E1
    dxA1   F10                 Fr
         =     (xA10 − xA1 ) +    (xAr − xA1 ) − ϕc k1 e rT1 xA1
     dt    V1                  V1
                                                        −E1               −E2
    dxB1   F10                 Fr
         =     (xB10 − xB1 ) +    (xBr − xB1 ) + ϕc k1 e rT1 xA1 − ϕc k2 e rT1 xB1
     dt    V1                  V1
                                                        −E1                   −E2
     dT1   F10               Fr                 ∆H1                   ∆H2                 Q1
         =     (T10 − T1 ) +    (T3 − T1 ) − ϕc     k1 e rT1 xA1 − ϕc     k2 e rT1 xB1 +
      dt   V1                V1                  cp                    cp                ρcp V1
                                                        −E1
    dxA2   F1                F20
         =    (xA1 − xA2 ) +     (xA20 − xA2 ) − ϕc k1 e rT2 xA2
     dt    V2                V2
                                                        −E1               −E2
    dxB2   F1                F20
         =    (xB1 − xB2 ) +     (xB20 − xB2 ) + ϕc k1 e rT2 xA2 − ϕc k2 e rT2 xB2                  (20)
     dt    V2                V2
                                                        −E1                   −E2
     dT2   F1              F20                  ∆H1                   ∆H2                 Q2
         =    (T1 − T2 ) +     (T20 − T2 ) − ϕc     k1 e rT2 xA2 − ϕc     k2 e rT2 xB2 +
      dt   V2              V2                    cp                    cp                ρcp V2
    dxA3   F2                (Fr + Fp )
         =    (xA2 − xA3 ) −            (xAr − xA3 )
     dt    V3                    V3
    dxB3   F2                (Fr + Fp )
         =    (xB2 − xB3 ) −            (xBr − xB3 )
     dt    V3                    V3
     dT3   F2               Q3      (Fr + Fp )
         =    (T2 − T3 ) +        +            (xAr ∆Hvap1 + xBr ∆Hvap2 + xCr ∆Hvap3 )
      dt   V3              ρcp V3     ρcp V3

For a more detailed explanation of this process, refer to (Liu et al., 2008; Yin & Liu, 2019). Addi-
tional process disturbances are introduced into the systems to evaluate the robustness of the proposed
control strategy. These disturbances are sampled from a multivariate normal distribution N (0, σϵ2 ),
where σϵ = [0.01, 0.01, 0.50, 0.01, 0.01, 0.50, 0.01, 0.01, 0.50] corresponds to the standard devia-
tions associated with the nine state variables. For time-invariant RSCP, parameter ϕc is set as ϕc = 1;
For time-varying, parameter ϕc is set as ϕc = e−0.01t . The control objectives for both processes are
to regulate the system states and ensure the states remain at a steady-state set point:
                                                                                        T
               xs = [0.18, 0.67, 480.32 K, 0.20, 0.65, 472.79 K, 0.07, 0.67, 474.89 K]

                                                                                                               T
Given a set of scaling coefficients xscale = [0.36, 0.18, 361.94 K, 0.21, 0.18, 342.88 K, 0.26, 0.21, 361.59 K] ,
the cost function for the two RSCP systems can be defined as:
                                                        x − xs 2
                                     costRSCP (x) = (          )                                   (21)
                                                        xscale

D     H YPERPARAMETERS
The hyperparameters for the MamKO, DKO, and MLP are listed in Table 4, Table 5, Table 6,
respectively.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 4: Hyperparameters of MamKO
      Hyperparameters                                                         Value
      Size of training set                                                   40000
      Size of test set                                                        4000
      Batch Size                                                               256
      Learning rate                                                           1e-3
      Prediction horizon H                                                      30
      Structure of ψ (CartPole & Time-varying CartPole)                     (4, 64, 8)
      Structure of ψ (GRN)                                                 (6, 64, 10)
      Structure of ψ (Time-invariant RSCP & Time-varying RSCP)             (9, 64, 15)
      Activation function in ψ                                                ReLU
      Kernel size h of ϕ (CartPole)                                             10
      Kernel size h of ϕ (Time-varying CartPole)                                15
      Kernel size h of ϕ (GRN)                                                  10
      Kernel size h of ϕ (Time-invariant RSCP)                                  10
      Kernel size h of ϕ (Time-varying RSCP)                                     5
      Dimension of observables (CartPole & Time-varying CartPole)                8
      Dimension of observables (GRN)                                            10
      Dimension of observables (time-invariant RSCP & Time-varying RSCP)        15


                              Table 5: Hyperparameters of DKO
     Hyperparameters                                                            Value
     Size of training set                                                     40000
     Size of test set                                                          4000
     Batch Size                                                                 256
     Learning rate                                                             1e-3
     Prediction horizon H                                                        30
     Structure of ψ (CartPole & Time-varying CartPole)                       (4, 64, 8)
     Structure of ψ (GRN)                                                   (6, 64, 10)
     Structure of ψ (Time-invariant RSCP & Time-varying RSCP)               (9, 64, 15)
     Activation function                                                       ReLU
     Dimension of observables (CartPole & Time-varying CartPole)                  8
     Dimension of observables (GRN)                                              10
     Dimension of observables (Time-invariant RSCP & Time-varying RSCP)          15


                              Table 6: Hyperparameters of MLP
         Hyperparameters                                                Value
         Size of training set                                            40000
         Size of test set                                                 4000
         Batch Size                                                        256
         Learning rate                                                    1e-3
         Prediction horizon H                                              30
         Structure of ϕ (CartPole & Time-varying CartPole)           (4, 24, 16, 8)
         Structure of ϕ (GRN)                                       (6, 30, 20, 10)
         Structure of ϕ (Time-invariant RSCP & Time-varying RSCP)   (9, 45, 30, 15)
         Activation function                                             ReLU


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E                       M ODELING RESULTS
E.1                      C OMPARISION WITH CLASSIC SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION METHOD

A classical system identification method – subspace identification (Van Overschee & De Moor,
2012) is also applied to build a data-based dynamic model for the dynamics of the CartPole system.
For the 30-step-ahead prediction task, the model built based on subspace identification can only
provide satisfactory predictions of the position and velocity of the cart, while the predictions of the
state variables related to the pole diverge. In contrast, the proposed method can accurately forecast
the future behaviors of all the states of the CartPole system.


                                                                                    Cart velocity (m/s)
                     1.10                                                                                   1
 Cart position (m)


                     0.95                                                                                   0


                       0.8                                                                                  -1
                          0     0.1      0.2     0.3    0.4          0.5      0.6                             0     0.1        0.2      0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6
                                               Time (s)                                                                               Time (s)


                                                                                    Pole velocity (rad/s)
                       0.3                                                                                  2
    Pole angle (rad)


                                                                                                            1
                       0.1
                                                                                                            0

                       -0.1                                                                                 -1
                           0    0.1      0.2     0.3    0.4          0.5      0.6                             0     0.1        0.2      0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6
                                               Time (s)                                                                               Time (s)
                                                          Actual state      Subspace identification                        MamKO


                       Figure 7: Modeling results of the CartPole system by MamKO and subspace identification.

E.2                      T HE SELECTION OF THE DIMENSION OF THE STATE - SPACE MODEL

The dimension of the linear state-space model is determined through trial and error. A case study on
the CartPole system is conducted to illustrate the selection of the dimension of the state-space model.
The results, which include the test loss across various lifting dimensions, are presented in Table 7.
As the dimension of the lifted space increases from 5 to 8, the test loss decreases significantly to
6.93 × 10−4 . Further increasing the dimension does not lead to significant improvement in the
modeling performance.


                       Table 7: Test loss of different lifting dimensions on CartPole system modeling by MamKO.
                                      Lifting dimension          5                  8                                 10                 15
                                                                       −4                                   −4                −4
                                          Test loss        8.95 × 10         6.93 × 10                            6.94 × 10          7.04 × 10−4


                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   P REDICTION ERROR ON EACH PREDICTION STEP

The modeling performance of the proposed method at each prediction step is evaluated. The results
for the CartPole system, GRN system, and time-invariant RSCP system are presented in Figure 8,
Figure 9, and Figure 10. From the results, it can be demonstrated that while the prediction error
tends to increase as the number of prediction steps progresses, there is a notable reduction in error
observed mid-way through the prediction horizon. This phenomenon underscores the effectiveness
of our method in managing error propagation.
                                         10-3
                               2.5
            Prediction error


                               2.0

                               1.5

                               1.0

                               0.5

                                0
                                     0          5    10         15            20     25         30
                                                            Prediction step
                    Figure 8: Prediction error of the CartPole system at each prediction step.
                                         10-3
                               2.0
            Prediction error


                               1.5

                               1.0

                               0.5

                                0
                                     0          5    10         15            20     25         30
                                                            Prediction step
                               Figure 9: Prediction error of the GRN system at each prediction step.
                                         10-3
                               8.0
            Prediction error


                               6.0

                               4.0

                               2.0

                                0
                                     0          5    10         15            20     25         30
                                                            Prediction step
      Figure 10: Prediction error of the time-invariant RSCP system at each prediction step.


                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F            C ONTROL EXPERIMENT RESULTS
F.1              C ART P OLE AND T IME - VARYING C ART P OLE SYSTEMS

The trajectories of the x and θ for the Cartpole systems are presented in Figure 11.

                 0.2                                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                                            SAC                        MamKO-based MPC
                                                                                                                            MLP-based MPC              Reference
                                                                                                                            DKO-based MPC
                 0.1                                                                                      0.01


                                                                                                 (rad)
        xt (m)


                     0                                                                                       0


                                                                                                    t
                 -0.1                 SAC                           MamKO-based MPC                      -0.01
                                      MLP-based MPC                 Reference
                                      DKO-based MPC

                 -0.2                                                                                    -0.02
                         0        4             8              12         16          20                         0      4          8              12         16          20
                                                    Time (s)                                                                           Time (s)

                             (a) xt of the CartPole system                                                           (b) θt of the CartPole system

                 1.0                                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                                            SAC                        MamKO-based MPC
                                                                                                                            MLP-based MPC              Reference
                                                                                                                            DKO-based MPC
                 0.5                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                 (rad)
        xt (m)


                     0                                                                                       0
                                                                                                    t


                 -0.5                                                                                    -0.01
                                  SAC                           MamKO-based MPC
                                  MLP-based MPC                 Reference
                                  DKO-based MPC
                 -1.0                                                                                    -0.02
                         0        4             8              12         16          20                         0      4          8              12         16          20
                                                    Time (s)                                                                           Time (s)

                  (c) xt of the time-varying CartPole system                                              (d) θt of the time-varying CartPole system

             1.0                                                                                         0.02
                                  SAC                           MamKO-based MPC                                             SAC                        MamKO-based MPC
                                  MLP-based MPC                 Reference                                                   MLP-based MPC              Reference
                                  DKO-based MPC                                                                             DKO-based MPC
             0.5                                                                                         0.01
                                                                                                (rad)
    xt (m)


                 0                                                                                          0
                                                                                                   t


             -0.5                                                                                        -0.01


             -1.0                                                                                        -0.02
                     0        4             8              12            16       20                             0      4          8              12          16         20
                                                Time (s)                                                                               Time (s)

(e) xt of the time-varying CartPole system with (f) θt of the time-varying CartPole system with
rapidly changing parameters                     rapidly changing parameters
Figure 11: The trajectories of the Cartpole systems. The Y-axis indicates the average state trajectory
of each time instant. The shaded area represents the confidence interval (one standard deviation)
over the ten experiments.

The steady-state errors of the three CartPole systems are listed in Table 8. From the results, the
MamKO-based MPC demonstrates the smallest steady-state errors in all the states of each of the
three CartPole systems. Particularly, for the time-varying CartPole system with rapidly changing
parameters, the MamKO-based MPC achieves a substantial reduction in the steady-state error in


                                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cart position, outperforming the MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC and SAC by 98.38%, 92.92%,
and 93.86%, respectively.


      Table 8: Steady-state errors of the three CartPole systems by different control methods.
                              CartPole system              Time-varying CartPole system       CartPole system CartPole system with rapidly changing paramters
      Method
                    Cart position (m) Pole angle (rad)   Cart position (m) Pole angle (rad)   Cart position (m)                Pole angle (rad)
  MamKO-based MPC     6.40 × 10−2       2.15 × 10−4        3.98 × 10−2       4.74 × 10−3        5.94 × 10−2                      2.96 × 10−4
   MLP-based MPC          1.28          5.26 × 10−4        6.62 × 10−1       1.02 × 10−3            3.66                         1.03 × 10−2
   DKO-based MPC      1.54 × 10−1       2.35 × 10−4        1.30 × 10−1       5.14 × 10−3        8.39 × 10−1                      2.68 × 10−3
       SAC            6.94 × 10−1       1.92 × 10−2        7.34 × 10−1       1.87 × 10−2        9.67 × 10−1                      2.65 × 10−2


                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2     GRN SYSTEM

The trajectories of x4 of the GRN system obtained based on different control methods are presented
in Figure 12. The steady-state errors of the GRN system are listed in Table 9 .The proposed MamKO-
based MPC provides the smallest steady-state error, reducing it by 52.23%, 92.10% and 90.68% as
compared to MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC, and SAC, respectively.


               Table 9: Steady-state error of the GRN system by different control methods.
          Method                MamKO-based MPC           MLP-based MPC      DKO-based MPC               SAC
                                               −2                       −1                     −1
      Steady-state error           5.35 × 10                1.12 × 10              6.77 × 10          5.74 × 10−1



                        8


                        6
                   x4


                        4


                        2                 SAC                            MamKO-based MPC
                                          MLP-based MPC                  Reference
                                          DKO-based MPC

                        0
                            0      50     100       150      200     250     300      350       400
                                                           Time (a.u.)

Figure 12: The trajectories of the GRN system by different control methods. The Y-axis indicates
the average state trajectory of each time instant. The shaded area represents the confidence interval
(one standard deviation) over the ten experiments


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3     T IME - INVARIANT RSCP AND TIME - VARYING RSCP

One set of trajectories obtained from ten experiments for the time-invariant RSCP system is pre-
sented in Figure 13. One set of trajectories obtained from the ten experiments for the time-varying
RSCP system is presented in Figure 14. Since the nine states of the RSCP system have significantly
different magnitudes, the tracking errors for the RSCP system are calculated based on the states after
normalization. The steady-state errors of the time-invariant RSCP system and time-varying RSCP
system are listed in Table 10. From the results, the proposed MamKO-based MPC demonstrates
the smallest steady-state error. For the time-invariant RSCP system, the proposed MamKO-based
MPC achieves reductions in the steady-state error by 57.33%, 17.42%, and 61.68% as compared to
MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC, and SAC, respectively. For the time-varying RSCP system,
the proposed MamKO-based MPC reduces steady-state error by 49.78%, 24.83%, and 22.25% as
compared to MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC, and SAC, respectively.


Table 10: Steady-state errors of the time-invariant RSCP system and the time-varying RSCP system.
              Method            MamKO-based MPC       MLP-based MPC          DKO-based MPC                SAC
   Time-invariant RSCP system      1.28 × 10−2           3.00 × 10−2               1.55 × 10−2         3.34 × 10−2
   Time-varying RSCP system        6.78 × 10−2           1.35 × 10−1               9.02 × 10−2         8.72 × 10−2



      0.34                               0.75                                     500


                                                                         T1 (K)
xA1


                                   xB1


      0.24                               0.65                                     475

      0.14                               0.55                                     450
          0     0.5      1.0     1.5         0     0.5      1.0        1.5           0         0.5      1.0          1.5
                                         0.71                                     500
                  Time (h)                           Time (h)            T2 (K)                  Time (h)
xA2


                                   xB2


      0.28                                                                        470
                                         0.62
      0.18                               0.53                                     440
          0     0.5      1.0     1.5         0     0.5      1.0        1.5           0         0.5      1.0          1.5
      0.15        Time (h)               0.80        Time (h)                     500            Time (h)
                                                                         T3 (K)
xA3


                                   xB3


      0.10                               0.73                                     475

      0.05                               0.66                                     450
          0     0.5      1.0     1.5         0     0.5      1.0        1.5          0.00      0.50     1.00      1.50
                  Time (h)                           Time (h)                                    Time (h)
                 SAC    MLP-based MPC       DKO-based MPC   MamKO-based MPC                Reference


                Figure 13: The state trajectories for the time-invariant RSCP systems.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      0.76                                500


                                                                 T1 (K)
xA1


                                xB1


      0.24                            0.68                                475
      0.14                            0.60                                450
          0   0.5      1.0    1.5         0    0.5      1.0    1.5           0      0.5      1.0   1.5
                                      0.72                                490
                Time (h)                         Time (h)                             Time (h)
      0.26                                                       T2 (K)
xA2


                                xB2


                                      0.66                                470
      0.18
                                      0.60                                450
          0   0.5      1.0    1.5         0    0.5      1.0    1.5           0      0.5      1.0   1.5
      0.14      Time (h)              0.80       Time (h)                 500         Time (h)
                                                                 T3 (K)
xA3


                                xB3


      0.09                            0.72                                475

      0.04                            0.64                                450
          0   0.5      1.0    1.5         0    0.5      1.0    1.5           0      0.5      1.0   1.5
                Time (h)                         Time (h)                             Time (h)
                SAC    MLP-based MPC     DKO-based MPC   MamKO-based MPC         Reference


              Figure 14: The state trajectories for the time-varying RSCP systems.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4   WATEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM

To further demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method on highly nonlinear systems, we
evaluate the performance of MamKO on a large-scale nonlinear water treatment system (Alex et al.,
2008), which contains 145 states, two control inputs and 14 known disturbances. The dynamic
behaviors of this process are simulated using a high-fidelity simulator that was built based on 145
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Zeng & Liu, 2015). A schematic of the water treatment
plant is presented in Figure 15.
15 invariant states are excluded from Koopman-based modeling and control tasks. The modeling
task aims to build a Koopman model that describes the evolution of the remaining 130 state vari-
ables over a 10-step prediction horizon. For the water treatment system, trajectories of state and
action samples are gathered, generating a training set of 20, 000 samples, a validation set of 2, 000
samples, and a test set of 2, 000 samples. The modeling performance of the MamKO method and
two baseline methods are presented in Figure 16. From the experimental results, the proposed
method outperforms the deep Koopman operator (DKO) and multilayer perception (MLP) methods
in modeling performance.
A set-point tracking task is considered to evaluate the control performance of the proposed method.
The objective of the control task is to drive two selected states to a desired set point under the
influence of the disturbances. In the control task, a PID controller and an MPC based on the first-
principles model denoted as NMPC are included as the baselines. From the experimental results, the
proposed MamKO-based MPC reduces tracking error by 55.60%, 45.95%, and 10.07% as compared
to MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC, and SAC, respectively. The MPC based on the exact first-
principles model (the same model as the simulator) exhibits the smallest tracking error. However,
as emphasized in the introduction, obtaining an exact first-principles model can be challenging.
Additionally, the nonlinear optimization required for first-principles model systems often results
in suboptimal solutions, leading to large deviation points in the process. Our method achieves a
reduction in tracking error of 11.56% as compared to the PID controller. Furthermore, integrating
state constraints with the PID controller for this system can be challenging, and switching to a
different set point may require retuning the parameters.
                                                                         𝑸𝒆 , 𝒁𝒆
                        Biological reactor
Wastewater                           𝑲𝑳 𝒂𝟑      𝑲𝑳 𝒂𝟒      𝑲𝑳 𝒂𝟓                           Settler
  𝑸𝟎 , 𝒁𝟎
                                                                                                          Layer 1

                                                                         𝑸𝒇 , 𝒁 𝒇
                                                                                                       Layer 5

          Chamber 1 Chamber 2     Chamber 3   Chamber 4 Chamber 5
                                                                                                 Layer 10
                Non-aerated                   Aerated
                  section                     section        𝑸𝒂 , 𝒁 𝒂               𝑸𝒖 , 𝒁 𝒖
                                                                                                     𝑸𝒘 , 𝒁 𝒘
                                                                        𝑸𝒓 , 𝒁𝒓



              Figure 15: A schematic of the water treatment plant (Alex et al., 2008).


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          1
                                                                                               MLP
                                                                                               DKO
                                                                                               MamKO

                          0
              Test Loss


                          -1


                          -2
                            0         50     100       150     200      250      300      350      400
                                                              Epoch

Figure 16: Test loss of water treatment process in log space from different methods. The shaded
area represents the confidence interval (0.5 times the standard deviation) across ten training trials.


                                SAC    MLP-based MPC   DKO-based MPC   MamKO-based MPC   PID    NMPC
                        3.0

                        2.5

                        2.0
       Tracking error


                        1.5

                        1.0

                        0.5

                          0



Figure 17: Tracking errors of the control task in the water treatment process from different methods.
The red dots inside the boxes indicate the mean tracking errors in the process. The box chart shows
the distribution of the tracking error. The middle line inside the box represents the median value of
the collected data. The box represents the interquartile range (IQR), which encompasses the range
between the first quartile (Q1) and the third quartile (Q3). The whiskers extend to the smallest and
largest values within 1.5 times the IQR from the lower and upper quartiles. The outliers are the
individual data points outside the whiskers.


                                                              28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.5   T IME - DELAY RSCP SYSTEM

From the application perspective of the RSCP system, the transportation lag of reactant A and de-
sired product B may introduce time delays in measuring the mass fractions xAi and xBi . In this
system, a 0.025 h time delay is included. At each new sampling instant k, the controller optimizes
control output based on the measurements of xAi and xBi at sampling instant k − 5, instantaneous
measurements of Ti and the historical trajectory. The modeling and control tasks of the time-delay
RSCP system are the same as the time-invariant RSCP and time-varying RSCP system in Section 5.
The modeling performance of each method is presented in Figure 18, and the control performance
of each method is presented in Figure 19. From the results of modeling tasks, the proposed method
reduces the test loss by 55.56% and 66.67% as compared with the MLP and DKO methods, respec-
tively. For the control task, the proposed MamKO-based MPC reduces the cost by 52.52%, 53.59%,
and 84.25% as compared to MLP-based MPC, DKO-based MPC, and SAC, respectively.

                                0.5
                                                                                        MLP
                                                                                        DKO
                                                                                        MamKO
                          -0.5
              Test Loss


                          -1.5



                          -2.5



                          -3.5
                              0       50     100    150     200       250    300     350      400
                                                           Epoch
Figure 18: Test loss of the time-delay RSCP system. The shaded area represents the confidence
interval (0.5 times the standard deviation) across ten training trials.

                                2.0
                                                                                SAC
                                                                                MLP-based MPC
                                                                                DKO-based MPC
                                                                                MamKO-based MPC
                                1.5
                 Average cost


                                1.0



                                0.5



                                 0
                                  0   0.25   0.50   0.75     1.00     1.25   1.50    1.75    2.00
                                                           Time (h)
Figure 19: Average cost of the time-delay RSCP system in log space. The shaded area represents
the confidence interval (0.3 times the standard deviation) over the ten experiments.


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6     T RAJECTORY TRACKING TASK FOR GRN SYSTEM

A sinusoidal function with periods of 400 seconds is set as the tracking target of the task, which can
be represented as:
                                                      π
                                      x(t) = 5 sin        t + 10                                  (22)
                                                     200
In the tracking process, extra uniform disturbance ranging from [−0.5, 0.5], i.e., ξi ∼ U(−0.5, 0.5)
is added in the tracking process. The tracking trajectories of the GRN system are shown in Figure 20.
The mean tracking errors of the different methods are presented in Table 11. From the results, the
MamKO-based MPC exhibits the best tracking performance among the control methods, which
reduces the tracking error by 9.84%, 20.29%, 32.93% as compared to MLP-based MPC, DKO-
based MPC, and SAC, respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
can be applied to trajectory-tracking tasks.

                                16
                                                                               SAC
                                                                               MLP-based MPC
                                14                                             DKO-based MPC
                                                                               MamKO-based MPC
                                12                                             Reference
                  State value


                                10

                                8

                                6

                                4

                                2
                                 0   50    100    150      200        250    300    350      400
                                                        Time (a.u.)
Figure 20: Tracking trajectories of the GRN system of different methods. The Y-axis indicates the
average state trajectory of each time instant. The shaded area represents the confidence interval (one
standard deviation) over the ten experiments.


                 Table 11: Mean tracking errors of GRN system of different methods.
           System                    MamKO-based MPC        MLP-based MPC          DKO-based MPC   SAC
      Mean tracking error                  0.55                       0.61                0.69     0.82


                                                          30
