Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPROVING P RETRAINING DATA U SING
P ERPLEXITY C ORRELATIONS
 Tristan Thrush, Christopher Potts & Tatsunori Hashimoto
 Department of Computer Science
 Stanford University
 Stanford, CA 94305, USA
 {tthrush,cgpotts,thashim}@stanford.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Quality pretraining data is often seen as the key to high-performance language
         models. However, progress in understanding pretraining data has been slow
         due to the costly pretraining runs required for data selection experiments. We
         present a framework that avoids these costs and selects high-quality pretraining
         data without any LLM training of our own. Our work is based on a simple
         observation: LLM losses on many pretraining texts are correlated with down-
         stream benchmark performance, and selecting high-correlation documents is an
         effective pretraining data selection method. We build a new statistical frame-
         work for data selection centered around estimates of perplexity-benchmark cor-
         relations and perform data selection using a sample of 90 LLMs taken from
         the Open LLM Leaderboard on texts from tens of thousands of web domains.
         In controlled pretraining experiments at the 160M parameter scale on 8 bench-
         marks, our approach outperforms DSIR on every benchmark, while matching
         the best data selector found in DataComp-LM, a hand-engineered bigram clas-
         sifier. We have now also updated this paper to include results from preregistered
         experiments with new pretraining data on an aggregation of 22 benchmarks up
         to the 1.4B scale, showing increasing improvements of our method over others
         with more scale. A pip package with full documentation can be found here:
         https://github.com/TristanThrush/perplexity-correlations.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Dataset curation is increasingly crucial for training high-quality large language models (LLMs). As
pretraining datasets have grown, from under 200B tokens in 2020 (Raffel et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2020) to 240T tokens today (Li et al., 2024), it has become critical to identify subsets of the available
data that will lead to the best LLMs, and a wide range of methods have arisen to meet these needs
(Ilyas et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a;b; Engstrom et al., 2024; Everaert & Potts, 2024; Liu et al.,
2024; Llama Team, 2024). However, data-driven approaches to data selection typically involve
expensive model retraining steps that limit their effectiveness, and no algorithm has been reported
to consistently beat or match hand-crafted classifiers for data selection (Li et al., 2024).
Is training new LLMs necessary for data selection? Instead of training our own models, can we use
the growing collection of publicly available, high-performance LLMs (Wolf et al., 2019; Beeching
et al., 2023) to perform data valuation and selection? This would have significant benefits: we
could leverage the millions of dollars collectively spent on building these LLMs, and we would
have coverage over a large, heterogeneous collection of high-performance models varying in size,
architectures, and pretraining data distribution.
Despite these advantages, using existing models for pretraining data selection is challenging, as the
training data for these models are often unknown and heterogeneous. Our key observation is that
data selection can be done using two observable features of all public models today: 1) all open-
weight models produce a causal language modeling loss for a given text, and 2) all of them can be


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Domains                 Benchmark
                           bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi      SciQ
                                                                                                        High Corr (Keep)
                 Mistral               ···                                    Correlations                 arxiv, bbc, · · ·
                 Llama                 ···                                bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi



          LLMs
                 Mamba                 ···                                           ···
                    ..      ..    ..   ..       ..            ..
                     .       .     .      .      .             .
                 Pythia                ···                                                              Low Corr (Discard)
                                                                                                           willys-hifi, · · ·


                                   logprob                 accuracy



Figure 1: We pretrain on domains where lower loss is generally correlated with higher downstream
performance. Our approach does this by taking public, pretrained LLMs and measuring correlations
across their log-likelihoods (left, red matrix) and performance on a target benchmark (center, blue
vector). We then perform data selection by training a fastText classifier that distinguishes high cor-
relation domains from others. This approach is on par with the best-known data selection methods
in our experiments, despite requiring no human selection of high-quality domains.


evaluated on benchmarks. Prior work has found systematic relationships between web corpus loss
and benchmark performance (Wei et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024), which suggests the possibility of
using correlations between perplexity and benchmark scores as the basis for a data selection policy.
In the present paper, we pursue this possibility and find a radically simple approach that is also
effective: we select data via perplexity correlations (Figure 1), where we select data domains (e.g.
wikipedia.org, stackoverflow.com, etc.) for which LLM log-probabilities are highly correlated with
downstream benchmark performance. To enable our approach, we complement our algorithm with
a statistical framework for correlation-based data selection and derive correlation estimators that
perform well over our heterogeneous collection of LLMs.
We validate our approach using a collection of pretrained causal LLMs on the Hugging Face Open
LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) and find that perplexity correlations are predictive of an
LLM’s benchmark performance. Importantly, we find that these relationships are robust enough to
enable reliable data selection that targets downstream benchmarks. In controlled pretraining experi-
ments at the 160M parameter scale on eight benchmarks, our approach strongly outperforms DSIR
(Xie et al., 2023b) (a popular training-free data selection approach based on n-gram statistics) while
generally matching the performance of the best method validated at scale by Li et al. (the OH-2.5
+ELI5 fastText classifier; Joulin et al. 2016) without any parameter tuning or human curation. In
followup experiments at the 160M to 1.4B parameter scale which we pre-registered, our approach
outperforms the best Li et al. filter on the main benchmark from their paper (an aggregate of 22
benchmarks) when filtering from their base data pool, and both approaches remain close to each
other when filtering from their extensively pre-filtered pool. We further find that the performance of
our approach strengthens with increasing scale.

2   R ELATED W ORK
To go beyond the status quo of deduplication, perplexity filtering, and hand-curation (Laurençon
et al., 2022; BigScience, 2023; Marion et al., 2023; Abbas et al., 2023; Groeneveld et al., 2024;
Soldaini et al., 2024; Penedo et al., 2024; Llama Team, 2024), targeted methods have been proposed
to filter pretraining data so that the resulting LLM will achieve higher scores on given benchmarks.
There are lightweight approaches that use n-gram overlap (Xie et al., 2023b) or embedding similarity
(Everaert & Potts, 2024) to select training data that is similar to data from a given benchmark. There
are also less-scalable methods that require training proxy LLMs on different data mixtures (Ilyas
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a; Engstrom et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Llama Team, 2024).
Given the high costs of proxy-based data selection methods, they have primarily been used to select
among human-curated pretraining data mixtures (Llama Team, 2024; Li et al., 2024) rather than
a high dimensional space of mixtures. Our work takes an orthogonal approach and builds upon
recent observational studies that have found scaling relationships that hold across collections of
uncontrolled and diverse LLMs (Owen, 2024; Ruan et al., 2024). While these studies do not examine


                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


loss-to-performance relationships or derive useful data selection methods from them, we know that
losses and performance are generally highly correlated. Validation losses on samples of text corpora
are commonly used as a proxy for downstream performance when comparing LLMs pretrained on
the same data distribution (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022), even if they
have different architectures (Poli et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2024).
According to a recent survey of data selection approaches by Li et al. (2024), the heavier-weight
pretraining data selection methods have not shown large gains, and the current state-of-the-art across
many tasks is primitive: a fixed fastText classifier (Joulin et al., 2016) combined with an English filter
as a final layer after extensive deduplication and filtering. Are we missing important information that
we can efficiently extract from a diverse collection of already trained models, larger and more diverse
than any single organization is likely to produce? We show evidence supporting this hypothesis –
simple loss-performance correlation coefficients are effective when used for data selection.

3    P ROBLEM S ETTING
Our goal is to build predictive models of how pretraining data distributions affect downstream bench-
mark performance and use them to build better language models. Unfortunately, this task is challeng-
ing and computationally expensive. A standard approach adopted in paradigms such as datamodel-
                                                                                                    D
ing (Ilyas et al., 2022) is to obtain N different pretraining distributions {pi : i ∈ [N ], pi ∈ R+
                                                                                                  0 }
over D ≫ N domains (e.g. arxiv.org, stackoverflow.com, etc.), pretrain and measure model errors
on a target benchmark yi ∈ [0, 1], and fit a model p → y. This approach requires N LLM training
runs, performed at a scale sufficient to obtain non-random performance on y. This can cost tens to
hundreds of millions of dollars for hard benchmarks such as MMLU, where even the performance
of 1B parameter LLMs often does not exceed random chance (Beeching et al., 2023).
Instead, our work considers the following observational setting that requires no training. We obtain
N pretrained, high-performance LLMs that vary in pretraining data, tokenizer, architecture, and
scale (i.e. models on Hugging Face’s OpenLLM leaderboard). If we could train a predictor p → y
on these N models, we could avoid large scale model training. Unfortunately, this is impossible as
the training data for these models is often proprietary, and so we have no knowledge of p.
The key observation of our work is that we can replace pi,j (the unobserved sampling probability of
model i’s data selection policy on document j) with an observable surrogate xi,j , which is the nega-
tive log-likelihood of document j under model i.1 We can then build a regression model that relates
negative log-likelihood xi and benchmark error yi . Using this model, we can select pretraining data
from domains j for which decreasing the loss xi,j is predicted to rapidly decrease error yi .
The perplexity-performance hypothesis. We formulate the task of predicting errors yi from nega-
tive log-probabilities xi as a single-index model (SIM),
                                           yi = f (⟨θ ∗ , xi ⟩ + ϵi )                                      (1)
where f : R 7→ R is some unknown monotonically increasing univariate function, ϵi is zero-mean
noise which is independent of x, and θ ∗ ∈ RD are unknown weights over D domains.
A single index model is highly flexible (due to the arbitrary, monotone f ) and has the advantage that
we do not need to estimate the nonlinear function f if our goal is to optimize model performance.
We can see this directly from the monotonicity of f as
             ⟨θ ∗ , xi ⟩ + ϵi < ⟨θ ∗ , xj ⟩ + ϵj ⇐⇒ f (⟨θ ∗ , xi ⟩ + ϵi ) < f (⟨θ ∗ , xj ⟩ + ϵj ).         (2)

Data selection from perplexity correlations. The weights θ ∗ tell us which domain perplexities
are correlated with downstream performance. However, this isn’t sufficient for data selection. Even
if we know how model likelihoods relate to model performance, we do not know how data selec-
tion affects likelihoods. Even worse, this data mixture to likelihood relationship cannot be learned
observationally, as we do not know the data mixture of any of our models.
   1
     To be precise, we use bits-per-byte, which normalizes the sequence negative log-likelihood with the number
of UTF-8 bytes. This is defined in terms of the length of the string in tokens LT , the length of the string in
UTF-8 bytes LB , and the cross entropy loss ℓ as BPB = LBLTln(2)ℓ


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite this, we show that there is a clean approach for optimizing the data mixture. Our core
observation is the following: if we find a nonnegative θ ∗ , sampling proportional to θ ∗ is always a
good choice. More formally, we see that this sampling distribution defines the pretraining loss such
that optimizing the training loss directly optimizes the downstream task via the single index model.
Proposition 1 Suppose that θ ∗ weights are non-negative. Then, for models with associated like-
lihoods x ∈ X ⊂ RD , the minimizer of the pretraining loss over the θ ∗ sampling distribution
Ej∼θ∗ [xj ] also has the lowest expected downstream error according to the single index model:
                           arg min Ej∼θ∗ [xj ] = arg min E[f (⟨θ ∗ , x⟩ + ϵ)].
                           x∈X                    x∈X

This observation follows directly from the fact that we can normalize any non-negative θ ∗ into a
distribution (and shift the normalization constant into f ) which allows us to write the inner product
in the single-index model as a monotone function of the expected pretraining loss:
                               y = f (⟨θ ∗ , x⟩ + ϵ) = f (Ej∼θ∗ [xj ] + ϵ).                        (3)

Proposition 1 allows us to entirely avoid the task of finding the optimal data mixture for a target
likelihood. Instead, we pick sampling distributions that make the pretraining loss a monotone func-
tion of the predicted downstream error. Afterward, we can rely on our ability to optimize the loss to
optimize downstream performance.
This view gives us a straightforward roadmap for data selection in the remainder of the paper:
estimate a set of domains where loss and downstream benchmark performance is highly correlated,
and then constrain our θ ∗ estimates to be a pretraining data sampling distribution.

4     M ETHODS
We now describe the details of our approach, starting by presenting the algorithm itself and the
intuitions behind it, followed by a more precise and mathematical justification for the various steps.

4.1   A LGORITHM

Estimating θ ∗ . The parameter θj∗ measures the relationship between log-likelihoods in domain
j and downstream performance. Because of this, we might naturally expect θj∗ to be related to
nonlinear correlation coefficients between x and y. Our work uses a simple correlation measure,
                              X
                      γj =          sign(yk − yl )(rankj (xk,j ) − rankj (xl,j ))
                           1≤k,l≤n
                             k̸=l

where rankj (x) is the rank of x among {x1,j . . . xN,j }. This formula is intuitive: when model k
does better than model l, what percentile is model k’s log-likelihood compared to model l’s? The
functional form also has the benefit of being a principled estimate of θ ∗ . In particular, we show in
sections below that in expectation, the ranking of domains in γ exactly matches that of θ ∗ (under
standard high-dimensional regression assumptions; see Section 4.2 for a complete discussion). We
note, though, that this is not the only correlation coefficient that performs well in our perplexity
correlations toolkit (see Appendix H) and we prove that Spearman’s rank correlation (Spearman,
1904) is principled in the same way (see Appendix C).
Selecting pretraining data. Suppose that we have an accurate estimate γj which is nonnegative. In
this case, we could use γj directly as a data selection procedure and Proposition 1 would ensure that
minimizing the population pretraining loss minimizes downstream errors. Unfortunately, γj can be
negative and the finite number of tokens per domain can make it difficult to minimize the population
pretraining loss. Thus, we must project γj onto the set of reasonable pretraining data distributions
that are nonnegative and account for the per-domain token counts.
What is a good way to project a set of domain rankings estimated via γ into a pretraining sampling
distribution? Intuitively, if wikipedia.org has a γj = 0.5 and arxiv.org is γk = 0.9, it would be nat-
ural to select tokens in order of γ, preferring tokens from arxiv.org over tokens from wikipedia.org.
Having established the ordering of domains, the remaining question is how many tokens we take for
each domain. We follow recent observations that repeating data degrades performance (Abbas et al.,


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023) to arrive at a simple selection algorithm: select domains in greatest to least γ, taking all the
tokens in each domain once, until we exhaust our total pretraining token budget.
Full algorithm. Together, these steps result in a simple, parameter-free algorithm that calculates
our rank correlation coefficient, and selects domains in order from largest to smallest coefficient.
We show this process explicitly with pseudocode in Algorithm 1 (see Appendix A), and additionally
show an extra step where we train a fastText (Joulin et al., 2016) classifier (using standard settings
and bigram features from Li et al. 2024) which distinguishes our selected documents and domains
from the rest of the pool. The fastText classifier allows us to perform data selection at a single-
page level, and scale the selection process to larger datasets. We also found the classifier to slightly
improve downstream performance over directly selecting the documents. More information on the
specifics of the data selection approaches that we tested is given in Appendix G.

4.2     T HEORY

We now study the approach closely and show that our choices for the correlation coefficient and
projection step are extensions of the classic, high-dimensional single index model estimator of Plan
et al. (2016). We describe the basic single-index model estimators first, describe our extensions,
and then conclude with a discussion on how our estimator and results deviate from the theory. A
discussion of other potential estimation paradigms is provided in Appendix E.

4.2.1    H IGH - DIMENSIONAL ESTIMATION OF SINGLE INDEX MODELS
For our theory, we consider the standard high-dimensional regression setting of Plan et al. (2016)
and Chen & Banerjee (2017). Here, our goal is to estimate the unknown weights θ ∗ in a single-index
model yi = f (⟨θ ∗ , xi ⟩ + ϵi ), with xi ∼ N (0, I) for ∥θ ∗ ∥2 = 1 (assumed without loss of generality,
as ∥θ ∗ ∥2 can be absorbed by f ).
Our starting point is the classic result of Plan et al. (2016), who showed
                                           E [yk xk ] = cθ ∗ ,                                       (4)
for some positive constant c and 1 ≤ k ≤ N . Closely related is the result of Chen & Banerjee
(2017), who developed a robust estimator quite similar to ours,
                                  E [sign(yk − yl )(xk − xl )] = βθ ∗                                (5)
for any 1 ≤ k, l ≤ N (where k ̸= l) and some positive constant β. Both of these results clearly iden-
tify that for the high-dimensional single-index model in the Gaussian setting, generalized correlation
coefficients provide consistent estimates of the true regression coefficient θ ∗ .

4.2.2    D ERIVING OUR ESTIMATOR
Both Plan et al. and Chen & Banerjee provide moment-matching style estimators that consistently
recover θ ∗ in high-dimensional, sparse settings. However, we found that both estimators directly
use the values of x, and this resulted in brittle estimates due to outliers in language model log-
likelihoods. While outlier removal is one possibility, we found that a simpler approach was to
robustify the estimator of Chen & Banerjee (2017) to outliers in x.
Recall that our estimate γ is a U-statistic, defined as pairwise sums of
                                   sign(yi − yj )(Φ(xi ) − Φ(xj )),                                  (6)
for any 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N (where i ̸= j), where Φ is the empirical CDF (effectively, normalized ranks)
of the x values. This estimate is significantly less sensitive to outliers than that of Chen & Banerjee
(2017), as the empirical CDF is bounded between zero and one.
We study this estimate theoretically in the Gaussian setting, where we consider the asymptotically
equivalent estimator with Φ as the CDF of the standard Gaussian. In this case, we can show that this
modified estimator is also consistent in recovering θ ∗ .

Theorem 1 When ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), we have:
                                                                           θ∗

                                                       2
                   E[sign(yi − yj )(Φ(xi ) − Φ(xj ))] = sin−1            √             .             (7)
                                                       π                2 1 + σ2

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof is in Appendix B. Because we assume ||θ ∗ ||2 = 1 and the expected value in Equation 7
must be in [−1, 1], we are always in the domain of sin−1 and can invert it. After inverting, we get:
                                     π
                           θ̂ ∝ sin     E [sign(yi − yj )(Φ(xi ) − Φ(xj ))]                       (8)
                                      2
                                              √
as an estimate for θ ∗ , where the constant 2 1 + σ 2 term due to noise has been dropped.
Beyond the fact that our estimator is consistent, we can show an even tighter connection to the Chen
& Banerjee estimator: our estimates agree when running the original estimator on rank-transformed
data. More specifically, for two models xi and xj with the estimated model rankings ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ >
⟨θ̂, xj ⟩, the expected ranking under rank-transformation (i.e. Φ(x)) matches this ranking.

Corollary 1 Suppose that θ̂ is any vector of fixed weights and x ∼ N (0, I). Then, conditioning on
the event ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩, we have with probability 1 that:
                ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(xi ) | ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩]⟩ < ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(xj ) | ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩]⟩.          (9)

This proof follows from the same calculations as Theorem 1 and is given in Appendix B.

4.2.3    S ELECTING DATA FOR PRETRAINING
Recall that our algorithm for data selection is to constrain γ to be a valid sampling distribution
and then sample directly from this estimate. For now, we focus on constraining θ̂, and we will
see at the end of this section that we can apply the same constraint to γ directly to get the same
result. The theory of constrained estimation for θ̂ is simple and well-understood, with both Plan
et al. (2016) and Chen & Banerjee (2017) extensively studying the problem of estimating θ̂ under a
known convex constraint set C. In particular, Plan et al. (2016) show that performing a L2 projection
via θ̂ proj = arg minθ∈C ∥θ − θ̂∥2 provides improved convergence rates that depend on the Gaussian
mean width of C rather than the ambient dimension, and Chen & Banerjee (2017) show similar
results when maximizing the linear correlation θ̂ proj = arg minθ∈C⊆BD −⟨θ, θ̂⟩.

We take a similar approach here. We define a convex constraint set C that forces θ̂ to be a reasonable
sampling distribution and find the best sampling distribution via the linear correlation approach.
We define C as the combination of two sets of constraints. First, we must have a valid sampling
distribution, so we constrain θ̂ to lie in the simplex. As we noted above, it is well-known that
duplicating data harms performance (Abbas et al., 2023), so we constrain θ̂ to avoid this by limiting
the maximum weight on domains: if we will pretrain on m tokens overall, we enforce θi∗ ≤ τi , ∀i ∈
[1, D], where τi is set so τi m is the number of tokens from the i-th domain accessible for training.
The resulting linear program has a simple solution and takes the form of initializing θ̂ proj to 0 and
then iterating through the values in θ̂ from largest to smallest, setting the value at the corresponding
index of θ̂ proj to the maximum allowable value, until θ̂ proj sums to 1 (see Appendix D for a proof).
Theorem 2 Suppose we want to solve:
                                          θ̂ proj = arg min −⟨θ, θ̂⟩,
                                                     θ∈RD
subject to:
                                                            D
                                                            X
                                                                  θi = 1
                                                            i=1
                                         0 ≤ θi ≤ τi , ∀i ∈ [1, D],
where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then, the solution is:
                                           P
          τk P
                                         if j: rj (θ̂j )≥rk (θ̂k ) τj ≤ 1
 θ̂kproj = 1 − j: rj (θ̂j )>rk (θ̂k ) τj if j: rj (θ̂j )≥rk (θ̂k ) τj ≥ 1 ∧ j: rj (θ̂j )>rk (θ̂k ) τj ≤ 1 , (10)
                                            P                              P
          
            0                             otherwise
          

where r breaks ties between θ̂j and θ̂k for k ̸= j; otherwise r keeps ordinal relationships the same.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We note that while the use of this linear program is in line with the constrained estimators proposed
in Chen & Banerjee (2017), the L2 projection is arguably more natural, and does not require assum-
ing that ∥θ̂∥2 = 1 for asymptotic recovery conditions. We derive similar closed-form expressions
for this quadratic case in Appendix D, but do not use this approach for two separate reasons. First,
the L2 projection depends on the L2 norm of θ̂, unlike the linear program which only depends on
the ranks of the values in θ̂. The challenge with determining the norm is that the exact recovery
result in Equation (7) requires knowledge of the noise level, and the trigonometric functions rely
strongly on the Gaussian structure of x. Because of this, we are unlikely to be able to estimate the
norm of θ̂ with any accuracy, and the only way to avoid this would be to treat the norm as a hyperpa-
rameter, which adds unnecessary complexity. The second reason is empirical (although possibly a
consequence of the first) – we found that the linear projection performed better across a wide range
of benchmarks and conditions (see Appendix H).
We conclude by relating our theory to the full algorithm in Section 4.1. The estimation step for γ
is the finite sample, U-estimate of the expectation in Equation (8), dropping the nonlinear transform
sin and π/2 as these two terms do not change the rankings of the domains. The data selection step
directly applies our projection in Equation (10), and we make use of the fact that this projection only
relies on rankings among the domains to use γ rather than an exact estimate for θ ∗ .

5       R ESULTS
We first pretrain 160M-parameter LLMs from scratch to study our primary goal of selecting pretrain-
ing data to improve downstream performance, and then we present a brief overview of results on
experiments which we preregistered in an earlier version of this document (most experiments show
a trend of even greater improvements at larger scales – up to 1.4B parameters – on new benchmarks
and data pools; more detail is in Appendices N and M). Finally, we present an analysis on the ability
of losses to predict downstream performance. Throughout our experiments, we use single-index
models trained using Algorithm 1. As shown in the algorithm, we train the fastText classifier on
selected vs. unselected domains and use the classifier to filter the pretraining data at the page-level.
Input data matrix X. To build the input data matrix, X, we collected byte normalized loss values
from a sample of 90 Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) LLMs that we could run
without errors. Concretely, these values are defined as bits-per-byte LBLln(2)
                                                                         Tℓ
                                                                               where LT is the token
count, LB is the number of UTF-8 bytes, and ℓ is the per-token cross-entropy (Gao et al., 2020).
For our initial experiments, we collected these values on the “sample” subset2 of the RedPajama V2
(RPJv2) dataset (Together Computer, 2023) for all domains with ≥ 25 pages in the sample. There
are 9,841 domains/features. Specifics are in Appendix F. The data for the additional preregistered
experiments is discussed in Appendix N. A detailed principal components analysis of X, which
reveals a variety of salient embedded information in the losses, is in Appendix L.
Target benchmark performance y. For our initial experiments, we constructed a target vector, y,
for LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016), ARC Easy (Clark et al., 2018), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), and
SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017). These are all of the tasks reported in the Pythia scaling experiments for
which a model in the 160M parameter range could meaningfully perform above chance. We also
constructed target vectors for LAMBADAIT , LAMBADAFR , LAMBADADE , and LAMBADAES ,
which are subsets of LAMBADA translated into Italian, French, German, and Spanish by Black
(2023). These languages match those in RPJv2, where each page is conveniently tagged as one of
five languages: English, Spanish, French, German, and Italian. The correspondence between our
target benchmark languages and the RPJv2 metadata allows us to easily include language filtering
baselines. For the preregistered experiments, we use 22 more benchmarks (see Appendix N).

5.1      I NITIAL P RETRAINING E XPERIMENTS

We begin by validating our algorithm in the end-to-end task of pretraining data selection with con-
trolled experiments at the 160M parameter, 3.2B token, scale. The low compute requirements of
this setting allow us to more extensively study replicates and ablations in Appendix H within the
timeframe of a few days. While 160M models are small, this is far from an easy setting for our data

    2
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data-V2


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Average rankings of data selection methods (lower is better) for 8 evals. Correlation-based
filtering beats baselines by a wide margin, and matches the current best open data filter from Li et al.
(2024). Our approach significantly beats the default filter in Li et al. (2024) and loses slightly after
additional manual language filtering that depends on the target task (+ manual Lang Filter).
                                                   Handcrafted fastText
                     Lang          DSIR                                   Handcrafted fastText   Handcrafted fastText   Perplexity
   Method    None                                   + EN Lang Filter
                      Filt   (Xie et al., 2023b)                            w/o Lang Filter      + manual Lang Filter   Correlations
                                                     (Li et al., 2024)
 Avg. Rank   3.750   4.000         4.500                  3.750                  3.250                  1.375               1.750


selection algorithm. Most of the Open LLM Leaderboard models are 10 to 100× larger than the
160M scale, and our single index model must extrapolate substantially from ≈7B scale models to
our small-scale validation setting (see Appendix K for a histogram of model sizes).
Pretraining data and setting. For the initial pretraining experiments, we used the “sample-100B”
subset of RPJv2. This is much larger than the sample that we used to compute our estimate. We
filtered this data so it contains only the domains used for our estimate, and then tokenized the data
with the Pythia tokenizer. The vast majority of the domains from our BPB matrix were present in
this larger sample of text. However, 42 (out of 9,841) were not, and so we removed them from our
estimate. For every data selection method that we tested, the task was to further select 3.2B tokens
for pretraining, which is Chinchilla-optimal (Hoffmann et al., 2022) for the 160M-parameter LLM.
Baselines. We compare against several baseline data-selection methods. First, we present the results
of uniformly sampling from the available pretraining data. Then we use the language tags present
in RPJv2 to filter only for the language matching the target task. In addition to these commonsense
baselines, we also run DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b), a lightweight training data selection technique based
on n-gram overlaps that Li et al. (2024) found to be competitive with proxy LLM-based techniques
and was also validated at scale (Parmar et al., 2024). Finally, we run the state-of-the-art method
for pretraining data quality filtering found by Li et al., which is a fastText classifier that beats all of
the heavier-weight proxy-LLM methods tested. The classifier was trained on a benchmark-agnostic
and handcrafted objective, which is to classify data as Common Crawl3 (low quality) or OH2.5
(Teknium, 2023) and Reddit ELI5 (Fan et al., 2019) (high quality). It is combined with an English
filter in Li et al.; we present results for this fastText filter with and without the English filter.
Model and hyperparameters. We use the Pythia 160M LLM configuration from Biderman et al.
(2023) and optimize the hyperparameters, including learning rate, weight decay, and warmup, to
minimize loss on the uniform sampling (no selection algorithm) baseline. Training hyperparameters
were fixed across all methods. We provide additional training and evaluation details in Appendix G.
Results. We report average rankings over initial benchmarks in Table 1, and we find that our ap-
proach significantly outperforms the basic baselines of random sampling, language filtering, and
DSIR. Compared to the existing state of the art from Li et al. (2024), our approach beats the perfor-
mance of the default, English-filtered fastText classifier, but loses slightly once we add in a manual
language filtering step to enable better performance on the multilingual LAMBADA datasets. For
the maintext comparisons, we use the optional fastText classifier from our algorithm to select pre-
training data at the page levels, but we show ablations without the classifier in Appendix H.
Figure 2 shows how each data selection method affects benchmark performance in more detail. Each
block of rows represents a data selection method, while an individual row represents an LLM within
a method that targets a particular benchmark or set of benchmarks. Columns represent benchmarks.
We see that language filtering and perplexity correlations both clearly optimize for the target bench-
mark: within each block, the benchmark column matching each row typically performs best. The
pattern is much less obvious for DSIR – the heatmap looks more uniform across LLMs with different
task targets. We also see that while language filtering has significant impacts on model performance,
our performance significantly exceeds the impact of language filtering across all tested benchmarks.
For some more analysis, including the types of domains selected, see Appendix O and J.
Finally, we note that our results are somewhat insensitive to the specifics of the perplexity-correlation
procedure we present in Algorithm 1. We show in Appendix H that varying the projection method
(linear, L2 ) and even using Spearman rank correlations (Spearman, 1904) often work better than the
   3
       https://commoncrawl.org


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Pretraining results with different data selection methods. Each row is an LLM, and each
column is a task. The number in the upper left indicates the ranking of the method when targeting
that benchmark compared to other methods (lower is better). Numbers within the heatmap denote
accuracy for all benchmarks except the LAMBADA tasks for which the values are log perplexities
(where lower scores are better). We find that our approach appropriately optimizes data mixes for
the target language and benchmark, and matches the fastText baseline across most benchmarks.


baselines. This suggests that the performance of our approach is not dependent on the precise form
of the estimator, but holds broadly across perplexity-correlation relationships; we may also be able
to prove the Appendix B and C results for many other rank correlation coefficients. Additionally,
our approach performs better with the optional fastText classifier that our algorithm trains, possibly
because it operates at the page-level instead of the domain-level.

5.2   P REREGISTERED P RETRAINING E XPERIMENTS

For our preregistered experiments, we target aggregates of many different benchmarks: “DCLM
Core”, which is an aggregate of 22 benchmarks, and “Non-EN LAMBADA”, which is an aggregate
of 4. We pretrain on DCLM (Li et al., 2024) data pools at chinchilla optimal (Hoffmann et al.,
2022) levels going up to 1.4B parameters, and we generally see increasing perplexity correlations
performance with scale. See Figure 3 and Appendix N.

5.3   P ERFORMANCE R ANK P REDICTIONS

Comparing model performance rankings predicted by our regression to the ground truth, we find
generally accurate predictions. Figure 4 shows 5-fold leave-out plots for PIQA, and LAMBADAFR
with rank predictions given by ⟨θ̂ proj , Φ(x)⟩. Every point in the plot is a held-out point: we estimated
θ ∗ five times, holding out a different 20% of the data each time, and plotted the held-out predictions.
We find that our estimator achieves high ordinal prediction performance across all target tasks. We
include 5-fold leave-out R2 scores for all tasks in Appendix I.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Raw Pool                                     Raw Pool        Pre-filtered Pool

 Non-EN LAMBADA Perf
                       .35                                          .25


                                                   DCLM Core Perf
                       .30                                           .2

                       .25                                          .15

                       .20                                                                                 Perp. Corr. (Page)
                                                                     .1
                                                                                                          Perp. Corr. (Domain)
                       .15                                          .05                                   Handcrafted fastText
                                                                                                                None
                       .10                                           .0
                             .16 .41   1     1.4                          .16 .41     1   1.4 .16 .41      1     1.4
                         Parameter Count (B)                                        Parameter Count (B)

Figure 3: Preregistered experiment results. We did not see a benefit from using perplexity corre-
lations when the dataset is already extensively filtered, but saw large consistent benefits otherwise,
with the benefits increasing with scale. For the pre-filtered pool, the largest correlation coefficient
was .33 and the smallest was .23 with the vast majority of domains being over .29, so we could
have predicted no or small gains before pretraining. In the raw pool for DCLM Core, the largest
coefficient was .32 and the smallest was −.07. Pre-filtered pool results for Non-EN LAMBADA are
not shown because there is only English in the pre-filtered pool. See Appendix N for more details.


Figure 4: Rank predictions given by ⟨θ̂ proj , Φ(x)⟩ for PIQA and LAMBADA FR. A standard devia-
tion (σ) from the ideal fit is shown in red. 2σ is shown in orange. Many models outside 2σ (shown
in blue) are trained on atypical data such as multilingual data, code, or GPT-4 (Brown et al., 2020)
outputs. Models with atypical architectures (i.e. Mamba; Gu & Dao 2024) are shown in black. Gen-
erally, our estimate tightly predicts ordinal benchmark performance from web corpus losses.



Finally, we discuss outliers in our prediction of model performance. Our predictions are accurate for
LLMs with unusual architectures (e.g. Mamba; Gu & Dao 2024), and the smallest/largest vocabulary
sizes, context sizes, and parameter sizes. However, LLMs that were trained on unusual data are not
as well predicted by our approach (e.g. Phi; Gunasekar et al. 2023). We may require a bigger or more
diverse pretraining data pool or set of models to find estimates that work well for these models.

6                      C ONCLUSION
Does high-performance data selection require hand-crafted heuristics or prohibitively expensive
model training runs? Our work demonstrates an alternative, viable approach: leveraging existing,
public models as a source of information for data selection. Pretraining experiments suggest that
a simple, correlation-based approach to selecting data can be effective, but more broadly, we show
how to 1) use single-index models as surrogates for downstream performance and 2) build models
that relate losses to downstream performance and use the surrogates effectively to select data.


                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jack Spilecki for conversations on the mathematical aspects of the work. We also thank
Zitong Yang, Yangjun Ruan, and Lisa Li for their helpful feedback throughout the project, Ludwig
Schmidt and Samir Gadre for discussions on scaling laws involving benchmark perplexity, Rohan
Pandey for conversations about scaling laws, Sung Min Park for discussions on drafts of this work,
and William Held for conversations about data selection. This work is supported in part by a grant
from Sandia National Laboratories, and gifts from Open Philanthropy, Meta, Panasonic Research,
and the Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of Sandia National Laboratories. Tristan Thrush is supported in part by the Stanford Graduate
Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Amro Abbas, Kushal Tirumala, Dániel Simig, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S. Morcos. Semdedup: Data-
 efficient learning at web-scale through semantic deduplication. arXiv, 2023.
Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky,
  Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will
  Constable, Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael
  Gschwind, Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael La-
  zos, Mario Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang, Yinghai Lu, CK Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan,
  Christian Puhrsch, Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk, Michael
  Suo, Phil Tillet, Eikan Wang, Xiaodong Wang, William Wen, Shunting Zhang, Xu Zhao, Keren
  Zhou, Richard Zou, Ajit Mathews, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch 2:
  Faster Machine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation and Graph Com-
  pilation. ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
  and Operating Systems, 2024.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao Liu,
   Chengqiang Lu, Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Chuanqi
   Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng
   Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu, Hongyi Yuan,
   Zheng Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang, Chang Zhou,
   Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen technical report. arXiv, 2023.
Edward Beeching, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Sheon Han, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Ra-
  jani, Omar Sanseviero, Lewis Tunstall, and Thomas Wolf, 2023. URL https://huggingface.
  co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard. Open LLM Leaderboard.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language
  models across training and scaling. arXiv, 2023.
BigScience. BLOOM: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv, 2023.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. PIQA: reasoning about
  physical commonsense in natural language. AAAI, 2020.
Sid Black, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/EleutherAI/lambada_openai.
  Multilingual LAMBADA.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sheng Chen and Arindam Banerjee. Robust structured estimation with single-index models. ICML,
  2017.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? Try ARC, the AI2 reasoning chal-
  lenge. arXiv, 2018.
John Duchi, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, and Tushar Chandra. Efficient projections onto
  the l1-ball for learning in high dimensions. ICML, 2008.
Logan Engstrom, Axel Feldmann, and Aleksander Madry. Dsdm: Model-aware dataset selection
  with datamodels. arXiv, 2024.
Dante Everaert and Christopher Potts. GIO: Gradient information optimization for training dataset
  selection. ICLR, 2024.
Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. ELI5:
  long form question answering. arXiv, 2019.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The Pile:
  An 800GB dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv, 2020.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang
  Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for
  few-shot language model evaluation. Zenodo, 2023.
Xinyang Geng and Hao Liu. OpenLLaMA: An open reproduction of LLaMA, 2023. URL https:
  //github.com/openlm-research/open_llama.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Ananya Harsh Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, Shane Arora, David Atkin-
  son, Russell Authur, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar,
  Yuling Gu, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, William Merrill, Jacob Morrison, Niklas Muennighoff,
  Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew E. Peters, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha Ravichander,
  Dustin Schwenk, Saurabh Shah, Will Smith, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Mitchell Worts-
  man, Pradeep Dasigi, Nathan Lambert, Kyle Richardson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jesse Dodge, Kyle
  Lo, Luca Soldaini, Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. OLMo: Accelerating the science of
  language models. arXiv, 2024.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv,
  2024.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital
  Shah, Harkirat Singh Behl, Xin Wang, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai,
  Yin Tat Lee, and Yuanzhi Li. Textbooks are all you need. arXiv, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv, 2022.
Yuzhen Huang, Jinghan Zhang, Zifei Shan, and Junxian He. Compression represents intelligence
  linearly. COLM, 2024.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data. ICML, 2022.
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and Tomas Mikolov. Bag of tricks for efficient
  text classification. arXiv, 2016.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Tauman Kalai and Ravi Sastry. The isotron algorithm: High-dimensional isotonic regression.
  COLT, 2009.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv, 2020.
Nikolai E. Korotkov and Alexander N. Korotkov. Table of integrals related to error function, 2019.
  URL https://intra.ece.ucr.edu/~korotkov/papers/Korotkov-book-integrals.pdf.
Hugo Laurençon, Lucile Saulnier, Thomas Wang, Christopher Akiki, Albert Villanova del Moral,
  Teven Le Scao, Leandro Von Werra, Chenghao Mou, Eduardo González Ponferrada, Huu Nguyen,
  Jörg Frohberg, Mario Šaško, Quentin Lhoest, Angelina McMillan-Major, Gerard Dupont, Stella
  Biderman, Anna Rogers, Loubna Ben allal, Francesco De Toni, Giada Pistilli, Olivier Nguyen,
  Somaieh Nikpoor, Maraim Masoud, Pierre Colombo, Javier de la Rosa, Paulo Villegas, Tristan
  Thrush, Shayne Longpre, Sebastian Nagel, Leon Weber, Manuel Muñoz, Jian Zhu, Daniel Van
  Strien, Zaid Alyafeai, Khalid Almubarak, Minh Chien Vu, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Aitor Soroa,
  Kyle Lo, Manan Dey, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Aaron Gokaslan, Shamik Bose, David Adelani, Long
  Phan, Hieu Tran, Ian Yu, Suhas Pai, Jenny Chim, Violette Lepercq, Suzana Ilic, Margaret
  Mitchell, Sasha Alexandra Luccioni, and Yacine Jernite. The BigScience ROOTS corpus: A
  1.6TB composite multilingual dataset. NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2022.
Jeffrey Li, Alex Fang, Georgios Smyrnis, Maor Ivgi, Matt Jordan, Samir Gadre, Hritik Bansal, Etash
   Guha, Sedrick Keh, Kushal Arora, Saurabh Garg, Rui Xin, Niklas Muennighoff, Reinhard Heckel,
   Jean Mercat, Mayee Chen, Suchin Gururangan, Mitchell Wortsman, Alon Albalak, Yonatan Bit-
   ton, Marianna Nezhurina, Amro Abbas, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Dhruba Ghosh, Josh Gardner, Maciej
   Kilian, Hanlin Zhang, Rulin Shao, Sarah Pratt, Sunny Sanyal, Gabriel Ilharco, Giannis Daras,
   Kalyani Marathe, Aaron Gokaslan, Jieyu Zhang, Khyathi Chandu, Thao Nguyen, Igor Vasiljevic,
   Sham Kakade, Shuran Song, Sujay Sanghavi, Fartash Faghri, Sewoong Oh, Luke Zettlemoyer,
   Kyle Lo, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hadi Pouransari, Alexander Toshev, Stephanie Wang, Dirk Groen-
   eveld, Luca Soldaini, Pang Wei Koh, Jenia Jitsev, Thomas Kollar, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Yair
   Carmon, Achal Dave, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. DataComp-LM: In search of the
   next generation of training sets for language models. arXiv, 2024.
Qian Liu, Xiaosen Zheng, Niklas Muennighoff, Guangtao Zeng, Longxu Dou, Tianyu Pang, Jing
  Jiang, and Min Lin. Regmix: Data mixture as regression for language model pre-training. arXiv,
  2024.
Llama Team. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv, 2024.
Max Marion, Ahmet Üstün, Luiza Pozzobon, Alex Wang, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. When
 less is more: Investigating data pruning for pretraining LLMs at scale. arXiv, 2023.
Edward W. Ng and Murray Geller. A table of integrals of the error functions. Journal of Research
  of the Natianal Bureau of Standards, Section B: Mathematical Sciences, 1968.
David Owen. How predictable is language model benchmark performance? arXiv, 2024.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
  Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The LAMBADA dataset:
  Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. ACL, 2016.
Jupinder Parmar, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Joseph Jennings, Bo Liu, Aastha Jhunjhunwala, Zhilin
  Wang, Mostofa Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Data, data everywhere:
  A guide for pretraining dataset construction. arXiv, 2024.
Karl Pearson. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. Philosophical Maga-
  zine, 1901.
Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin
  Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the
  finest text data at scale. arXiv, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Stella Biderman,
  Huanqi Cao, Xin Cheng, Michael Chung, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, Xuzheng He, Haowen
  Hou, Jiaju Lin, Przemyslaw Kazienko, Jan Kocon, Jiaming Kong, Bartlomiej Koptyra, Hayden
  Lau, Krishna Sri Ipsit Mantri, Ferdinand Mom, Atsushi Saito, Guangyu Song, Xiangru Tang,
  Bolun Wang, Johan S. Wind, Stanislaw Wozniak, Ruichong Zhang, Zhenyuan Zhang, Qihang
  Zhao, Peng Zhou, Qinghua Zhou, Jian Zhu, and Rui-Jie Zhu. RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the
  Transformer era. arXiv, 2023.

Yaniv Plan, Roman Vershynin, and Elena Yudovina. High-dimensional estimation with geometric
  constraints. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 2016.

Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y. Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional
 language models. arXiv, 2023.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 1–67, 2020.

Yangjun Ruan, Chris J. Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Observational scaling laws and the
  predictability of language model performance. arXiv, 2024.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Yoram Singer. Efficient learning of label ranking by soft projections onto
  polyhedra. JMLR, 2006.

Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Harsh
  Jha, Sachin Kumar, Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
  Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew E. Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle
  Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Pete Walsh, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge, and
  Kyle Lo. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for language model pretraining research.
  arXiv, 2024.

Charles Spearman. The Proof and Measurement of Association between Two Things. The American
  Journal of Psychology, 1904.

Teknium. OpenHermes 2.5: An open dataset of synthetic data for generalist LLM assistants, 2023.
  URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/teknium/OpenHermes-2.5.

Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 58(1):267–288, 1996.

Together Computer, 2023. URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.
  RedPajama: an Open Dataset for Training Large Language Models.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv, 2023.

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. JMLR, 2008.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  TMLR, 2022.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
  W-NUT, 2017.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. HuggingFace’s trans-
  formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv, 2019.
Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press, 2010.
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy Liang,
  Quoc V. Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. DoReMi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up
  language model pretraining. NeurIPS, 2023a.
Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Data selection for language
  models via importance resampling. NeurIPS, 2023b.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      M AIN A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Perplexity Correlation Based Data Selection
      Input: Benchmark error vector y ∈ [0, 1]N , log-loss matrix normalized as bits-per-byte X ∈
           N ×D
      R+0          , available tokens per domain a ∈ ND , and pretraining token target b ∈ N.
      Output: Target token counts per domain t ∈ ND             0 , a fastText classifier to filter pretraining data.
      Initialize: γ ← 0 ∈ RD , t ← [0 . . .] ∈ ND        0 , counter ← 0.
      r0 , r1 , . . . , rN ← rank(x0 , x1 , . . . , xN )               ▷ 1. Compute the γ correlation coefficient
      for i, j ∈ 0 to N do
           γ ← γ + sign(yi − yj ) · (ri − rj )
      for i ∈ArgSort(γ, descending=True) do                   ▷ 2. Select most corr. domains (linear projection)
           ti ← min(ai , b − counter)
           counter ← counter + ai
           if counter ≥ b then
                 Break
      classifier = trainFastText(positive = 1t>0 , negative = 1t=0 )
      Return t, classifier


B      E STIMATOR SOLUTION
B.1     L EMMA 1
                                                                                     √        x2
Statement of Lemma 1 Define the PDF of HalfNormal as f (x; σ) = σ√2π e− 2σ2 for x > 0 and 0
otherwise. Now, suppose:

         • β is a vector with ||β||2 = 1
         • Z1 , Z2 are vectors ∼ N (0, I)
         • ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
         • Z ′ ∼ N (0, 1)
         • Z+ ∼ HalfNormal(1).

Then we have:
                                                           s
                                                      d              βj2       βj
                     Z1j |⟨Z1 − Z2 , β⟩ + ϵ > 0 = Z ′          1−        2
                                                                           +√        Z+ ,
                                                                    2+σ       2 + σ2
where Z1j is the j-th entry of Z1 .

Proof: First, note:
                                                                       
                                 * Z1          β +                * Z1         β                 +
                         d                             d                p
                                                                                               2
Z1j |⟨Z1 −Z2 , β⟩+ϵ > 0 = Z1j |  Z2  , −β  > 0 = Z1j |  Z2  , −β  / 2 + σ
                                                                                           > 0,
                                    ϵ/σ        σ                      ϵ/σ       σ
       
        ·
       
where ·
       
          denotes the vector-valued result of concatenating vectors and scalars. For readability, we
        ·
                          
            Z1                β
                           √
set Zc =  Z2  and βc = −β                2
                                 / 2 + σ .
                         
           ϵ/σ                σ

                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given that βc is unit-norm (by supposition, β is unit-norm), and every element of Zc is ∼ N (0, 1)
(even ϵ/σ), we can easily split a conditional random vector containing Z1j into a conditionally
dependent component and independent component:
                                                  d
                              Zc |⟨Zc , βc ⟩ > 0 = (I − βc βc⊤ )Z′′ + βc Z+ .
The first term is orthogonal to βc and so it is the part of Zc that is not subject to the condition. In the
unconditional case, Zc ∼ N (0, I) and so Z′′ ∼ N (0, I). The second term is the part of Zc that is
in the direction of βc . Z+ ∼ HalfNormal(I) because our dot product condition is satisfied for half
of the possible non-orthogonal Zc values. Now, we focus on finding Zc |⟨Zc , βc ⟩ > 0 for a single
index j. We have (for C defined to be the dimensionality of βc ):
                                                                    X
             ((I − βc βc⊤ )Z′′ )j + (βc Z+ )j = Zj′′ (1 − βc2 j ) −      Zi′′ βc j βc i + βj Z+ j
                                                                      1≤i≤C
                                                                       i̸=j



Now, note that Zj′′ (1 − βc2 j ) −            ′′
                                     P
                                       1≤i≤C Zi βc j βc i is the sum of independent zero-mean Gaussians,
                                        i̸=j
so it itself is a zero-mean Gaussian with variance:
                                     X                                    X
                     (1 − βc2 j )2 +   βc2 j βc2 i = 1 − 2βc2 j + βc4 j +   βc2 j βc2 i
                                     1≤i≤C                                     1≤i≤C
                                      i̸=j                                      i̸=j
                                                                              X
                                                      = 1 − 2βc2 j + βc2 j           βc2 i
                                                                             1≤i≤C

                                                      = 1 − βc2 j ,

where we simplified the expression by recalling that βc is unit norm. So we have that Z1j is:
                                                s
                      q                                   βj2         βj
                   Z ′ 1 − βc2 j + βc j Z+ = Z ′ 1 −            +√         Z+ ,
                                                       2 + σ2       2 + σ2
for Z ′ ∼ N (0, 1). As a corollary, we can see that Z2j under the same condition is given by:
                                     s
                                              βj2        −βj
                                  Z′ 1 −            +√          Z+ .
                                            2 + σ2       2 + σ2

B.2    L EMMA 2

Statement of Lemma 2 Suppose that Φ is the CDF of a standard Gaussian, a and c are constants,
and Z ∼ N (0, 1). Then we have:

                                                     c
                              E[Φ(aZ + c)] = Φ √            .
                                                   1 + a2

Proof: By the definition of the CDF of a standard Gaussian, we have:
                                     E[Φ(aZ + c)] = E[P (X ≤ aZ + c)],
where X ∼ N (0, 1). Continuing, we have:
                                         = E[P (X − aZ − c ≤ 0)].
Now, note that X − aZ − c is the sum of independent Gaussian random variables with given mean
and variance; it itself is a Gaussian random variable ∼ N (−c, a2 + 1). To find P (X − aZ − c ≤ 0),
we can evaluate its CDF at 0:

                                             c                  c
                               =E Φ √                 =Φ √              .
                                           a2 + 1             a2 + 1

                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   L EMMA 3

Statement of Lemma 3 Suppose Φ is the standard Gaussian CDF, Z+ ∼ HalfNormal(1), and b
and a are constants. Then we have:

                                Z+ b       1  1    −1      b
                       E Φ √              = + tan       √          .
                                a2 + 1     2 π            a2 + 1

Proof: By the definition of expected value, we can take the following integral where fZ+ is the PDF
of Z+ . We integrate from 0 instead of −∞ because the PDF of the Standard Half Normal is 0 in the
domain below 0:
                            Z ∞
                 Z+ b                        zb
       E Φ √                 =        Φ √             fZ+ (z)dz
                 a2 + 1          0          a2 + 1
                                Z ∞                    √
                                             zb          2 −z2
                             =        Φ √              √ e 2 dz
                                 0
                                             2
                                            a +1         π
                                        Z ∞              Z ∞
                                  1            −z 2                    zb           −z 2
                             =√              e 2 dz +         erf √ √             e 2 dz (*).
                                  2π     0                 0        2 a2 + 1
The second integral is generally non-trivial to solve, but luckily we can solve it by using Equation 2
in Section 4.3 of the integral table from Ng & Geller (1968), which states:
                          Z ∞                        √
                                           2 2         π      1           d
                               erf(cx)e−d x dx =          − √ tan−1
                           0                          2d     d π          c
Where c and d are real and positive. We split the solution by cases: b > 0, b = 0, and b < 0. We find
that in every case, we can manipulate our integral so that the solution is trivial or the constant inside
the erf(·) is positive
                       (and
                           so we can use the integral table). In every case, we find that the solution is
1     1     −1 √ b
2 + π tan          a2 +1
                          .

Case 1: b > 0. We can use the integral table directly:
                                   √       √        √          √        !!
                             1       π        π       2    −1    a2 + 1
                    (*) = √        √ + √ − √ tan
                             2π       2       2       π           b
                                                  √        !
                           1 1       1              a2 + 1
                        = + − tan−1                          .
                           2 2 π                       b
Then, using the identity:
                                             1  π
                                 tan−1 x + tan−1
                                               = if x > 0,
                                             x  2
we find the following:
                                     1 1         b
                                    = + tan−1 √          .
                                     2 π        a2 + 1
Case 2: b = 0. Note that erf(0) = 0; we do not have to use the integral table:
                                                  √
                                              1      π
                                     (*) = √        √ +0
                                              2π     2
                                            1
                                         = .
                                            2
           −1
Because tan (0) = 0, we have:

                                     1    1     −1      b
                                 = + tan             √          .
                                     2 π               a2 + 1

Case 3: b < 0. Because erf(·) is an odd function, we can pull the negative out:
                             Z ∞                Z ∞
                        1             −z 2                   z|b|         −z 2
                (*) = √             e  2   dz −    erf √ √              e  2   dz .
                        2π      0                0        2 a2 + 1


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we can use the integral table as in the b > 0 case:
                                   √       √      √           √        !!
                            1        π       π       2    −1    a2 + 1
                       =√          √ − √ + √ tan
                            2π       2       2      π            |b|
                                                √         !
                          1 1        1             a2 + 1
                       = + − tan−1                          .
                          2 2 π                     |b|
We can then use the same identity again:
                                                     1  π
                                   tan−1 x + tan−1     = if x > 0
                                                     x  2
to get:
                                      1 1              |b|
                                     = − tan−1      √          .
                                      2 π             a2 + 1
Because tan−1 is an odd function, we can put the negative inside of it:

                                   1    1     −1        b
                                 = + tan            √          .
                                   2 π                a2 + 1

B.4       F ULL P ROOF

Here, we prove:
                                                                                              !
                                                       2                       θ∗
                   E[sign(y1 − y2 )(Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 ))] = sin−1      p
                                                       π            4 + 2σ12 + 2σ22
with y1 , y2 , Φ(x1 ), Φ(x2 ), and θ ∗ defined in the main text, for the case where ϵ1 and ϵ2 are zero-
mean Gaussian noise ∼ N (0, σ12 ) and ∼ N (0, σ22 ), respectively.
It is easy to see that this is a more general version of the following theorem.

Theorem 1 When ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), we have:
                                                                             θ∗

                                                             2
                      E[sign(yi − yj )(Φ(xi ) − Φ(xj ))] =     sin−1       √              .        (7)
                                                             π             2 1 + σ2

Proof: By symmetry, we have:
   E[sign(y1 − y2 )(Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 ))]
       1                                         1
    = E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )| sign(y1 − y2 ) > 0] + E[−(Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 ))| sign(y1 − y2 ) < 0].
       2                                         2
By increasing monotonicity of f , we have sign(y1 − y2 ) > 0 ⇐⇒ ⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0, for
ϵ∆ = ϵ1 − ϵ2 ∼ N (0, σ12 + σ22 ). So:
                          1
                         = E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0]
                          2
                            1
                          + E[−(Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 ))|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ < 0].
                            2
               d             d
Because x1 = x2 and ϵ∆ = −ϵ∆ , the two expected values above are the same:
                             = E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0].
By linearity of expectation:
               = E[Φ(x1 )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0] − E[Φ(x2 )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0].
Now, we focus on finding the overall estimate for a single index j. By Lemma 1, we have, for
Z ∼ N (0, 1) and Z+ ∼ HalfNormal(1):
                                                             d
                          Φ(x1j )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0 = Φ(Za + Z+ b1 ).


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            r
                       (θ ∗ )2                     θj∗
Here, a =       1 − 2+σj2 +σ2 and b1 = √                       . As a corollary of Lemma 1, we can see:
                            1    2               2+σ12 +σ22
                                                                                d
                                Φ(x2j )|⟨x1 − x2 , θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0 = Φ(Za + Z+ b2 ).
                      θj∗
Where b2 = − √                    . So for the index j, our estimate is:
                    2+σ12 +σ22

                   E[Φ(Za + Z+ b1 )] − E[Φ(Za + Z+ b2 )]
                    = E[E[Φ(Za + c)|c = Z+ b1 ]] − E[E[Φ(Za + c)|c = Z+ b2 ]].
Using Lemma 2, we have:

                                        Z+ b1                      Z+ b2
                           =E Φ √                    −E Φ √                   .
                                         a2 + 1                     a2 + 1
Then, using Lemma 3, we have:

                       1     1              b1          1       1             b2
                     = + tan−1 √                     − − tan−1 √
                       2 π                 a2 + 1       2 π                  a2 + 1

                       1              b1           1                b2
                     = tan−1 √                 − tan−1 √                    .
                       π              2
                                     a +1         π                a2 + 1
Using the fact that tan−1 is an odd function and b2 = −b1 , we get:

                                          2               b1
                                      = tan−1 √                     .
                                          π             a2 + 1
Now, we write a and b1 in terms of θj∗ :
                                                    ∗
                                                                 
                                               √ θj2 2
                                2                 2+σ1 +σ2
                              = tan−1 
                                                                
                                             r                   
                                π                     (θj∗ )2
                                                                 
                                               2 − 2+σ2 +σ2
                                                         1     2
                                                                        
                                                                          θj∗
                                                                √                          
                                      2   −1 
                                                                    4+2σ12 +2σ22           
                                     = tan  s                                            2  .
                                                                                            
                                      π
                                                                               θj∗         
                                                         1−           √
                                                                          4+2σ12 +2σ22

Using the identity sin−1 x = tan−1              √ x
                                                 1−x2
                                                             , we have:
                                                                                      !
                                          2                             θj∗
                                         = sin−1             p                            .
                                          π                      4 + 2σ12 + 2σ22

B.5   C OROLLARY 1

Corollary 1 Suppose that θ̂ is any vector of fixed weights and x ∼ N (0, I). Then, conditioning on
the event ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩, we have with probability 1 that:
                 ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(xi ) | ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩]⟩ < ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(xj ) | ⟨θ̂, xi ⟩ < ⟨θ̂, xj ⟩]⟩.       (9)

To see this, we can find:
  E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )|⟨θ̂, x1 ⟩ + ϵ1 > ⟨θ̂, x2 ⟩ + ϵ2 ] = E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )|⟨θ̂, x1 − x2 ⟩ + ϵ∆ > 0]
Note that we have already computed this expected value in the proof above; for an index j, it is:
                                                                !
                                  2                    θ̂ j
                                    sin−1 p                       .
                                  π             4 + 2σ12 + 2σ22
Because sin−1 is an odd function, the above expression has the same sign as θ̂j . Because the
values at every index of E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )] under our condition and θ̂ are the same sign, we have
⟨E[Φ(x1 ) − Φ(x2 )], θ̂⟩ > 0, so ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(x1 )]⟩ > ⟨θ̂, E[Φ(x2 )]⟩.


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     S PEARMAN R ANK E STIMATOR S OLUTION
C.1     L EMMA 4

Statement of Lemma 4 Suppose Φ is the standard Gaussian CDF, Z is a vector ∼ N (0, I), ϵ ∼
N (0, σ 2 ), β is a vector with ||β||2 = 1, and a is a constant. Then we have:
                                                                              
                                                                    β j a
                        E[Φ(Zj )|⟨β, Z⟩ + ϵ = a] = Φ               q          
                                                                  2        βj2
                                                          (1 + σ ) 2 − 1+σ2

Proof: Note that
                                                            *"
                                                         # " #+       !
                                                 d           β   Z
                         Zj |(⟨Z, β⟩ + ϵ = a) = Zj |      ,      =a
                                                     ϵ/σ     σ
                                 *"      # " #         +              !
                         d            Z     β p      2
                                                             p
                                                                    2
                         = Zj |           ,    / 1+σ     = a/ 1 + σ
                                     ϵ/σ    σ
        "#
         ·
where        denotes the vector-valued result of concatenating vectors and scalars. For readability, we
         ·
             "       #" #
                 Z     β √
set Zc =     and βc =     / 1 + σ2 .
         ϵ/σ           σ
Given that βc is unit-norm (by supposition, β is unit-norm), and every element of Zc is ∼ N (0, 1)
(even ϵ/σ), we can easily split a conditional random vector containing Zj into a conditionally de-
pendent component and independent component:

                                                d
                                    p                                    p
                Zc | ⟨Zc , βc ⟩ = a/ 1 + σ 2 = (I − βc βc⊤ )Z′′ + βc a/ 1 + σ 2 .
The first term is orthogonal to βc and so it is the part of Zc that is not subject to the condition. In
the unconditional case, Zc ∼ N (0, I) and so Z′′ ∼ N (0, I).
The second term√comes from the part of Zc that is in the direction of βc . Solving for Zc where
⟨Zc , β                   2
      √c ⟩ = a/ 1 + σ in the case where Zc and βc are parallel, we get a constant vector:
βc a/ 1 + σ   2
                                            √
Now, we focus on finding Zc |⟨Zc , βc ⟩ = a/ 1 + σ 2 for a single index j. We have (for C defined
to be the dimensionality of βc ):
                               p                              X                             p
   ((I − βc βc⊤ )Z′′ )j + βc a/ 1 + σ 2 = Zj′′ (1 − βc2 j ) −       Zi′′ βc j βc i + βc j a/ 1 + σ 2
                                             j
                                                                     1≤i≤C
                                                                      i̸=j

Now, note that Zj′′ (1 − βc2 j ) −           ′′
                                     P
                                      1≤i≤C Zi βc j βc i is the sum of independent zero-mean Gaussians,
                                       i̸=j
so it itself is a zero-mean Gaussian with variance:
                                     X                                    X
                     (1 − βc2 j )2 +   βc2 j βc2 i = 1 − 2βc2 j + βc4 j +   βc2 j βc2 i
                                     1≤i≤C                                    1≤i≤C
                                      i̸=j                                     i̸=j
                                                                             X
                                                     = 1 − 2βc2 j + βc2 j           βc2 i
                                                                            1≤i≤C

                                                     = 1 − βc2 j ,
where we simplified the expression by recalling that βc is unit norm. So we have that Zj is:
                                                       s
                    q                   p                         βj2      βj a
                 Z ′ 1 − βc2 j + βc j a/ 1 + σ 2 = Z ′ 1 −             +        ,
                                                                1 + σ2   1 + σ2

                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For Z ′ ∼ N (0, 1). Now, the problem reduces to finding:
                                  s                            
                                                  β 2
                                                    j      β j a
                              E Φ Z ′ 1 −            +         
                                               1 + σ2    1 + σ2

By Lemma 2, we have that this is:
                                                                          
                                  βj a
                                 1+σ 2                βj a
                      Φ q              = Φ         q         
                                   βj2              2       βj2
                          1 + 1 − 1+σ2        (1 + σ ) 2 − 1+σ2

C.2   L EMMA 5

Statement of Lemma 5 Suppose Φ is the standard Gaussian CDF, Y ∼ N (0, 1 + σ 2 ), and b and
a are constants. Then we have:
                          1    1                           ab
      E[Φ(aY )Φ(bY )] = +        tan−1 p
                          4 2π        2 1/(2 + 2σ ) + a /(4 + 4σ 2 ) + b2 /(4 + 4σ 2 )
                                                  2 2    2


Proof: By the definition of expected value,

                                                       Z ∞
                                    E[Φ(aY )Φ(bY )] =       Φ(ay)Φ(by)fY (y)dy
                                                        −∞
              Z ∞                                                          2
                  1           ay     1            by          1        − y
            =       1 + erf   √         1 + erf   √      √            e 2+2σ2 dy
               −∞ 2             2    2              2      2π + 2πσ 2


Now, let’s multiply the terms in the integral:
                                         1 ∞                       2
                                           Z
                                                      1        − y
                                       =         √            e 2+2σ2 dy
                                         4 −∞ 2π + 2πσ 2
                                  Z ∞                              2
                                1          ay         1        − y
                              +       erf √      √            e 2+2σ2 dy
                                4 −∞         2     2π + 2πσ 2
                                  Z ∞                              2
                                1          by         1        − y
                              +       erf √      √            e 2+2σ2 dy
                                4 −∞         2     2π + 2πσ 2
                         Z ∞                                       2
                       1          ay       by         1        − y
                     +       erf √    erf √      √            e 2+2σ2 dy
                       4 −∞        2         2     2π + 2πσ 2
The first term is an integral over the full domain of a Gaussian PDF, so it is just 14 . The second and
third terms are integrals over the full domains of odd functions, so they evaluate to zero. Overall,
we are left with:
                       1 1 ∞
                              Z                                                 2
                                          by         by         1          − y
                    = +             erf √        erf √     √             e 2+2σ2 dy
                       4 4 −∞               2          2     2π + 2πσ 2
To solve the final integral, we note that the conditions are satisfied in our case to use integral 3 in
section 2.7.1 of the integral table from Korotkov & Korotkov (2019):
                   Z ∞
                                               2        2                 q1 q2
                        erf(q1 z)erf(q2 z)e−qz dz = √ tan−1 p
                    −∞                                  qπ           q + qq12 + qq22
                                                                      2

After applying this result, we are left with:
                      1            1          2            ab
                        + √                 √ tan−1 p 2
                      4 4 2π + 2πσ 2 qπ              q + qa2 /2 + qb2 /2
          1
For q = 2+2σ 2 . Substituting our variables back in and simplifying, we have:


                 1   1                             ab
                   +   tan−1 p
                 4 2π       2 1/(2 + 2σ 2 )2 + a2 /(4 + 4σ 2 ) + b2 /(4 + 4σ 2 )

                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   F ULL P ROOF

Here, we prove:
                                                         1  1                     θ∗
                          E[(Φy (y1 ) − Φx (x1 ))2 ] =     − tan−1 q                             ,
                                                         6 π
                                                                           4(1 + σ 2 ) − θ ∗ 2
where Φy is the empirical CDF of the y values, Φx is the elementwise empirical CDF of the x values,
and ϵ is zero-mean Gaussian noise ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). We can see that this expected value is monotonic
with respect to θ ∗ , because the numerator inside tan−1 is θ ∗ , and the θ ∗ 2 in the denominator
just serves to increase the magnitude of the tan−1 expression. We can also check that the overall
expected value is never negative by remembering that the largest value at any index of θ ∗ can be at
                               θ∗
most 1, and so π1 tan−1 √        2  ∗2
                                       can never be more than 61 .
                                      4(1+σ )−θ

Now, we can see that proving this theorem also shows
                                     E[(rank(y1 ) − rank(x1 ))2 ]
is monotonic with respect to θ ∗ , where rank(y1 ) is the rank of y1 among the y values, and rank(x1 )
is the elementwise ranks of x1 among the x’s. We can then see that Spearman’s rank correlation,
in expectation, is monotonic with respect to θ ∗ (as long as the ranks are distinct), per the following
equation for Spearman’s rank correlation (Spearman, 1904):
               PN                         2
           6     i=1 (rank(yi )−rank(xi ))
rs = 1 −               N (N 2 −1)             .
We begin our proof by finding the value for a single index of x1 , multiplying out the terms, and
using linearity of expectation:
     E[(Φy (y1 ) − Φx1,j (x1,j ))2 ] = E[(Φy (y1 )2 − 2Φy (y1 )Φx1,j (x1,j ) + Φx1,j (x1,j )2 ]
                                            = E[(Φy (y1 )2 ] − 2E[Φy (y1 )Φx1,j (x1,j )] + E[Φx1,j (x1,j )2 ].
Note that E[Φx1,j (x1,j )2 ] and E[Φy (y1 )2 ] are both
                                                    Z 1
                                                               1
                                        E[U 2 ] =       u2 du = ,
                                                     0         3
where U ∼ Uniform(0, 1). Now we move to finding E[Φy (y1 )Φx1,j (x1,j )]. First notice that
                                  E[Φy (y1 )Φx1,j (x1,j )] = E[Φy′ (y ′ )Φx1,j (x1,j )],
where y ′ = f −1 (y1 ). This is because Φy (y1 ) = P (Y ≤ y1 ) = P (f −1 (Y ) ≤ f −1 (y1 )) = Φy′ (y ′ ).
So, we now focus on finding E[Φy′ (y ′ )Φx1,j (x1,j )]. By the law of total expectation, it is:
                    E[E[Φy′ (c)Φx1,j (x1,j )|y ′ = c]] = E[Φy′ (y ′ )E[Φx1,j (x1,j )|y ′ = c]].
Note that y ′ = ⟨θ ∗ , x1 ⟩ + ϵ and ||θ ∗ ||2 = 1, so y ′ ∼ N (0, 1 + σ 2 ). And x1,j ∼ N (0, 1). So, by
Lemma 4, we have that this equals:
                                              E[Φy′ (y ′ )Φ(ky ′ )],
                      θ∗
where k =             rj               .
                               θ∗ 2
                               j
               (1+σ 2 )    2− 1+σ 2

                                                          ′
                                                 y
Also, because Φy′ (y ′ ) = P (Y ′ ≤ y ′ ) = Φ( √1+σ 2
                                                      ), we can further simplify the expression:
                                                   E[Φ(py ′ )Φ(ky ′ )],
            1
where p = √1+σ 2
                 .
Now, we can write this expected value as an integral and solve it. Via Lemma 5, the solution is:
              1      1                                  pk
                 +      tan−1 p
              4 2π             2 1/(2 + 2σ ) + p /(4 + 4σ 2 ) + k 2 /(4 + 4σ 2 )
                                              2 2     2

Now we have a solution for every component of the expected value that we hope to find. Simplifying,
we are left with:
                                              1    1                θj∗
                  E[(Φy (y1 ) − Φx (x1 ))2 ] = − tan−1 q
                                              6 π             4(1 + σ 2 ) − θ∗ 2            j



                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D      O PTIMAL PROJECTED WEIGHTS SOLUTIONS
D.1      L INEAR P ROJECTION

Theorem 2 Suppose we want to solve:
                                                  θ̂ proj = arg min −⟨θ, θ̂⟩,
                                                              θ∈RD

subject to:
                                                                    D
                                                                    X
                                                                            θi = 1
                                                                      i=1
                                                  0 ≤ θi ≤ τi , ∀i ∈ [1, D],
where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then, the solution is:
                                          P
          τk P
                                        if j: rj (θ̂j )≥rk (θ̂k ) τj ≤ 1
 θ̂kproj = 1 − j: rj (θ̂j )>rk (θ̂k ) τj if j: rj (θ̂j )≥rk (θ̂k ) τj ≥ 1 ∧ j: rj (θ̂j )>rk (θ̂k ) τj ≤ 1 , (10)
                                           P                               P
          
            0                            otherwise
          

where r breaks ties between θ̂j and θ̂k for k ̸= j; otherwise r keeps ordinal relationships the same.

Proof: We proceed by considering each of the three cases from Equation 10.
Case 1. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that the optimal solution is θ̂ proj and yet θ̂kproj < τk
for some θ̂kproj falling under the first case of Equation 10. Now suppose that we construct a θ ′ also
satisfying the projection constraints that is the same as θ̂ proj except in these places:
                                                     θk′ = θ̂kproj + ∆ = τk
                                                     θp′ = θ̂pproj − δ1 ≥ 0
                                                        ..
                                                         .
                                                     θq′ = θ̂qproj − δn ≥ 0

                   Pn
for some ∆ = i=1 δi > 0 where θ̂p ≥ · · · ≥ θ̂q are all of the θ̂ values which do not fall under the
first condition and where the corresponding θ̂proj values are nonzero. We know that there must be
some θ̂pproj           proj
          P, · · · , θ̂q from which we can subtract δ1 , · · · , δn (and so from which we can take the ∆)
because j: rj (θ̂j )≥rk (θ̂k ) τj ≤ 1. Now, we have:

⟨θ̂, θ̂ proj ⟩ − ⟨θ̂, θ ′ ⟩
 = θ̂k θ̂kproj + θ̂p θ̂pproj + · · · + θ̂q θ̂qproj − θ̂k θ̂kproj − θ̂k ∆ − θ̂p θ̂pproj − · · · − θ̂q θ̂qproj + θ̂p δ1 + · · · + θ̂q δn
 = −θ̂k ∆ + θ̂p δ1 + · · · + θ̂q δn
 ≤ θ̂p (δ1 + · · · + δn ) − θ̂k ∆
 = θ̂p ∆ − θ̂k ∆
 ≤ 0.

At this point, the only way to avoid the contradiction result would be if θ̂k = θ̂p = · · · = θ̂q .
Otherwise, the above non-strict inequality would be a strict inequality. If θ̂k = θ̂p = · · · = θ̂q , then
we know that θ̂k is the smallest θ̂ value satisfying condition 1 and all of the other greater θ̂ values
satisfying condition 1 must be projected to their τ threshold value (otherwise we would get the
contradiction result). In this edge case can see above that rearranging the remaining weight among
equal θ̂ values does not change the dot product, so all of the solutions that we can get without the
contradiction result are equivalently optimal (including the solution from Equation 10).


                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Case 3. This is analogous to case 1. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that the optimal solution
is θ̂ proj and yet θ̂kproj > 0 for some θ̂kproj falling under the third case of Equation 10. Now suppose that
we construct a θ ′ also satisfying the projection constraints that is the same as θ̂ proj except in these
places:

                                                    θk′ = θ̂kproj − ∆ = 0
                                                    θp′ = θ̂pproj + δ1 ≤ τp
                                                       ..
                                                        .
                                                     θq′ = θ̂qproj + δn ≤ τq


               Pn
for some ∆ = i=1 δi > 0 where θ̂p ≥ · · · ≥ θ̂q are all of the θ̂ values which do not fall under the
third condition and where the corresponding θ̂proj values are not at their thresholds. By construction
we know that there must be some θ̂pproj , · · · , θ̂qproj to which we can add δ1 , · · · , δn . Now, we have:

⟨θ̂, θ̂ proj ⟩ − ⟨θ̂, θ ′ ⟩
 = θ̂k θ̂kproj + θ̂p θ̂pproj + · · · + θ̂q θ̂qproj − θ̂k θ̂kproj + θ̂k ∆ − θ̂p θ̂pproj − · · · − θ̂q θ̂qproj − θ̂p δ1 − · · · − θ̂q δn
 = θ̂k ∆ − θ̂p δ1 − · · · − θ̂q δn
 ≤ −θ̂q (δ1 + · · · + δn ) + θ̂k ∆
 = −θ̂q ∆ + θ̂k ∆
 ≤ 0.

At this point, the only way to avoid the contradiction result would be if θ̂k = θ̂p = · · · = θ̂q .
Otherwise, the above non-strict inequality would be a strict inequality. If θ̂k = θ̂p = · · · = θ̂q , then
we know that θ̂k is the largest θ̂ value satisfying condition 3 and all of the other smaller θ̂ values
satisfying condition 3 must be projected to 0 (otherwise we would get the contradiction result). In
this edge case, we can see above that rearranging the remaining weight among equal θ̂ values does
not change the dot product, so all of the solutions that we can get without the contradiction result
are equivalently optimal (including the solution from Equation 10).
Case 2. Above, we show that both Case 1 and Case 3 are true. So, the remaining weight must be
given to the single value of θ̂ proj not covered by either case.

D.2      Q UADRATIC P ROJECTION

D.2.1       L EMMA 4

Statement of Lemma 6 Suppose that θ̂ proj is the optimal solution to:

                                                θ̂ proj = arg min ||θ̂ − θ||22 ,
                                                             θ∈RD

subject to:
                                                                      D
                                                                      X
                                                                            θi = 1
                                                                      i=1
                                                  0 ≤ θi ≤ τi , ∀i ∈ [1, D],

where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then, θ̂sproj = 0 implies that any j with θ̂s > θ̂j must have θ̂jproj = 0.

Proof: This is similar to Lemma 2 from Shalev-Shwartz & Singer (2006). Assume for the sake of
contradiction θ̂sproj = 0 and θ̂s > θ̂j , yet we have θ̂jproj > 0.


                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we can construct another vector θ ′ that is the same as θ̂ proj , except in two places:
                                                   θs′ = θ̂sproj + ∆
                                                   θj′ = θ̂jproj − ∆,
for some ∆ satisfying 0 < ∆ < min(θ̂jproj , τs − θ̂sproj ). This bound on ∆ ensures that θ′ is still
within the thresholds. We know that ∆ can exist because min(θ̂jproj , τs − θ̂sproj ) > 0 (by supposition,
τs − θ̂sproj = τs − 0 > 0 and θ̂jproj > 0).
Now we can compute:
||θ̂ − θ̂ proj ||22 − ||θ̂ − θ ′ ||22 = (θ̂s − θ̂sproj )2 + (θ̂j − θ̂jproj )2 − (θ̂s − (θ̂sproj + ∆))2 − (θ̂j − (θ̂jproj − ∆))2
                                 = 2∆((θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − (θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − ∆)
                                 > 2∆((θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − (θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − min(θ̂jproj , τs − θ̂sproj ))
                                 ≥ 2∆((θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − (θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − θ̂jproj )
                                 = 2∆(θ̂s − θ̂j )
                                 > 0.
So θ̂ proj cannot be the optimal solution.

D.2.2     L EMMA 5

Statement of Lemma 7 Suppose that θ̂ proj is the optimal solution to:
                               θ̂ proj = arg min ||θ̂ − θ||22 ,
                                                       θ∈RD
subject to:
                                                                D
                                                                X
                                                                      θi = 1
                                                                i=1
                                             0 ≤ θi ≤ τi , ∀i ∈ [1, D],
where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then, θ̂sproj = τs implies θ̂jproj = τj for any θ̂j − τj > θ̂s − τs .
Proof: Again, this is similar to Lemma 2 from Shalev-Shwartz & Singer (2006). Assume for the
sake of contradiction θ̂sproj = τs and θ̂j − τj > θ̂s − τs , yet we have θ̂jproj < τj .

Now we can construct another vector θ ′ that is the same as θ̂ proj , except in two places:
                                                   θs′ = θ̂sproj − ∆
                                                   θj′ = θ̂jproj + ∆,
for some ∆ satisfying 0 < ∆ < min(θ̂sproj , τj − θ̂jproj ). This bound on ∆ ensures that θ′ is still
within the thresholds. We know that ∆ can exist because min(θ̂sproj , τj − θ̂jproj ) > 0 (by supposition,
τj − θ̂jproj > 0 and θ̂sproj = τs > 0).
Now we can compute:
||θ̂ − θ̂ proj ||22 − ||θ̂ − θ ′ ||22 = (θ̂s − θ̂sproj )2 + (θ̂j − θ̂jproj )2 − (θ̂s − (θ̂sproj − ∆))2 − (θ̂j − (θ̂jproj + ∆))2
                                 = 2∆((θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − (θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − ∆)
                                 > 2∆((θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − (θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − min(θ̂sproj , τj − θ̂jproj ))
                                 ≥ 2∆((θ̂j − θ̂jproj ) − (θ̂s − θ̂sproj ) − (τj − θ̂jproj ))
                                 = 2∆((θ̂j − τj ) − (θ̂s − θ̂sproj ))
                                 = 2∆((θ̂j − τj ) − (θ̂s − τs ))
                                 > 0.
So θ̂ proj cannot be the optimal solution.


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2.3     F ULL P ROOF
Theorem 3 Suppose we want to solve:
                                           θ̂ proj = arg min ||θ̂ − θ||22 ,
                                                     θ∈RD
subject to:
                                                              D
                                                              X
                                                                    θi = 1
                                                              i=1
                                            0 ≤ θi ≤ τi , ∀i ∈ [1, D],
where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then the solution is:
                                     θ̂kproj = min(max(θ̂k − λ, 0), τk ),
where λ is found (through e.g. bisection search) to satisfy:
                                     D
                                     X
                                           min(max(θ̂i − λ, 0), τi ) = 1.
                                     i=1

Proof: Note that this problem is the same as the simplex projection problem from Shalev-Shwartz
& Singer (2006) and Duchi et al. (2008), except here we have additional θi ≤ τi constraints. The
Lagrangian for this problem is4 :
                                                       N
                                                            !
                              1         2
                                                     X
             L(θ, µ, ζ, λ) = ||θ̂ − θ||2 + λ −1 +         θi − ⟨µ, θ⟩ + ⟨ζ, θ − τ ⟩.
                              2                       i=1
To find the optimality condition with respect to a single index of θ, we set the derivative to zero:
                                 dL
                                      = θi − θ̂i + λ − µi + ζi = 0.
                                 dθi
The complimentary slackness KKT condition gives us that ζi = µi = 0 when 0 < θi < τi , so for θi
not at the boundary of our constraints, we get:
                                                   θi = θ̂i − λ.
So, we have that for all θi ∈ (0, τi ), there is a shared value λ which we subtract from θ̂i to get the
value of θi . How do we know which θi are 0 and which θi are τi , though?
Assume that we know λ. By Lemma 6, we can characterize the optimal solution as:
                                            θ̂kproj = max(θ̂k − λ, 0),
for θ̂kproj ̸= τk . By Lemma 7, we can characterize the optimal solution as:
                                            θ̂kproj = min(θ̂k − λ, τk ),
for θ̂kproj ̸= 0. So, we can combine these two forms to get:
                                     θ̂kproj = min(max(θ̂k − λ, 0), τk ).
Now recall that we have the following constraint:
                                     D
                                     X
                                           min(max(θ̂i − λ, 0), τi ) = 1.
                                     i=1
Given this constraint, we can find λ through search (moving the value up or down). We can see this
                  PD
by noticing that i=1 min(max(θ̂i − λ, 0), τi ) is a strictly decreasing function of λ between the
setting of λ that makes θ̂i − λ > 0 for at least one i, and the setting of λ that makes θ̂i − λ < τi for
at least one i. So in this range, there is only one setting of λ that satisfies this equation. We can only
                                          PD
choose a λ outside of this range when i=1 τi = 1, and in this case the solution is trivial: θ̂iproj = τi
for all i.
    4
      Note that multiplying ||θ̂ proj − θ||22 by 12 does not change the minimization problem and enables us to get
rid of a factor of 2 after taking the derivative of the Lagrangian.


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     A LTERNATIVE M ETHODS
Our estimator is far from the only reasonable high-dimensional, single-index model estimator. We
briefly discuss some alternatives and the tradeoffs involved before moving to experimental results.
We could use classic low-dimensional methods regularized for the high-dimensional setting. This
includes ordinal regression (Wooldridge, 2010) and the isotron algorithm (Kalai & Sastry, 2009).
We found these methods to underperform correlation-based estimators, and tuning hyperparameters
added additional complexity that was not needed in the correlation-based approaches.
Another class of methods involve scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Llama Team, 2024; Ruan
et al., 2024). We could transform the y values via an inverse sigmoid or power law, and fit high-
dimensional linear regression methods (e.g. ridge, partial least squares, or Lasso). We initially found
this approach promising, but the inverse transforms were unstable, and the combination of fitting the
nonlinear transform and regularization required significant amounts of tuning.
Rank-correlation methods, including our robustified version of the estimator from Chen & Banerjee
(2017), and even the standard Spearman correlation (Spearman, 1904) (see Appendix H) performed
well. We believe that in general, robust per-feature correlations are likely to perform well as D ≫ N ,
and extreme levels of regularization are needed to obtain reasonable models. Sparse methods such
as the Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) are one classic answer, but we cannot necessarily assume that the
underlying correlations θ ∗ are sparse, and we did not find these techniques to perform well.

F     L OSS M ATRIX C OMPUTATION S PECIFICS
For all of our initial experiments, we computed the loss matrix as follows. For efficiency purposes,
we sampled only 25 pages for a domain’s bits-per-byte (BPB) computation even if a domain had
more than 25 pages. To get an LLM’s BPB on a page, we split the page into chunks of text that were
512 tokens according to a reference tokenizer (we used the Llama 2 7B tokenizer; Touvron et al.
2023). These text chunks turned out to be small enough to fit in the context of every LLM we tested.
We then averaged BPB across chunks for each page and then across pages for each domain.

G     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR I NITIAL P RETRAINING E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we specify hyperparameters and methods used for LLM pretraining and evaluation
for our initial LLM pretraining experiments. We also specify settings used for the data-selection
methods.

G.1    LLM P RETRAINING

We trained each LLM on 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. At 3.2B tokens, each training run took under 3
hours with the Hugging Face Trainer (Wolf et al., 2019) and appropriate PyTorch (Ansel et al., 2024)
compile flags. We provide pretraining hyperparameters in Table 2. Given our per-device batch size,
we found the learning rate by increasing it by a factor of 2 until we saw instability and then using
the highest learning rate where no instability was observed. Refer to the Pythia paper (Biderman
et al., 2023) for more information; we initialized the model from scratch using their 160M model
configuration at https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/pythia-160m. Other hyperparameters
can be assumed to be Hugging Face Trainer defaults at the time of this writing.

G.2    LLM E VALUATION

At the end of the pretraining script, we used the Eleuther AI Eval Harness (Gao et al., 2023). For
efficiency, we set the sample limit to 5000 examples per benchmark. Elsewhere, we used the default
settings. On 4 NVIDIA A100s, it took only a few minutes per LLM to compute evaluation results
for SciQ, ARC Easy, PIQA, LAMBADA, and all of the translations of LAMBADA.

G.3    DSIR

DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b), despite its simplicity, requires some tuning. A decision must be made
about how to format the bemchmark data into a single piece of text per example so that it can be


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 2: LLM Pretraining Hyperparameters

                                      Parameter                   Value
                                Per-device Batch Size              128
                                    Learning Rate             5 × 10−3
                                    Warmup Ratio                   0.1
                                       Adam β1                     0.9
                                       Adam β2                    0.95
                                       Adam ϵ                 1 × 10−8
                                    Weight Decay                   0.1
                                    LR Scheduler                  cosine
                                   Max Grad Norm                   1.0
                                        BF 16                     True
                                 Distributed Backend               nccl
                            Gradient Accumulation Steps             1

             Table 3: Unique pretraining tokens selected per benchmark, from DSIR.

                                  Benchmark              Tokens
                                   ARC Easy           2,905,206,499
                                      PIQA            2,910,486,295
                                      SCIQ            2,920,734,042
                                   LAMBADA            3,022,219,424
                                 LAMBADADE            3,210,986,137
                                 LAMBADAES            3,396,528,704
                                 LAMBADAFR            3,413,930,081
                                  LAMBADAIT           3,384,854,845


compared with potential pretraining data in terms of n-gram overlap. The LAMBADA tasks only
have one text column per example, so the decision here is trivial. Examples from the other tasks
each have a question, possibly a context, and a set of multiple choice answers to choose from. We
chose to concatenate all of these columns together with spaces to form one piece of text per example,
duplicating the same question as a prefix for each different answer.
DSIR does not allow the user to specify the exact number of unique tokens desired for pretraining.
It only allows the specification of the number of unique pages, which can have wildly varying token
counts. For every DSIR job, we set the desired number of pages to 3325589, which we found
through binary search to produce slightly more than 3.2B unique tokens for LAMBADAFR . It was
expensive to find this number for even one bechmark, because for each iteration of the binary search,
we had to run DSIR and then the Pythia tokenizer to know how many tokens resulted from the input
page number parameter. We provide the number of unique tokens from DSIR for each task in Table
3. We pretrained on 3.2B tokens for every LLM regardless of whether all of them were unique.

G.4   FAST T EXT

The “SOTA” fastText model from Li et al. (2024) is available here: https://huggingface.co/
mlfoundations/fasttext-oh-eli5. We used this model to filter data by sorting pages by the


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model’s “high quality” score, including the top pages in order until we had either reached or gone
slightly over 3.2B unique tokens. This aligns with the data-selection procedure in the original paper,
and is also essentially the same as running the linear projection (Equation 10) at the page-level. We
also applied this method when selecting data using our own fastText filter trained by our algorithm.

H    A DDITIONAL I NITIAL P RETRAINING R ESULTS
In Figure 5, we present additional initial pretraining results for methods in our loss-performance
correlation data selection paradigm. We find that using Spearman rank correlation (Spearman, 1904)
in place of our estimator achieves comparable performance. On some tests, it performs even better
than our estimator. We also find that using the quadratic projection, while perhaps more intuitive,
leads to worse performance than the linear projection.

I   P ERFORMANCE P REDICTION S CORES
We include 5-fold leave-out R2 scores for all initial experiment tasks in Figure 6. However, we com-
plement these strong results with the additional observation that simply taking the mean loss across
all domains is a strong predictor of model performance (bottom row). The surprising effectiveness of
average loss over uniformly sampled documents has been discussed extensively (Owen, 2024; Wei
et al., 2022; Kaplan et al., 2020) and our results further suggest that regressions with correlations
only slightly above the mean loss baseline can still result in effective data selection methods.

J   P RETRAINING L ANGUAGE D ISTRIBUTION
Figure 7 shows the language distributions of the projected estimates for our initial RPJv2 experi-
ments. Our algorithm provides significant enrichment of the corresponding languages for the mul-
tilingual benchmarks (LAMBADA_*), but it does not exclusively select domains in one language.
In contrast, for English benchmarks our approach selects nearly exclusively English data, likely due
to the large quantity of high-quality English data in our pretraining data pool. There are signifi-
cantly fewer tokens in non-English languages in the data pool and our τ constraint prevents their
duplication.
Figure 8 shows what the projected estimate in our pretraining experiments would be if we had a
pretraining data pool 5× as large. We see here that the estimate does an even better job at selecting
pretraining data with the language that matches the target task.

K    PARAMETER C OUNT D ISTRIBUTION FOR E STIMATOR LLM S
In Figure 9, we present the parameter-count histogram of the 90 models from the Open LLM Leader-
board (Beeching et al., 2023) that we used to compute our estimate for pretraining data selection.
Only 8 models here are less than 160M parameters. Despite this, our estimate can be used to effec-
tively pretrain 160M parameter LLMs.

L    A NALYSIS OF THE MODEL - LOSS MATRIX X
What information is contained in the matrix of model losses X? Clearly, it must contain semantically
meaningful information about the data, such as the language that a piece of text is in. We performed
PCA (Pearson, 1901) and t-SNE (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) on X and plotted the first two
components for each of our 9,841 RPJv2 domains. As shown in the first row of Figure 10, we found
two components with relatively high singular values. The first component clearly corresponds with
the language of a domain. The second component corresponds with the average bits-per-byte or
entropy of a domain. The t-SNE components show the same general pattern as well as showing
that the language clusters are very well separated. As shown in our plots, there are several salient
clusters within the language clusters. Within the English cluster, we found a subcluster for luxury
goods, another for legal services and information, another for academic research, and even a cluster
for funeral homes.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Estimate with linear projection. This is our algo- (b) Estimate with quadratic projection. Same as (a) ex-
rithm from the main text without training the addi- cept the linear projection is replaced with the quadratic
tional fastText filter.                                projection.


(c) Spearman rank correlation with linear projection. (d) fastText filter trained on data selected in (c). This
Same as (a) except we replaced our estimator with the is the same as our algorithm in the main text, replacing
Spearman rank correlation.                            our estimator with the Spearman rank correlation.

Figure 5: Pretraining results for different methods within our paradigm. Overall, we see that many
rank-correlation pretraining data selection approaches perform well.



The second row of Figure 10 shows plots for the loss matrix when we take the principal components
of the other dimension, where points correspond to the 90 LLMs. For PCA, PC1 corresponds to
entropy. For both cases, it is less clear what the other PCs are, but when we color the three largest
families of models in our data (Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023), Qwen (Bai et al., 2023), and OpenL-
lama (Geng & Liu, 2023)), we see that model families are clustered together in the PC graphs.

M     S CALED U P E XPERIMENTS
During the ICLR review process, and before we had completed the preregistration in Appendix N,
concerns about scale were raised. So, we re-ran the uniform sampling baseline and our main per-
plexity correlations method to create Figure 11, analogous to Figure 2. Besides scale, the only other


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Held-out R2 score of our raw correlation estimate θ̂, our projected estimate θ̂ proj , and
the average loss baseline. The 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are wide enough that no
individual comparison is significant. Across benchmarks, θ̂ proj has statistically significant gains
over the baseline (p=0.035) as it is unlikely that θ̂ proj beats mean loss 7 times out of 8 by chance.


Figure 7: Language distributions of pretraining data selected by perplexity correlations. The default
RPJv2 distribution is given in the left column for reference. The English benchmark targets often
exclusively select English but the reverse is not the case. In every case, our approach selects more
data than the default from the benchmark-matched language (shown as a green box in each column).



feature we changed was the number of pretraining tokens, which we set to 8.2B to keep the ratio
chinchilla-optimal (Hoffmann et al., 2022). This setting is arguably harder for perplexity correla-
tions, because the uniform sampling method was allowed to sample from a pool of 8.2B unique
tokens, whereas for our perplexity correlations experiment, we duplicated the original 3.2B set of
tokens from the 160M parameter model experiments. Despite training on data that is far more du-
plicated, perplexity correlations still achieves superior performance in 7 out of 8 tasks as seen in
Figure 11.

N    S CALING U P F URTHER : P REREGISTERED E XPERIMENTS
In small-scale experiments, our approach is competitive with the leading approach from Li et al.’s
survey: a fixed fastText model (Joulin et al., 2016), manually augmented with the best language fil-
tering. This leading approach is heuristic and hand-crafted, requiring appropriate language filtering
matched to the target benchmark and assumptions about what good pretraining data looks like. Our
approach does not make these assumptions and could potentially improve as more public models are
released and we have better data to estimate θ ∗ .
While our initial results are generally positive, many past data selection methods have reported
initially positive results, only to later break: they may fail to scale to larger models or rely on specific
details of their experimental setting. Our 160M-scale experiments may also raise such concerns.
We designed a pre-registered scaling experiment that addresses both the concerns of scale and
external validity. We used the permanence of arXiv preprints as a mechanism to preregister a
series of scaling experiments within the DataComp-LM framework (Li et al., 2024), which is a
testbed for data-selection techniques released with the recent survey. Pre-registering held-out scal-
ing experiments committed us to reporting potentially negative results, and avoid overfitting to our
chosen experimental settings. Our first arXiv submission with the preregistration is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05816v1.
DataComp-LM was ideal for this preregistered scaling experiment, as it standardizes the setting by
providing a pool of 240 trillion tokens, pretraining code for 412M to 7B parameter models, and
evaluation code for 53 benchmarks, 22 of which are labelled as “core” benchmarks that scale pre-
dictably. Importantly, we did not train any models on DataComp-LM using our methods beforehand
or baselines, making this a true held-out experiment with known high-performance baselines.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: This figure is analogous to Figure 7, except the τ thresholds have been multiplied by 5.
We see that our approach selects even more relevant data when the selection pool is larger.


Figure 9: The parameter-count histogram of the 90 models from the Open LLM Leaderboard
(Beeching et al., 2023) that we used to compute our estimate for pretraining data selection. Bar
widths are 160M. The smallest model in the sample has ≈33M parameters and the largest has ≈9B.
The spike around 6.7B parameters is due to a large number of partially trained Pythia (Biderman
et al., 2023) checkpoints from the same training run at that scale. Our algorithm has the hard task
of selecting pretraining data for 160M parameter models, which is abnormally small in the set of
models used to compute the estimate.


We ran the best-performing approach from our paper: a fastText filter trained on our correlation
estimator. We defined the target benchmark for our estimator as the average of the “core” DataComp-
LM benchmarks and ran our estimator with perplexities from our set of 90 OpenLM Leaderboard
LLMs on a uniform subsample of the DataComp-LM pool of data. Instead of using the provided
DCLM code (as planned in our preregistration), we used our own pretraining and eval code after
consulting with the DCLM authors, as their codebase could not be easily run outside their infra
setup, and they advised us to switch to our own codebase.
Specifically, we used our own code for training Pythia-architecture LLMs (and the same method-
ology for tuning hyperparameters as in the 160M experiments before), as well as the Eleuther Eval
Harness (Gao et al., 2023) for replicating the “core” benchmark evaluations using the settings re-
ported in the DCLM paper. Differences in Pythia architectures and Eleuther Eval Harness implemen-
tations unfortunately make our evaluation numbers not directly comparable to the original DCLM
codebase numbers.
We report results for the “Filtering 1B-1x” track, where a 1.4B parameter LLM is trained on 28.8B
tokens chosen from a 1.64T sample of the DataComp-LM pool of data.5 In the DataComp-LM
paper, they apply their fixed fastText filter as a final step after several complicated deduplication and
filtering steps. We report results where our fastText classifier is used as a direct substitute for this
last step alone (filtering from the “pre-filtered pool”), as well as another test in which we replace the
entire pipeline with one classifier (filtering from the “raw pool”).
We also report results where our estimator is trained at the domain-level (following this paper) and
where our estimator is trained at the page-level (which we had not tried before).

   5
     Due to disk constraints, we filtered starting from a 10% random sample of this 1.64T sample for every
method.


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a)               (b)                (c)                (d)                (e)


        (f)               (g)                (h)                 (i)                (j)

Figure 10: Analysis of the loss matrix. The first row treats domains as examples to be projected via
PCA, while the second row treats models as examples. Panels (a): eigenvalue decay for the eigende-
composition of the D×D covariance matrix resulting from the loss matrix; a few dominant PCs are
seen. (b) and (c): domains plotted by the first two PCA components showing separation of language
in b and entropy in c. (d,e) show analogous plots in t-SNE with a clearer separation of language. (f):
eigenvalue decay analogous to (a). (g,h): models plotted by the first two PCA components showing
clustering by model family (clusters show Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023), Qwen (Bai et al., 2023),
and OpenLlama (Geng & Liu, 2023) derivatives – the three largest clusters in our data), and average
model loss. (i,j) show analogous results under t-SNE where (i) is normalized to remove per-model
entropy differences.


Figure 11: Analog to Figure 2 at the 410M parameter and 8.2B token scale. For perplexity corre-
lations, we duplicate the original 3.2B tokens, whereas the uniform sampling baseline is allowed to
sample from 8.2B unique tokens.


Finally, we report analogous results where we replace the “core” evaluation score with the average
score on all of the non-English LAMBADA translations, and compare the raw fastText classifier
from Li et al. (2024) to our approach, using both of these approaches in place of the full filtering
pipeline from 1.64T tokens. We preregistered this additional multilingual task because “core” does
not include multilingual evaluations.
Beyond our preregistered experiments, we also ran chinchilla-optimal 160M, 410M, and 1B scales
to complement our results. We applied the same perplexity correlations fastText filter at all data
selection scales. To train it, we set the token threshold in our algorithm to be 50% of the tokens used
for training the estimator, meaning that approximately 50% of the domains/pages from our estimate
were labeled as ‘include’ and the other approximate 50% were labeled as ‘exclude’ for the purposes
of fastText training. To train our estimator, we used approximately the same scale of data as our


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


initial RPJv2 BPB matrix. For the pre-filtered DCLM pool, this was a sample with about the same
disk size as the RPJv2 estimate sample with 129,376 pages and 9,952 domains at ≥ 13 pages per
domain (we found that the pages in this pool were about twice as long on average as the RPJv2
pages). For the raw DCLM pool, this was a sample also of about the same disk size with 325,682
pages and 13,732 domains at ≥ 23 pages per domain (page lengths were generally shorter in this
sample).
All results can be found in Figure 3.

O    T OP C ORRELATED D OMAINS P ER -TASK
Here, we list the top 10 most correlated domains (before projection) found by our main rank corre-
lation estimator for the pretraining experiments.
ARC Easy. api-bridge.azurewebsites.net, superlogical.net, www.aaeoptometry.com,
www.akronchildrens.org, www.edusofttech.com, www.fredericksburgtso.com,
www.harborfronthospitalforanimals.com, www.hopkinsallchildrens.org,
www.metropolitanvisionnyc.com, www.myheartliveshere.com
PIQA. api-bridge.azurewebsites.net, familyserviceshub.havering.gov.uk, ricardofran-
cia.com, www.aaeoptometry.com, www.akronchildrens.org, www.eczemainfoclub.com,
www.groupeproxim.ca, www.gynecology-doctors.com, www.medicineshoppe.ca,
www.metropolitanvisionnyc.com
SciQ. api-bridge.azurewebsites.net, goodbusinesskit.com, original-ideas.net, pos-
university.com, taraweddings.ca, thefloristic.com, www.cuemath.com, www.edusofttech.com,
www.groupeproxim.ca, www.landkreis-waldeck-frankenberg.de
LAMBADA. 2gringos.blogspot.com, birdingmarc.blogspot.com, books.google.ae, chestof-
books.com, joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu, snoqualmie.cementhorizon.com, twowheeledmad-
woman.blogspot.com, www.ganssle.com, www.sarahhague.com, www.themodernnovel.org
LAMBADA DE. 1nselpresse.blogspot.com, biomedicalhouse.com, schariageg-
ner.wordpress.com, truthfriends.us, www.aerzteblatt.de, www.buddha-blog.online,
www.deutschesgesundheitsportal.de, www.global2015.net, www.juedische-allgemeine.de,
www.metropolis-verlag.de
LAMBADA ES. archi7.net, catolico.org, cineclubdecaen.com, dbe.rah.es, www.ca-se-passe-
la-haut.fr, www.corsarios.net, www.e-stoire.net, www.la-historiadora.com, www.proverbes-
francais.fr, www.vedaveda.com
LAMBADA FR. archi7.net, cineclubdecaen.com, es.m.wikipedia.org, images.cnrs.fr,
irb-cisr.gc.ca, www.ca-se-passe-la-haut.fr, www.corsarios.net, www.futura-sciences.com,
www.neurologia-castellon.es, www.vedaveda.com
LAMBADA IT. doc.studenti.it, message-for-you.net, shop.fedecultura.com,
www.getstoryshots.com, www.global2015.net, www.peterlang.com, www.scrutatio.it,
www.scuolafilosofica.com, www.scuolissima.com, www.storieparallele.it
Non-EN LAMBADA (DCLM Raw Pool). digi.ub.uni-heidelberg.de, it.thefreedictionary.com,
it.wikiquote.org, slideplayer.it, www.astro.com, www.epo.org, www.kunsthaus.ch,
www.logitech.com, www.peterlang.com, www.zenit.org
DCLM Core (DCLM Raw Pool). au.finance.yahoo.com, eldaddp.azurewebsites.net,
nrich.maths.org, serc.carleton.edu, whois.epik.com, www.bom.gov.au,
www.countrycurrencyrates.com, www.ecdc.europa.eu, www.iaaf.org, www.metoffice.gov.uk


                                               35
