Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NDERSTANDING FACTUAL R ECALL IN
T RANSFORMERS VIA A SSOCIATIVE M EMORIES
 Eshaan Nichani                      Jason D. Lee                        Alberto Bietti
 Princeton University                Princeton University                Flatiron Institute



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large language models have demonstrated an impressive ability to perform fac-
         tual recall. Prior work has found that transformers trained on factual recall tasks
         can store information at a rate proportional to their parameter count. In our work,
         we show that shallow transformers can use a combination of associative memories
         to obtain such near optimal storage capacity. We begin by proving that the stor-
         age capacities of both linear and MLP associative memories scale linearly with
         parameter count. We next introduce a synthetic factual recall task, and prove that
         a transformer with a single layer of self-attention followed by an MLP can obtain
         100% accuracy on the task whenever either the total number of self-attention pa-
         rameters or MLP parameters scales (up to log factors) linearly with the number of
         facts. In particular, the transformer can trade off between using the value matrices
         or the MLP as an associative memory to store the dataset of facts. We comple-
         ment these expressivity results with an analysis of the gradient flow trajectory of a
         simplified linear attention model trained on our factual recall task, where we show
         that the model exhibits sequential learning behavior.


1   I NTRODUCTION

One hallmark capability of transformer-based large language models (LLMs) is factual re-
call (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020). Given a prompt of the form
вҖңIn what year was George Washington born?вҖқ an LLM will correctly respond with вҖң1732.вҖқ Lan-
guage models thus act as databases, storing somewhere in their parameters mappings of the form
(George Washington, birth year) 7вҶ’ (1732) which can be easily accessed during inference time.
Prior work (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024) has observed that transformers trained on factual recall tasks
can store information at a rate proportional to their parameter count. Other studies (e.g., Meng
et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Lv et al., 2024) have sought to understand the
specific mechanism by which transformers implement factual recall, probing models to understand
specifically which transformer blocks вҖңcontainвҖқ certain facts. However, these studies do not consider
the memorization capacity of such constructions, and it is thus an open question to understand how
transformers optimally encode such factual information within their weights.
In this work, we show that shallow transformers can use a combination of associative memories
to obtain near-optimal storage capacity for factual recall tasks. Associative memories store pairs
of input-output embeddings through their outer products, and are thus well-suited for modeling the
weight matrices of a transformer. Prior work (Bietti et al., 2023) has shown that this associative
memory model is a key primitive towards understanding both the representational capacity and
optimization dynamics of transformers on synthetic tasks.
Our specific contributions are as follows: In Section 3 we begin by studying the ability of linear
and MLP associative memory models to store associations between discrete vocabularies. We prove
that when the embeddings are sampled randomly over the sphere, these models can store a number
of associations proportional to their parameter count, significantly improving over the case where
the embeddings are orthogonal. In Section 4, we introduce a synthetic next-token prediction task
which models factual recall. The data distribution consists of prompts containing a subject token s
and relation token r hidden amongst a set of noise tokens, which the learner must map to a ground
truth answer aвҲ— (s, r). Our main theorem is that a transformer consisting of a single multi-head


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


self-attention layer followed by an MLP can obtain 100% accuracy when either the number of self-
attention parameters or MLP parameters scales (up to logs) proportionally with the dataset size. In
Section 5, we study the gradient descent dynamics of a single linear self-attention head trained on
the synthetic task. We prove that the model undergoes a sequential learning dynamics, consisting
of a вҖңhallucinationвҖқ stage where the model outputs the conditional distribution for the answer based
on only the relation. Finally, in Section 6 we complement our constructions with lower bounds,
showing that they are optimal up to logarithmic factors. Overall, our work makes progress towards
understanding the mechanism by which transformers learn and store factual information.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Associative memories. Associative memories have a long history in the neural computation litera-
ture (Hopfield, 1982; Kohonen, 1972; Willshaw et al., 1969). More recently there has been renewed
interest in extensions of such models with larger capacity (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016; Demircigil
et al., 2017; Lucibello & MeМҒzard, 2024). These have been linked to the attention blocks in Trans-
formers (Ramsauer et al., 2020; Schlag et al., 2021), with (Le et al., 2020; Hoover et al., 2023)
in particular using the connection between self-attention and associative memories to design new
variants of the attention module. (Radhakrishnan et al., 2020) show that overparameterized autoen-
coders can also behave as associative memories. However, these connections differs from our work,
where we consider instead the role of both self-attention and MLP weights as associative memories,
in a similar vein to (Bietti et al., 2023; Cabannes et al., 2024).

Memorization and factual recall. Large language models are known to store vast amounts of
factual knowledge in their weights (Jiang et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020; Geva et al., 2021). Sev-
eral recent works in the mechanistic interpretability literature have attempted to understand how
transformers store facts (Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Lv et al., 2024).
Allen-Zhu & Li (2024) empirically studied the memorization capacity for Transformer language
models of different sizes trained on synthetic factual recall tasks, and observed near-linear scaling
with the number of parameters. Jiang et al. (2024) demonstrate how shallow transformers can solve
a related latent concept association task by viewing the weight matrices as associative memories.
At a more basic level, several works have studied the memorization capacity of neural networks,
using constructions that differ from our associative memory approach, both in the context of re-
gression (Bubeck et al., 2020; Vardi et al., 2021; Madden & Thrampoulidis, 2024) and (next) token
prediction (Mahdavi et al., 2023; Kajitsuka & Sato, 2023; 2024; Madden et al., 2024).

Gradient dynamics. Training dynamics of transformer models on various tasks has been a pop-
ular recent line of research (Jelassi et al., 2022; Snell et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Bietti et al.,
2023; Tian et al., 2023; Nichani et al., 2024). Zhang et al. (2024); Mahankali et al. (2024) studied
training dynamics of transformers with linear attention on in-context learning tasks. Ghosal et al.
(2024) studied the fine-tuning dynamics on a similar factual recall task, showing how training on
lesser-known facts may hurt performance. Our emphasis differs in that we consider non-orthogonal
embeddings, and require the model to additionally filter out the relevant subject and relation tokens
from the noise tokens, which requires learning of the key and query matrices.

3   A SSOCIATIVE M EMORIES
In this section, we show that associative memories have a storage capacity on the order of the number
of parameters (up to logarithmic factors), which is near-optimal (as we show in Section 6).

Setup. Our setting follows that of Cabannes et al. (2024). Let [N ] be the set of input tokens, and
[M ] be the set of output tokens. Our goal is to store a set of associations given by the function
f вҲ— : [N ] вҶ’ [M ]. For each input token x вҲҲ [N ] we assign a corresponding embedding vector
ex вҲҲ Rd , and likewise for each output token y вҲҲ [M ] we associate an unembedding vector uy вҲҲ
Rd . We primarily focus on the setting where the embeddings {ex }xвҲҲ[N ] and {uy }yвҲҲ[M ] are drawn
i.i.d uniformly from the sphere of radius 1. Let F : Rd вҶ’ Rd be our model which вҖңstoresвҖқ the
associations f вҲ— . Given such an F , the prediction fЛҶ(x) for f вҲ— (x) is given by the arg-max decoding
fЛҶ(x) := arg maxyвҲҲ[M ] uвҠӨ  y F (ex ).


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   L INEAR A SSOCIATIVE M EMORIES

We first consider the case where F is a linear map F (ex ) = W ex .
Theorem 1. Assume that f вҲ— is injective. If d2 вүі N poly log N , then with high probability over the
draw of the embeddings, there exists a W such that
                           arg max uвҠӨ         вҲ—
                                    y W ex = f (x) for all x вҲҲ [N ].                                (1)
                               yвҲҲ[M ]
                                                                          вҠӨ
                                                       P
This capacity is obtained by the construction W =        xвҲҲ[N ] uf вҲ— (x) ex . Furthermore, if W is
restrictedPto be a rank m matrix,
                            Pm then вҠӨ such a W exists when md вүі N poly log N ; this construction
is W = xвҲҲ[N ] uf вҲ— (x) eвҠӨ x       v v                d
                              i=1 i i , where vi вҲҲ R are drawn i.i.d from the standard Gaussian.

Since W has d2 parameters, Theorem 1 shows that the number of associations that can be stored
scales (up to log factors) linearly in the number of parameters. We note that in this linear case,
the injectivity assumption on f вҲ— is important, as otherwise the capacity may be as low as d, as
in (Cabannes et al., 2024). Additionally, we remark that these constructions are easily obtained
                   P the general W construction corresponds to one-step of GD on the correlation
by gradient descent;
loss L(W ) = вҲ’ x uвҠӨ      f вҲ— (x) W ex , while the low-rank construction corresponds to parameterizing
W = U V вҠӨ for U , V вҲҲ RdГ—m , and taking one step of GD on U while V is fixed to random
Gaussian initialization. The proof of Theorem 1 is deferred to Appendix B.

Remarks. Our setting bears similarity to associative Hopfield networks (Hopfield, 1982), yet dif-
fers in that we decode to a fixed discrete set of output tokens [M ] rather than exactly matching
the target output. This more closely resembles the language modeling framework, and allows us
to improve the memorization capacity from d to d2 (McEliece et al., 1987). Next, we note that
non-orthogonality of the embeddings is necessary for Theorem 1, as the optimal storage capacity
for one-hot embeddings is only N = d. Since our constructions are in the regime N вү« d, the
associative memory W is a superposition (Elhage et al., 2022) of the outer products uf вҲ— (x) eвҠӨx.
Finally, we remark that the random, rather than trainable, embeddings setting was also studied in
Cabannes et al. (2024). The embeddings can be viewed as global quantities in a larger network, of
which the associative memory is implementing some subtask, and is thus not able to optimize these
embeddings in order to solve its specific task.

3.2   MLP A SSOCIATIVE M EMORIES

Next, we consider the case where F is a two-layer neural network with hidden width m; that is
F (ex ) = V вҠӨ Пғ(W ex ) for V , W вҲҲ RmГ—d .
Theorem 2 (Informal). If md вүі N poly log N , then with high probability over the draw of the
embeddings, there exists V , W such that
                       arg max uвҠӨ  вҠӨ            вҲ—
                                y V Пғ(W ex ) = f (x) for all x вҲҲ [N ].                              (2)
                           yвҲҲ[M ]


Since the MLP has 2md parameters, Theorem 2 shows that the MLP associative memory scheme
has storage capacity which is (nearly) linear in the parameter count.

Proof Sketch. The construction for Theorem 2 mimics that of Theorem 1, after an appropriate ran-
dom featurePtransformation. First, sample the rows of W from the standard Gaussian. Then, set each
vi = mвҲ’1 x uf вҲ— (x) hk (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©), where hk is the kth Hermite polynomial (see Appendix F.1).
We then see that
                    m
                  1 X X                                                  X
      F (ex ) =               uf вҲ— (xвҖІ ) hk (вҹЁwi , exвҖІ вҹ©)Пғ(вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©) вүҲ   uf вҲ— (xвҖІ ) вҹЁex , exвҖІ вҹ©k . (3)
                 m i=1 вҖІ                                                 вҖІ
                         x вҲҲ[N ]                                      x вҲҲ[N ]

for sufficiently large m. Such polynomial associative memory is reminiscent of that in Krotov &
Hopfield (2016), and can store many more associations for large k. By choosing k вүҲ logd m and
appropriately dealing with concentration, one can obtain the OМғ(md) storage capacity (for technical
reasons, we must also use the Neural Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018) rather the random feature
model). The full proof of Theorem 2 is deferred to Appendix B.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Linear Associative Memory             MLP Associative Memory
                                   NlogN d 2                 104         m/d = 1
                                                                         m/d = 2
                       103                                               m/d = 4
                                                                         m/d = 8
                                                             103         NlogN md


                   N


                                                         N
                       102
                                                             102
                       101
                             102       103        104              102      103        104
                                             d2                                   md

Figure 1: We train linear and MLP associative memories to store f вҲ— (x) = x. Left: Linear associa-
tive memories require d2 вҲқ N log N parameters to store N associations. Right: MLP associative
memories require md вҲқ N log N parameters to store N associations, as predicted by Theorem 2.


On Optimal Storage Capacity. Prior works (Bubeck et al., 2020; Madden & Thrampoulidis,
2024; Madden et al., 2024) studying the memorization capacity of neural networks focus on the
regression setting, and thus do not directly apply to our setup with multiple outputs and a discrete
set of output tokens. Other works (Vardi etвҲҡ al., 2021; Kajitsuka & Sato, 2023; 2024) show that one
can memorize
      вҲҡ         N arbitrary labels with OМғ( N ) parameters, at the expense of using a bit complexity
of в„ҰМғ( N ). Such networks still require в„Ұ(N ) bits, which matches our lower bounds in Section 6.
These constructions, however, are unwieldy, and are not learnable if we restrict the precision to be
poly log N . Instead, our constructions are learnable вҖ“ the linear construction results from one step
of GD, while the ReLU construction uses the NTK and can thus be learned via GD on a convex
loss. In Corollary 2, we show that a quantized version of the construction from Theorem 1 indeed
succeeds with bit precision OМғ(1), and thus more accurately captures realistic training regimes where
models do seem to succeed with low precision (Dettmers et al., 2022; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024).

Empirical Validation. In Figure 1, we train both linear and MLP associative memories to store
the association f вҲ— (x) = x. Given a fixed model size (d, m), we fit datasets with increasing values
of N using the cross entropy loss, and plot the largest value of N for which we can obtain at
least 99% accuracy. We observe that the linear associative memory can store ОҳМғ(d2 ) associations,
while the MLP associative memory can store ОҳМғ(md) associations. See Appendix A for additional
experiments where the number of output tokens M does not scale with N .

4     A S YNTHETIC TASK FOR FACTUAL R ECALL
In this section we introduce a synthetic factual recall task, and show that one-layer transformers
constructed via associative memories can store a number of facts proportional to parameter count.

4.1   T HE TASK

We first define a global dictionary of facts. Let S be a set of subject tokens and R be a set of relation
tokens, where S = |S|, R = |R|. Let A be the set of answer tokens. We let aвҲ— : S Г— R вҶ’ A be the
ground truth association function, which maps subject-relation tuples (s, r) to their corresponding
answer aвҲ— (s, r)1 . A similar such task was considered in Petroni et al. (2019); Ghosal et al. (2024).
Define Ar to be the set of answers corresponding to a relation r, i.e Ar := {aвҲ— (s, r) : s вҲҲ S}.
Define As := {aвҲ— (s, r) : r вҲҲ R} analogously. We assume that each relation corresponds to a
disjoint set of answers:
Assumption 1. Ar вҲ© ArвҖІ = вҲ… for r, rвҖІ вҲҲ R with r Мё= rвҖІ . Furthermore, define D := maxrвҲҲR |Ar |.
For example, S could be the set of all countries, while R could be {president, capital}; in this case,
the set of all presidents and set of all capitals are disjoint.
    1
      We focus on one-to-one relations, where each (s, r) pair corresponds to a unique aвҲ— . This is in contrast
to the one-to-many setting, where each (s, r) maps to many possible answers (for example, s = вҖңFrance,вҖқ r =
вҖңcity,вҖқ aвҲ— вҲҲ {вҖңParisвҖқ, вҖңToulouseвҖқ, В· В· В· })


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 z1     вӢҜ ziвҲ’1   s     zi+1 вӢҜ zjвҲ’1       r   zj+1 вӢҜ zTвҲ’1   EOS
                                                                                 вҶ’ a*
                        Figure 2: A diagram of the synthetic factual recall task.


We next define our data distribution D over sequences. Let T > 0 be the context length. Let N
be a set of noise tokens, and define the vocabulary to be V := S вҲӘ R вҲӘ A вҲӘ N вҲӘ {EOS}, where
EOS is a special вҖңend-of-sequenceвҖқ token. The data distribution is over length T + 1 sequences
z1:T +1 := (z1 , z2 , . . . , zT , zT +1 ) вҲҲ V T +1 , generated via the following procedure:
      1. First, sample a subject and relation tuple (s, r) from some distribution p over S Г— R.
      2. Next, sample two distinct indices i, j вҲҲ [T вҲ’ 1]. Set zi = s and zj = r.
      3. For the remainder of tokens zk where k вҲҲ [T вҲ’ 1] \ {i, j}, draw zk uniformly at random
         from the noise tokens N .
      4. Set zT = EOS.
      5. Finally, set zT +1 = aвҲ— (s, r).
The goal of this task is to predict zT +1 from (z1 , . . . , zT ). A model which can successfully do so
must (1) be able to isolate the relevant subject and relation tokens from the noise tokens and (2) store
all of the associations (s, r) 7вҶ’ aвҲ— (s, r). See Figure 2 for a diagram of the task.

4.2   T HE M ODEL : O NE -L AYER T RANSFORMER

Our learner for the task is a single layer of multi-head self attention followed by an MLP. Define
d to be the embedding dimension. The input to the transformer is a sequence of vectors X :=
(x1 , . . . , xT )вҠӨ вҲҲ RT Г—d . Each self attention head is parameterized by the key, query, and value
matrices WK , WQ , WV вҲҲ Rdh Г—d , where dh is the head dimension. The self attention head is then
a map attn( В· ; WK , WQ , WV ) : RT Г—d вҶ’ Rdh , which operates as
                       attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ) = WV X вҠӨ S XWK         вҠӨ

                                                                       WQ xT ,                   (4)
where S(z)i = Pexp(z i)
                 exp(zj ) is the softmax operator.
                   j

A multi-head self-attention layer with H heads is parameterized by H different key, query, and
                                                               (h)   (h)    (h)     (h)
value matrices, along with H output matrices. Let Оё := {(WK , WQ , WV , WO )}hвҲҲ[H] ,
          (h)     (h)     (h)    (h)
where WK , WQ , WV , WO вҲҲ Rdh Г—d . A multi-head self-attention layer is then a map
FMHSA ( В· ; Оё) : RT Г—d вҶ’ Rd given by
                                      (h) вҠӨ          (h)  (h)  (h)
                                  X
                 FMHSA (X; Оё) =      WO     attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ).             (5)
                                       hвҲҲ[H]

Finally, a single-layer transformer combines a multi-head self-attention layer with an MLP. Let m
be the MLP width. Let V , W вҲҲ RmГ—d be the MLP parameters, and define ОёTF := Оё вҲӘ {V , W }.
Then, a single-layer transformer is the map FTF ( В· ; ОёTF ) : RT Г—d вҶ’ Rd given by
                      FTF (X; ОёTF ) = FMHSA (X; Оё) + V вҠӨ Пғ(W FMHSA (X; Оё)).                         (6)

A single-layer transformer is parameterized by the tuple of hyperparameters (d, H, dh , m). The
model has 4Hddh self-attention parameters, and 2md MLP parameters.

4.3   O NE -L AYER T RANSFORMERS HAVE (A LMOST ) L INEAR S TORAGE C APACITY

We next characterize how large a single-layer transformer must be in order to obtain 100% ac-
curacy on the synthetic task. For each token z вҲҲ V, sample its embedding vectors ПҶ(z) вҲҲ Rd
i.i.d uniformly over the sphere of radius 1. An input sequence (z1 , . . . , zT ) gets embedded as
X = (ПҶ(z1 ), . . . , ПҶ(zT ))вҠӨ . We use argmax decoding to predict the next token; that is,
                                fЛҶ(z1:T ) = arg max ПҶ(z)вҠӨ FTF (X; ОёTF ).                       (7)
                                               zвҲҲV



                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our first result is that there exists an attention-only single-layer transformer that obtain 100% accu-
racy on the factual recall task, as long as the total number of self-attention parameters 4Hddh scales
(up to logarithmic factors) linearly with the dataset size SR.
Theorem 3 (Attention-only, informal). Assume that d вүҘ в„ҰМғ(max(R, D)) and Hdh вүҘ в„ҰМғ(S + R).
With high probability over the embeddings, there exists a single-layer attention-only transformer
FTF ( В· ; ОёTF ) with embedding dimension d, number of heads H and head dimension dh such that

                     Pz1:T +1 вҲјD arg max ПҶ(z)вҠӨ FTF (X; ОёTF ) = zT +1 = 1.                      (8)
                                       zвҲҲV


We next show that a single-layer transformer with an MLP can obtain 100% accuracy on the factual
recall task, if the number of MLP parameters md scales linearly with the dataset size:
Theorem 4 (Attention + MLP, informal). Assume that Пғ is a polynomial of sufficiently large degree.
Define C(a) = |{(s, r) : aвҲ— (s, r) = a}|. Let (d, H, dh , m) satisfy

           d вүҘ в„ҰМғ(1)      Hdh вүҘ в„ҰМғ(S + R)          m вүҘ в„ҰМғ(max C(a))            md вүҘ в„ҰМғ(SR).         (9)
                                                             a

Then with high probability over the embeddings there exists a single-layer transformer FTF ( В· ; ОёTF )
with embedding dimension d, number of heads H, head dimension dh , and MLP width m such that

                    Pz1:T +1 вҲјD arg max ПҶ(z)вҠӨ FTF (X; ОёTF ) = zT +1 = 1.                          (10)
                                       zвҲҲV


The proofs of Theorem 3 and Theorem 4 are deferred to Appendix C.

Remarks. Theorems 3 and 4 each have two main constraints on the size of the architecture needed
to obtain 100% accuracy. First, the quantity Hdh must be larger than S + R. This corresponds to
self-attention having sufficient capacity to filter out the tokens in S вҲӘ R from the noise tokens N .
For the attention-only architecture, we additionally require d = в„ҰМғ(max(R, D)). When R вүҘ D,
the total number of parameters Hddh is (up to logs) at least the total number of facts SR. For
the MLP construction, the second condition is that the number of MLP parameters, md, scales
nearly linearly with the number of facts SR. As such, as long as either the total number of self-
attention parameters or the total number of MLP parameters is large enough, 100% accuracy can be
obtained. The single-layer transformer can thus trade off MLP and self-attention parameters while
still maintaining perfect accuracy. This phenomenon is reflected in the experiments in Section 4.4.
We remark that it is straightforward to extend our construction to the case where we only need to
store a size M subset of S Г— R, where the constraints now become Hddh , md = в„ҰМғ(M ).

Proof Sketch. Theorems 3 and 4 both utilize the associative memory framework of Section 3.
First, the key and query matrices of each self-attention head act as a denoiser, selecting the relevant
subject and relation tokens in z1:T while ignoring the noise tokens. To the hth attention head, we
associate a subset S (h) вҠӮ S вҲӘ R of subject and relation tokens. Then, setting
                                (h) вҠӨ   (h)
                                                   X
                             WK WQ вүҲ ОІ                  ПҶ(z)ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ                                (11)
                                                  zвҲҲS (h)

for a large constant ОІ, we see that the hth head will only attend to the tokens in the subset S (h) . We
remark that since the embeddings are d-dimensional, at most d/ poly log(d) embeddings can be in
superposition, and thus we must have S (h) вүӨ d/ poly log(d).
                                                                 (h) вҠӨ   (h)
For the attention-only construction, the output-value matrix WO WV acts as a linear associative
memory, mapping each z in S (h) to a superposition of all possible answers associated with the
subject/relation z. Letting Ph be a projection onto a random dh -dimensional subspace of Rd , we set
                               (h) вҠӨ    (h)
                                               X X
                             WO WV вҲқ                      ПҶ(a)ПҶ(z)вҠӨ Ph .                       (12)
                                              zвҲҲS (h) aвҲҲAz



                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Attention-only Construction                                                    0
                                                         вӢ®                                        1
                                                                                           рқ’ңs
                                 Head hs (attends to s)                                           1

                                                                                                  1

                    s            X вҠӨрқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )             П•(s)    WOвҠӨWV                       0

                                                                                                  0                      0
                                                         вӢ®                                        0                      1

                                                                                              вҲ‘aвҲҲрқ’ң П•(a)             рқ’ңs
                                Rest of heads attend to EOS                                           s
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                    argmax
                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                             a*(s, r)
                                 X   вҠӨ
                                         рқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )       П•(EOS)   WOвҠӨWV                                         рқ’ңr   1

                                                                                                 0                       1
                    r                                    вӢ®                                       0                       0

                                Head hr (attends to r)                                           0          вҲ‘aвҲҲрқ’ң П•(a) + вҲ‘aвҲҲрқ’ң П•(a)
                                                                                                                r            s
                                                                                                  1

                                 X вҠӨрқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )            П•(r)     WOвҠӨWV                рқ’ңr     1

                   EOS                                                                            1

                                                         вӢ®                                       0

                                                                                           вҲ‘aвҲҲрқ’ң П•(a)
                                                                                                      r


                   Attention + MLP Construction
                                                         вӢ®

                                 вҢҲd/dhвҢүheads attends to s
                                                                                      П•Мғ(s)
                    s            X вҠӨрқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )             П•(s)    WOвҠӨWV
                                                         вӢ®
                                Rest of heads attend to EOS                                       П•Мғ(s)   MLP Associative Memory
                                 X вҠӨрқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )                     WOвҠӨWV            0                                                     a*(s, r)
                                                             П•(EOS)
                                                                                                  П•Мғ(r)       x вҶҰ V вҠӨПғ(Wx)
                    r                                    вӢ®

                                вҢҲd/dhвҢүheads attends to r
                                                                                      П•Мғ(r)
                                 X вҠӨрқ’®(XWKвҠӨWQ xT )            П•(r)     WOвҠӨWV
                   EOS

                                                         вӢ®


  Figure 3: Both the Attention-only and Attention+MLP constructions for the factual recall task.


In Lemma 2, we show that this construction stores at most dh tokens per head (i.e S (h) вүІ dh ), and
requires the dimension to scale with the number of elements in superposition (i.e |Az | вүІ d). Since
|Az | вүӨ R + D, and the S (h) partition S вҲӘ R, it suffices to take d вүі R + D and Hdh вүі S + R.
For the MLP construction, we instead associate the subset S (h) with вҢҲd/dh вҢү attention heads. This is
equivalent to having a single full-rank attention head per subset. We set the aggregate output-value
matrix to the identity, so that the output of the self-attention layer is FMHSA (X; Оё) = ПҶ(s) + ПҶ(r).
Finally, the MLP layer acts as an MLP associative memory, mapping ПҶ(s) + ПҶ(r) to ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r))
for each (s, r) pair. Via a similar computation to Theorem 2, it suffices to make the total number of
parameters md be md = в„ҰМғ(SR). Since the S (h) partition S вҲӘ R, it suffices to take Hdh вүі S + R
as well. See Figure 3 for a diagram describing both constructions.

4.4      E MPIRICAL VALIDATION

We next empirically validate the claims of Theorems 3 and 4 that 100% accuracy can be obtained
as long as either the total number of self-attention or MLP parameters scales with SR. We further
observe that 100% accuracy can be achieved as long as the total number of parameters scales with
SR, providing evidence that the model can simultaneously use attention and the MLP to store facts.
In Figure 4, we train a wide range of models of various вҖңshapesвҖқ on datasets of varying sizes. A
model shape is defined by the tuple (Оұ, ОІ, H)2 , and corresponds to the family of models satisfying
Hdh = Оұd and m = ОІd. The total number of model parameters is 4Hdh d + 2md = (4Оұ + 2ОІ)d2 ,
which can thus be varied by increasing d. For a fixed model size (d, H, dh , m), we binary search on
the largest dataset size that can be memorized. Specifically, we fix D = 8 and vary S, R jointly as
S = R. Experiments with different scalings are considered in Appendix A. For each (S, R, D), the
fact dataset is generated at random by selecting |A| = RD, |N | = S + R, and for each s sampling
aвҲ— (s, r) uniformly at random from {(r вҲ’ 1)D + 1, . . . , rD}. We say the dataset was successfully
memorized, and as such SR facts were stored, if the model can obtain an accuracy of at least 99%.
On the left panel of Figure 4 we observe that, across different model shapes, the maximum number
of facts stored scales linearly with the total number of parameters. On the right panel, we consider
a specific dataset with S = 32, R = 32, D = 8, and plot the accuracy as the number of parameters
vary. We observe that the model can trade off MLP parameters for self-attention parameters, while
still maintaining an accuracy of near 1. However, we do still require the total number of attention
parameters to be large enough; this corresponds to the Hdh = в„ҰМғ(S + R) constraint.
   2
       The вҖңstandardвҖқ transformer scaling takes Оұ = 1, ОІ = 4.


                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                              alpha=4.0, beta=4.0
                                                                              alpha=4.0, beta=2.0
                                104                                           alpha=4.0, beta=1.0
                                                                              alpha=4.0, beta=0.5
                                                                              alpha=2.0, beta=4.0
                                                                              alpha=2.0, beta=2.0


       Number of Facts Stored
                                                                              alpha=2.0, beta=1.0
                                                                              alpha=2.0, beta=0.5
                                                                              alpha=2.0, beta=0.25
                                                                              alpha=1.0, beta=2.0
                                103                                           alpha=1.0, beta=1.0
                                                                              alpha=1.0, beta=0.5
                                                                              alpha=1.0, beta=0.25
                                                                              alpha=0.5, beta=4.0
                                                                              alpha=0.5, beta=2.0
                                                                              alpha=0.5, beta=1.0
                                                                              alpha=0.5, beta=0.5
                                                                              alpha=0.5, beta=0.25
                                                                              alpha=0.25, beta=4.0
                                102                                           alpha=0.25, beta=2.0
                                                                              alpha=0.25, beta=1.0
                                                                              alpha=0.25, beta=0.5
                                      103      104            105     106     alpha=0.25, beta=0.25
                                            Number of Parameters              Facts Params



Figure 4: (Left) The number of facts stored scales linearly with the total number of parameters, for a
wide range of model sizes. (Right) For a fixed dataset, the model can trade off MLP parameters for
attention parameters to obtain 100% accuracy. The heatmap color corresponds to model accuracy.


5   O PTIMIZATION DYNAMICS
We next study the optimization dynamics of the factual recall task. To simplify the model, we
consider a linear attention transformer (i.e., the softmax is replaced with the identity map) with
orthogonal embeddings. We set d = |V|, and let the embedding vectors {ПҶ(z)}zвҲҲV satisfy
вҹЁПҶ(z), ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ© = Оҙz=zвҖІ . Such linear attention or orthogonal embeddings assumptions are common
in prior works studying the gradient descent dynamics of transformers (Li et al., 2023; Von Oswald
et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024; Mahankali et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Nichani et al., 2024).
The linear attention model is given by
                                                            Flin (X; Оё) := WOV X вҠӨ XWKQ xT ,                    (13)
where we set dh = d and let WOV := WOвҠӨ WV , WKQ := WK             вҠӨ
                                                                    WQ denote the non-factorized
output-value and key-query matrices. Let pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) вҲҲ вҲҶA be the predicted next token distribution
on an input sequence z1:T , i.e
                                                                             exp (вҹЁПҶ(a), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©)
                                                  pМӮ(a | z1:T ) := P                                        .   (14)
                                                                                exp (вҹЁПҶ(aвҖІ ), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©)
                                                                            aвҖІ вҲҲA
One can then rewrite the cross entropy loss as
                                                            L(Оё) = Ez1:T +1 [вҲ’ log pМӮ(zT +1 | z1:T )].          (15)

We would like to characterize the output of running gradient flow, (i.e ОёМҮ = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё)) with respect to
the non-factorized parameters Оё := {WOV , WKQ } on the cross-entropy loss (15). For notational
convenience, we denote WOV (a, z) := ПҶ(a)вҠӨ WOV ПҶ(z), WKQ (z) := ПҶ(z)вҠӨ WKQ ПҶ(EOS), and
note that by isometry gradient flow on Оё is equivalent to gradient flow on these quantities.
Let us assume that we start from the following вҖңbalancedвҖқ initialization.
Assumption
 p           2. Given an initialization scale Оұ > 0, set WOV (a, z) = Оұ and WKQ (z) =
Оұ |A| + 1 for each a вҲҲ A, z вҲҲ V.

Our first result is that the gradient flow indeed converges to zero loss. As a consequence, the pre-
dicted next token probabilities pМӮ(zT +1 | z1:T ) converge to 1(zT +1 = aвҲ— (s, r)), where s, r are the
subject and relation contained in the sequnece z1:T .
Theorem 5 (Global Convergence). For t вүҘ 0, let Оё(t) be the output of running gradient flow for t
time. For any Оҙ > 0, there exists a time tОҙ such that for t вүҘ tОҙ , L(Оё(t)) вүӨ Оҙ.

We next show that the model undergoes a sequential learning dynamics. Let us assume that the
number of subjects S is much greater than the number of facts R. We show that during the first
stage of training only the WOV (a, r) and WKQ (r) components grow for relations r вҲҲ R, while the
remainder of the parameters stay close to zero. As such, the model gets close to outputting the best
predictor based on just the relation token r. Define pвҲ— (В· | r) to be the conditional distribution of the
answer, given the relation r, i.e p (a | r) := sвҲҲS p(s | r)1(a = aвҲ— (s, r)).
                                   вҲ—
                                              P


                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    3.5                                                                   3.5
                                    3.0   Stage 1:   Stage 2:        Stage 3:                             3.0   Stage 1:   Stage 2:        Stage 3:
                                            Init   Hallucination   Convergence                                    Init   Hallucination   Convergence


               Cross Entropy Loss


                                                                                     Cross Entropy Loss
                                    2.5                                                                   2.5
                                    2.0                              Relation-only                        2.0                              Relation-only
                                                                     Subject-only                                                          Subject-only
                                    1.5                              Total                                1.5                              Total
                                    1.0                                                                   1.0
                                    0.5                                                                   0.5
                                    0.0                                                                   0.0
                                          0     2000       4000     6000      8000                              0      1000      2000     3000      4000
                                                        Steps of GD                                                           Steps of GD

Figure 5: (Left) Loss of the linear attention model with orthogonal embeddings. There is an interme-
diate hallucination stage where the loss plateaus and the model predicts based on only the relation.
(Right) Loss of the softmax attention model with random embeddings. We again observe an inter-
mediate hallucination stage, where the relation-only loss is zero but the total loss is still large.

                                                        вҲҡ                    вҲҡ
Theorem 6 (Sequential Learning). Assume that S вүҘ 8R 2D, and |N | вүҘ 4R 2DT . Let p(s, r) =
 1                                     вҲ—
SR . Pick Пө > 0. There exists runtime T and initialization scale Оұ (both depending on Пө) such that:

      1. For all t вүӨ T вҲ— and z вҲҲ S вҲӘ N , a вҲҲ A, we have |WOV (a, z)|, |WKQ (z)| вүӨ Оұ1/2
      2. There exists t вүӨ T вҲ— such that, for any input sequence z1:T containing a relation r,
         P        вҲ—                       2   2
           aвҲҲA (p (a | r) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T )) вүӨ Пө .

Proofs of Theorems 5 and 6 are deferred to Appendix D.

Remarks. Theorem 6 tells us that at some intermediate time, the prediction of the model pМӮ(В· |
z1:T ) is approximately equal to pвҲ— (В· | r), the conditional distribution of the answer given the relation
r. At this stage, the model ignores all other tokens in the sequence z1:T вҖ“ including the useful subject
token s вҖ“ and predicts based only on the relation r. For example, if S is the set of all countries and
r is the relation вҖңcapital,вҖқ then on the prompt вҖңWhat is the capital of France?вҖқ the model will output
a random countriesвҖҷ capital. We view this as an instance of hallucination: the model is outputting
a plausible, yet ultimately incorrect, answer to the prompt. We remark that without the assumption
that S вү« R, it is possible for this intermediate hallucination stage to exhibit different behavior.

Empirical Validation. We next empirically verify Theorems 5 and 6. We first train the linear
attention model with orthogonal embeddings (15) with S = 16, R = 4 and D = 8, and plot the
loss over time. In the left pane of Figure 5, we observe three distinct stages. At the start of training,
the prediction is close to uniform over all possible answers, and the model obtains a loss of log |A|.
Next, the loss plateaus at log D, and the model outputs the conditional distribution of a given the
relation r. Finally, as training continues, the model escapes the plateau
                                                                          and converges
                                                                                 P         to zero loss.

We include the вҖңrelation-only lossвҖқ in the plot, defined as Ez1:T +1 вҲ’ log          aвҲҲAr  p(a | z1:T ) ,
where any probability mass assigned to an answer which is valid for the relation r is considered to
be correct; the subject-only loss is defined analogously.
In the right pane of Figure 5, we plot the loss of a single softmax attention head with random
embeddings trained on the same factual recall task. We observe similar phenomenology as for linear
attention, and identify an intermediate вҖңhallucinationвҖқ stage where the relation-only loss drops to
zero, but the subject-only loss is still far from zero.

6    L OWER B OUNDS
In this section, we argue via information-theoretic arguments that the results from Sections 3 and 4
are optimal up to logarithmic factors. Proofs are deferred to Appendix E.

Associative Memories. Let [N ] and [M ] be the input and output vocabularies, respectively. To
establish a lower bound, we must consider a distribution over association functions f вҲ— . For each
x вҲҲ [N ], assume that the output f вҲ— (x) is sampled independently from the uniform distribution over
[M ]. We model the learning protocol as follows. At train time, the learner observes the randomly


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sampled ground truth f вҲ— , and writes down a B bit model F . At test time, the learner generates a
set of predictions fЛҶ вҲҲ RN Г—M from F , where fЛҶ(x) вҲҲ вҲҶM is the prediction for f вҲ— (x). Both the
mappings f вҲ— вҶ’ F and F вҶ’ fЛҶ can be randomized. Let p be a probability distribution over the input
space [N ]; assume WLOG that p(1) вүҘ p(2) вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ p(N ). The goal of the learner is to minimize
the cross entropy loss L(fЛҶ) = вҲ’ xвҲҲ[N ] p(x) log fЛҶ(x)f вҲ— (x) .
                                 P

Theorem 7. The expected loss of the learner can be lower bounded by
                                  h     i
                             E вҲ— ЛҶ L(fЛҶ) вүҘ log M В·
                                                    P
                              f ,f                              B p(x).
                                                         xвүҘвҢҲ log M вҢү                          (16)

We thus see that in order to obtain zero loss, the learner must use B вүҘ N log M bits; this matches
the construction from Theorem 2 up to log factors. As a corollary of Theorem 7, we can obtain
scaling law lower bounds with respect to model size.
                                                                                h       i
Corollary 1. Assume that p is a power law, i.e p(x) вҲқ xвҲ’Оұ for Оұ > 1. Then E вҲ— ЛҶ L(fЛҶ) вүі B 1вҲ’Оұ .
                                                                               f ,f


This lower bound is obtained by the MLP associative memory by storing the most probable OМғ(B)
associations. This matches the scaling law with respect to model size considered in Michaud et al.
(2023); Cabannes et al. (2024), which also considered storing the OМғ(B) most frequent associations.

Remark. The constructions in Section 3 require storing OМғ(N ) network parameters, along with
input and output embeddings. We view F in Theorem 7 as containing only the network parameters,
while the embeddings are вҖңglobalвҖқ quantities, independent of the ground truth f вҲ— , used to compute
the predictions fЛҶ. This matches our interpretation of the embeddings as fixed global quantities which
cannot be modified by the associative memory. We remark that the associative memory constructions
from Section 3 match the lower bound, since they hold for OМғ(1)-bit precision (Corollary 2).

Factual Recall. We next prove a lower bound for the factual recall task; a similar bound was
proven in Allen-Zhu & Li (2024). Let S and R be the fixed set of subjects and relations and V be
the full vocabulary, where |V| вү« |S|, |R|. The association function aвҲ— : S Г— R вҶ’ V is sampled
randomly as follows. First, for each relation r вҲҲ R, the answer set Ar is chosen to be a uniformly
random size D subset of V, conditional on all subsets Ar being disjoint. For each s вҲҲ S, the answer
aвҲ— (s, r) is sampled uniformly at random from Ar . The learner sees the association aвҲ— , writes down
a B bit model F , and from F generates a set of predictions fЛҶ вҲҲ RSГ—RГ—|V| , where fЛҶ(s, r) вҲҲ вҲҶV
is the prediction for aвҲ— (s, r). We lower bound L, the expected cross entropy loss with respect to a
distribution p(s, r) over S Г— R, defined as follows:
                                 h    i        h P                                i
                   L := EaвҲ— ,fЛҶ L(fЛҶ) = EaвҲ— ,fЛҶ вҲ’ s,r p(s, r) log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) .             (17)

Theorem 8. Assume that |V| вүҘ 2RD and S вүҘ CD log 2D2 log |V | for sufficiently large constant
C. There exists a constant c вҲҲ (0, 1) such that, if L = 0, the number of bits B must satisfy
                               B вүҘ SR log D + (1 вҲ’ c)RD log (|V|/D)                              (18)

We thus see that OМғ(SR) parameters are needed to achieve a loss of zero. For this lower bound, the
learner knows the sets S and R and does not have to distinguish them from the noise tokens N ,
making it a strictly easier problem than the factual recall task in Section 4.

7   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we showed that shallow transformers can use associative memories to obtain near
optimal storage capacity for factual recall tasks. Furthermore, by studying the optimization dynam-
ics of a simplified model, we also showed that transformers undergo an intermediate hallucination
stage. One interesting direction of future work is to better understand the role of the embeddings,
and whether there exists an optimal choice of (non-random) embeddings leading to more efficient
constructions. Another important direction is to understand the implication of our results towards
understanding empirical LLM scaling laws (Hoffmann et al., 2022). In particular, does there exist
a scaling law lower bound for the factual recall task? Finally, it would be very interesting to under-
stand the extent to which larger models utilize similar associative memory constructions, and if one
can probe whether specific вҖңfactsвҖқ are stored in either the self-attention matrices or the MLP.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was conducted while EN was an intern at the Flatiron Institute. JDL acknowledges
support of NSF CCF 2002272, NSF IIS 2107304, NSF CIF 2212262, ONR Young Investigator
Award, and NSF CAREER Award 2144994. This work was conducted in part at the Simons Institute.

R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to imple-
 ment preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.3, knowledge capacity
  scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05405, 2024.

William Beckner. Inequalities in fourier analysis. Annals of Mathematics, 102(1):159вҖ“182, 1975.
 ISSN 0003486X, 19398980. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1970980.

William Beckner. Sobolev inequalities, the poisson semigroup, and analysis on the sphere sn. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 89(11):4816вҖ“4819,
 1992. ISSN 00278424, 10916490. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2359537.

Alberto Bietti, Vivien Cabannes, Diane Bouchacourt, Herve Jegou, and Leon Bottou. Birth of
  a transformer: A memory viewpoint. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2023.

SeМҒbastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Yin Tat Lee, and Dan Mikulincer. Network size and size of the
   weights in memorization with two-layers neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 2020.

Vivien Cabannes, Elvis Dohmatob, and Alberto Bietti. Scaling laws for associative memories. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Mete Demircigil, Judith Heusel, Matthias LoМҲwe, Sven Upgang, and Franck Vermet. On a model
 of associative memory with huge storage capacity. Journal of Statistical Physics, 168:288вҖ“299,
 2017.

Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Gpt3. int8 (): 8-bit matrix
  multiplication for transformers at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  30318вҖ“30332, 2022.

Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2022/toy_model/index.html.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
 (EMNLP), 2021.

Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing (EMNLP), 2023.

Gaurav Ghosal, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding finetuning for factual
  knowledge extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14785, 2024.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Benjamin Hoover, Yuchen Liang, Bao Pham, Rameswar Panda, Hendrik Strobelt, Duen Horng
  Chau, Mohammed Zaki, and Dmitry Krotov. Energy transformer. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
John J Hopfield. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
  abilities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 79(8):2554вҖ“2558, 1982.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and CleМҒment Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Samy Jelassi, Michael Sander, and Yuanzhi Li. Vision transformers provably learn spatial structure.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Samy Jelassi, Clara Mohri, David Brandfonbrener, Alex Gu, Nikhil Vyas, Nikhil Anand, David
  Alvarez-Melis, Yuanzhi Li, Sham M Kakade, and Eran Malach. Mixture of parrots: Experts
  improve memorization more than reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19034, 2024.
Yibo Jiang, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Do llms dream of ele-
  phants (when told not to)? latent concept association and associative memory in transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18400, 2024.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423вҖ“438, 2020.
Tokio Kajitsuka and Issei Sato. Are transformers with one layer self-attention using low-rank weight
  matrices universal approximators? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14023, 2023.
Tokio Kajitsuka and Issei Sato. Optimal memorization capacity of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.17677, 2024.
Teuvo Kohonen. Correlation matrix memories. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 1972.
Dmitry Krotov and John J Hopfield. Dense associative memory for pattern recognition. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Hung Le, Truyen Tran, and Svetha Venkatesh. Self-attentive associative memory. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 5682вҖ“5691. PMLR, 2020.
Yuchen Li, Yuanzhi Li, and Andrej Risteski. How do transformers learn topic structure: Towards a
  mechanistic understanding. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023.
Carlo Lucibello and Marc MeМҒzard. Exponential capacity of dense associative memories. Physical
  Review Letters, 132(7):077301, 2024.
Ang Lv, Kaiyi Zhang, Yuhan Chen, Yulong Wang, Lifeng Liu, Ji-Rong Wen, Jian Xie, and Rui
  Yan. Interpreting key mechanisms of factual recall in transformer-based language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.19521, 2024.
Liam Madden and Christos Thrampoulidis. Memory capacity of two layer neural networks with
  smooth activations. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 6(3):679вҖ“702, 2024.
Liam Madden, Curtis Fox, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Upper and lower memory capacity bounds
  of transformers for next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13718, 2024.
Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is prov-
  ably the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Sadegh Mahdavi, Renjie Liao, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Memorization capacity of multi-head
  attention in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02010, 2023.
R. McEliece, E. Posner, E. Rodemich, and S. Venkatesh. The capacity of the hopfield associative
  memory. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 33(4):461вҖ“482, 1987. doi: 10.1109/TIT.
  1987.1057328.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Eric Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. The quantization model of neural scaling.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Ashley Montanaro. Some applications of hypercontractive inequalities in quantum information the-
  ory. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 53(12), 2012.
Neel Nanda, S Rajamanoharan, J KramaМҒr, and R Shah.           Fact finding: Attempt-
  ing to reverse-engineer factual recall on the neuron level.   AI Alignment Forum,
  2023. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/iGuwZTHWb6DFY3sKB/
  fact-finding-attempting-to-reverse-engineer-factual-recall.
Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2024.
Fabio Petroni, Tim RocktaМҲschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? In Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2019.
Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, Mikhail Belkin, and Caroline Uhler. Overparameterized neural
  networks implement associative memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117
  (44):27162вҖ“27170, 2020.
Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard SchaМҲfl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Thomas
  Adler, Lukas Gruber, Markus Holzleitner, Milena PavlovicМҒ, Geir Kjetil Sandve, et al. Hopfield
  networks is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217, 2020.
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you pack into the
  parameters of a language model? In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and JuМҲrgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2021.
Charlie Snell, Ruiqi Zhong, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Approximating how single head
  attention learns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07601, 2021.
Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon Du. Scan and snap: Understanding train-
  ing dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, and Ohad Shamir. On the optimal memorization power of relu neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03187, 2021.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, JoaМғo Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151вҖ“35174. PMLR, 2023.
David J Willshaw, O Peter Buneman, and Hugh Christopher Longuet-Higgins. Non-holographic
  associative memory. Nature, 222(5197):960вҖ“962, 1969.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(49):1вҖ“55, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                               A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
A.1                             MLP A SSOCIATIVE M EMORY

In Figure 6, we train MLP associative memories to store the association f вҲ— (x) = x mod M . We
fix M = 32 throughout. In this case, we see that the number of associations N which can be stored
by a model with md parameters scales as N вҲқ md. This linear scaling in the absence of logarithmic
factors is due to the fact that the number of output tokens M is a constant, and does not scale with
the number of input tokens N .

                                                                            MLP Associative Memory
                                                                                     m/d = 1
                                                                    104              m/d = 2
                                                                                     m/d = 4
                                                                                     m/d = 8
                                                                    103              N md
                                                              N


                                                                    102

                                                                            102                  103                                  104
                                                                                                    md
Figure 6: We train an MLP associative memory to store the association f вҲ— (x) = x mod 32. Em-
pirically, md вҲқ N parameters are required to store N associations.


A.2                             FACTUAL R ECALL

In Figures 7 to 9, we repeat the experiment in the left pane of Figure 4, for different choices of H
and scalings of (S, R, D). In all plots, we observe the general trend that the number of facts stored
scales proportionally to the number of model parameters.
                                                                                                                                          H = 16, D = 8, S = R
                                          H = 4, D = 8, S = R                                                                                                        alpha=4.0, beta=4.0
                                                                             alpha=4.0, beta=4.0                                                                     alpha=4.0, beta=2.0
                          104                                                alpha=4.0, beta=2.0                              104                                    alpha=4.0, beta=1.0
                                                                             alpha=4.0, beta=1.0                                                                     alpha=4.0, beta=0.5
                                                                             alpha=4.0, beta=0.25                                                                    alpha=4.0, beta=0.25
                                                                             alpha=2.0, beta=4.0                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=4.0
                                                                                                     Number of Facts Stored


                                                                             alpha=2.0, beta=2.0                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=2.0
 Number of Facts Stored


                                                                             alpha=2.0, beta=1.0                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=1.0
                                                                             alpha=2.0, beta=0.5                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=0.5
                          103                                                alpha=2.0, beta=0.25                                                                    alpha=2.0, beta=0.25
                                                                             alpha=1.0, beta=4.0                              103                                    alpha=1.0, beta=4.0
                                                                             alpha=1.0, beta=2.0                                                                     alpha=1.0, beta=2.0
                                                                             alpha=1.0, beta=1.0                                                                     alpha=1.0, beta=1.0
                                                                             alpha=1.0, beta=0.5                                                                     alpha=1.0, beta=0.5
                                                                             alpha=1.0, beta=0.25                                                                    alpha=1.0, beta=0.25
                                                                             alpha=0.5, beta=4.0                                                                     alpha=0.5, beta=4.0
                          102                                                alpha=0.5, beta=2.0                                                                     alpha=0.5, beta=2.0
                                                                             alpha=0.5, beta=1.0                                                                     alpha=0.5, beta=1.0
                                                                             alpha=0.5, beta=0.5                                                                     alpha=0.5, beta=0.5
                                                                             alpha=0.5, beta=0.25                             102                                    alpha=0.5, beta=0.25
                                                                             alpha=0.25, beta=4.0                                                                    alpha=0.25, beta=4.0
                                                                             alpha=0.25, beta=2.0                                                                    alpha=0.25, beta=2.0
                                                                             alpha=0.25, beta=1.0                                   103         104            105   alpha=0.25, beta=1.0
                                    103         104           105     106    alpha=0.25, beta=0.5                                           Number of Parameters     alpha=0.25, beta=0.5
                                          Number of Parameters               alpha=0.25, beta=0.25                                                                   alpha=0.25, beta=0.25
                                                                             Facts Params                                                                            Facts Params



Figure 7: We repeat the experiment in Figure 4, varying the number of head to be 4 (Left) or 16
(Right). In both cases, we observe that the number of facts stored scales linear with the parameter
count.


A.3                             E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Figures 1, 6: For the MLP associative memory experiments, for each choice of m, d, N , we first
sample random embeddings {ex }xвҲҲ[N ] , {uy }yвҲҲ[M ] i.i.d uniformly over the sphere. We train a two-
layer neural network on the cross entropy loss to predict the association f вҲ— (x) = x. We use standard
parameterization and initialization, and the activation Пғ = ReLU. The network is trained using
ADAM with a learning rate of 10вҲ’2 for 214 steps. We compute the maximum accuracy the network


                                                                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             H = 8, D = S = R                                                                            H = 16, D = S = R
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=4.0
                          104                                              alpha=4.0, beta=2.0
                                                                                                                            104
                                                                                                                                                                    alpha=4.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=4.0, beta=0.25
 Number of Facts Stored                                                    alpha=2.0, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=4.0


                                                                                                   Number of Facts Stored
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=0.25
                          103                                              alpha=1.0, beta=4.0                              103                                     alpha=1.0, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=1.0, beta=0.25
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=0.5
                          102                                              alpha=0.5, beta=0.25                             102                                     alpha=0.5, beta=0.25
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=4.0                                                                     alpha=0.25, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=2.0                                                                     alpha=0.25, beta=2.0
                                103            104            105    106   alpha=0.25, beta=1.0                                   103      104             105      alpha=0.25, beta=1.0
                                             Number of Parameters          alpha=0.25, beta=0.5                                          Number of Parameters       alpha=0.25, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=0.25                                                                    alpha=0.25, beta=0.25
                                                                           Facts Params                                                                             Facts Params



Figure 8: We repeat Figure 4 on factual recall tasks where each subject and relation map to a distinct
answer (i.e D = S).

                                            H = 8, D = 8, S = R 2                                                                       H = 16, D = 8, S = R 2
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=4.0
                          104                                              alpha=4.0, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=1.0                              104                                     alpha=4.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=4.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=4.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=4.0, beta=0.25
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=4.0
 Number of Facts Stored


                                                                                                   Number of Facts Stored
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=2.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=2.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=2.0, beta=0.25
                          103                                              alpha=1.0, beta=4.0                              103                                     alpha=1.0, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=1.0, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=1.0, beta=0.25                                                                     alpha=1.0, beta=0.25
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=4.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=2.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=2.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=1.0                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=1.0
                                                                           alpha=0.5, beta=0.5                                                                      alpha=0.5, beta=0.5
                          102                                              alpha=0.5, beta=0.25                             102                                     alpha=0.5, beta=0.25
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=4.0                                                                     alpha=0.25, beta=4.0
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=2.0                                                                     alpha=0.25, beta=2.0
                                      103         104          105   106   alpha=0.25, beta=1.0                                   103       104               105   alpha=0.25, beta=1.0
                                             Number of Parameters          alpha=0.25, beta=0.5                                          Number of Parameters       alpha=0.25, beta=0.5
                                                                           alpha=0.25, beta=0.25                                                                    alpha=0.25, beta=0.25
                                                                           Facts Params                                                                             Facts Params



Figure 9: We repeat Figure 4 on factual recall tasks where the number of subjects is much larger
than the number of relations; specifically, we take S = R2 .


achieves over the training run, and say that the network has вҖңstoredвҖқ the dataset if the highest accu-
racy is at least 99%. We repeat this procedure to binary search over N , to find the largest value of
N such that the network achieves an accuracy of at least 99%. Error bars are shown for 5 random
seeds.

Figures 4, 7, 8, 9: We consider a fixed prompt length of T = 32, and train the models via online
batch gradient descent with batch size 1024 on the population loss (i.e we sample an independent
batch at each timestep). We use standard parameterization and initialization for both self-attention
and the MLP. For a fixed model size, we binary search over the maximum value of SR such that the
model achieves an accuracy of at least 99%. All models were trained using ADAM for 214 steps,
with a sweep over learning rates in {.001, .003, .01} (where we consider the best performing model
over all learning rates).

Figure 5: In the left pane we train a linear attention head with orthogonal embeddings. The
weights are all initialized to be equal to 10вҲ’5 . In the right plot, we train a softmax attention head
with random embeddings, which are fixed throughout training.
Code for all the experiments can be found at https://github.com/eshnich/
factual-recall-iclr.

B                           P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3
                                                                                              вҠӨ             вҲ—
                                                                           P
Proof of Theorem 1. Let us set W =                                           zвҲҲ[N ] uf вҲ— (z) ez . For y Мё= f (x), define the quantity Оіxy by

                                                                      Оіxy = (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ W ex .


                                                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first see that (where the expectation is taken over the randomness of the embedding vectors)
                                   X
                                        E (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ uf вҲ— (z) E eвҠӨ

                        E[Оіxy ] =                                       z ex
                                   zвҲҲ[N ]

                                = E (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ uf вҲ— (x)


                                = 1.
We can next compute the second moment of Оіxy . Since the ez are drawn uniformly on the sphere,
the eвҠӨ
     z ex terms for z Мё= x are independent and mean zero. Therefore
                        X h                              2 i h       2 i
               2
            E[Оіxy ]=        E (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ uf вҲ— (z) E eвҠӨ  z ex
                      zвҲҲ[N ]
                                          2   1 X h                                    2 i
                    = E 1 вҲ’ uвҠӨ  вҲ—
                               f (x) u y     +          E   (uf
                                                                            вҠӨ
                                                                вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy ) uf вҲ— (z)
                                                 d
                                                   zМё=x

                          1 1   X       2                             1
                    =1+ +                 В· 1(f вҲ— (z) Мё= y) + 1 +         В· 1(f вҲ— (z) = y)
                          d d           d                             d
                                zМё=x
                              2
                           1       2(N вҲ’ 2)
                    = 1+        +              .
                           d            d2
Therefore
                                            2   1   2(N вҲ’ 2)  1 N
                           Var(Оіxy ) =        +   +          вүІ + 2.
                                            d d2       d2     d d

Let Оҙ be a fixed failure probability, and let Оҙ вҖІ = NОҙM . Observe that Оіxy is a degree 4 polynomial. By
Lemma 14, by choosing d вүҘ C log4 (1/Оҙ вҖІ ) and d2 вүҘ CN log4 (1/Оҙ вҖІ ) for a sufficiently large constant
                  16eвҲ’1 log4 (1/Оҙ)Var(Оіxy )
C, we have that           (EОіxy )2          вүӨ 1, and thus P(Оіxy вүӨ 0) вүӨ Оҙ вҖІ .
Therefore union bounding over all (x, y) pairs with y Мё= f вҲ— (x), we have that
                                 P(вҲғ Оіxy вүӨ 0) вүӨ N (M вҲ’ 1)Оҙ вҖІ вүӨ Оҙ.
Thus with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Оіxy > 0 for all x and y Мё= f вҲ— (x), and on this event
arg maxyвҲҲ[M ] uвҠӨ         вҲ—
               y W ex = f (x) for all x вҲҲ [N ].


For Theorem 2, we need the following assumption on the activation Пғ.
                                                                   Pq
Assumption 3. Пғ is a polynomial of degree q. Furthermore, if Пғ(z) = k=0 ck hk (z) is the Hermite
decomposition of Пғ, then ck Мё= 0 for all 0 вүӨ k вүӨ q.

We prove the following formal version of Theorem 2.
Theorem 9. Let Пө вҲҲ (0, 1) be a fixed constant. Assume that d вүҘ N Пө and N вүҘ C1 (Пө), where C1 (Пө)
is a constant depending only on Пө. Assume that q in Assumption 3 satisfies q = CПө2 for some C2 > 2.
                                    C /Пө
Then, if md вүі N (C3 log(M N/Оҙ)) 4 , with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the draw of the embeddings,
there exists V , W such that
                                 arg max uвҠӨ  вҠӨ            вҲ—
                                          y V Пғ(W ex ) = f (x)                                    (19)
                                     yвҲҲ[M ]

for all x вҲҲ [N ].

Proof of Theorem 2. Let us consider the linearization, or Neural Tangent Kernel, of F :
                                                          X
        FNTK (z) = V вҠӨ Пғ вҖІ (W 0 z) вҠҷ (W вҲ’ W 0 )z =            vi Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi0 , zвҹ©)вҹЁwi вҲ’ wi0 , zвҹ©.


                                                            iвҲҲ[m]



                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where W 0 is the initialization which we are linearizing with respect to. By rescaling the parameters
as W вҲ’ W 0 вҶҗ Пө(W вҲ’ W 0 ) and V вҶҗ ПөвҲ’1 V , we see that F вҶ’ FNTK as Пө вҶ’ 0. It thus suffices
to work with FNTK instead of F . For ease of notation, we redefine W 0 as W , and W вҲ’ W 0 as Q,
so that
                                          X
                                 F (z) =        vi Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , zвҹ©)вҹЁqi , zвҹ©
                                                iвҲҲ[m]

Let k be a even integer, to be chosen later. Assume without loss of generality that ck+1 > 0 (if it is
negative, we can simply negate all the qi in the construction below). Set
                                   1 X
                             qi =            hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©ez ,
                                   m
                                            zвҲҲ[N ]

where hk is the kth Hermite polynomial. Then
                       1     X
             F (ex ) =             vi вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)вҹЁex , ez вҹ©
                       m
                                 iвҲҲ[m],zвҲҲ[N ]

As in the proof of Theorem 1, define the margin between x and some y Мё= f вҲ— (x) as
       Оіxy = (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ F (ex )
              1      X
           =                вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)вҹЁex , ez вҹ©.
             m
                   iвҲҲ[m],zвҲҲ[N ]

We will show that, with high probability over the draw of the embeddings over the sphere, and the
vi , wi independently from the standard Gaussian, that Оіxy > 0 for all y Мё= f вҲ— (x).
The expectation of the margin is
                  X
                       E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)вҹЁex , ez вҹ©

        E[Оіxy ] =
                       z
                            X
                             E вҹЁuf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©вҹЁez , ex вҹ©k+1

                  = ck+1
                             z
                  = ck+1 .
                                      xy
We next compute the variance. Define Пүiz as
                xy
              Пүiz  = вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)вҹЁex , ez вҹ©,
                                                                                    h            i
                1
                   P      xy                                          вҖІ                 xy xy
so that Оіxy = m         Пү
                     i,z iz  . First, observe   that  when     z Мё
                                                                 =  z   , we have E   Пү   Пү
                                                                                        iz jz  вҖІ   = 0, since k is
even. For i Мё= j, we have that
                      xy xy
                         Пүjz = c2k+1 E вҹЁuf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©2 E[вҹЁez , ex вҹ©2(k+1) ]

                  E Пүiz


First, by Lemma 12 we have that

                                                         1                       x=z
                           E[вҹЁez , ex вҹ©2(k+1) ] вүӨ                                       .
                                                         (2k + 2)k+1 dвҲ’(k+1)     x Мё= z
Next, we see that
                                                         1 + d1   f вҲ— (x) = f вҲ— (z) or y = f вҲ— (z)

               E вҹЁuf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©2 =

                                                         2                                         .
                                                         d        otherwise
Finally, we have that
        xy xy
          Пүiz ] = E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©2 вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©2 Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)2 hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)2 вҹЁex , ez вҹ©2

   E[Пүiz
                = E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©2 вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©2 E Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)2 hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)2 вҹЁex , ez вҹ©2 .


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first quantity can be bounded as
                                                                              1/2                     1/2
       E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©2 вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©2 вүӨ E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy вҹ©4     E вҹЁvi , uf вҲ— (z) вҹ©4

                                                         вҲҡ вҲҡ
                                                   вүӨ 2 В· 3 В· 3 = 6.

The second term is bounded as
                                                                        1/4                    1/4               1/2
E Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)2 hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)2 вҹЁex , ez вҹ©2 вүӨ E Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)8     E hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)8     E вҹЁex , ez вҹ©4


By Gaussian hypercontractivity (Lemma 13),
                                                  1/4
                             E Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwi , ex вҹ©)8      = вҲҘПғ вҖІ вҲҘ2L8 вүӨ 8q вҲҘПғ вҖІ вҲҘ2L2 вүІ 8q ,


and likewise
                                                               1/4
                                           E hk (вҹЁez , wi вҹ©)8      вүӨ 8k .


                        1/2
                            вүӨ 4dвҲ’1 if x Мё= z, and 1 otherwise. Altogether,

Finally, E вҹЁex , ez вҹ©4
                                   xy xy
                                      Пүiz ] вүІ 23q+3k dвҲ’1 + 1(x = z) .

                               E[Пүiz

Altogether, we get that
                           2   m вҲ’ 1 X   xy xy     1 X    xy xy
                        E Оіxy =        E Пүiz Пүjz +     E[Пүiz Пүiz ].
                                m    z
                                                   m z



The first quantity is
                 X   xy xy
                                   1 2
                   E Пүiz Пүjz вүӨ 1 +     ck+1 + c2k+1 (2k + 2)k+1 dвҲ’(k+1) В· 2N.
                 z
                                   d

The second quantity is

                                    X        xy xy                      N
                                          E[Пүiz Пүiz ] вүӨ 23q+3k       1+    .
                                      z
                                                                        d

Therefore
                                                 1 (2k)k+1 N   23q+3k N
                                 Var(Оіxy ) вүІ       +  k+1
                                                             +          .
                                                 d   d            md
Choose k = 2вҢҲ 1Пө вҢү; then
                                             dk           N
                                                    вүҘ            вүҘ1
                                          (2k)k+1 N   (4/Пө)1+2/Пө
for N вүҘ C1 (Пө), and so

                                                        1 23q+3k N
                                          Var(Оіxy ) вүІ     +        .
                                                        d    md
Observe that Оіxy is a degree 2q + 2k + 4 вүӨ 4q + 4 polynomial. If md вүі N В· C3q log4q+4 (1/Оҙ вҖІ ) for
                             24q+4 eвҲ’1 log4q+4 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )Var(Оіxy )
unspecified constant C3 , then            (EОіxy )2               вүӨ 1, and thus by Lemma 14, we have
that P(Оіxy вүӨ 0) вүӨ Оҙ . Choosing Оҙ = M N and union bounding over all (x, y) pairs with y Мё= f вҲ— (x)
                   вҖІ            вҖІ      Оҙ

yields the desired result.



                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1    B OUNDED B IT C OMPLEXITY

Corollary 2. Under the setting of Theorem 1, if d2 вүі N poly log N , then with high probability
there exists a quantized weight matrix WМғ , where each weight requires O(log d) bits to store, such
that
                             arg max uвҠӨ          вҲ—
                                      y WМғ ex = f (x) for all x вҲҲ [N ].                            (20)
                                  yвҲҲ[M ]


Proof. One sees fromPthe proof of Theorem 1 that, with high probability over the embeddings, the
weight matrix W = zвҲҲ[N ] uf вҲ— (z) eвҠӨ                                    1               вҲ—
                                     z has a margin Оіxy satisfies Оіxy вүҘ 2 for all y Мё= f (x). Each
entry of W lies in the interval [вҲ’N, N ]. For some Пө > 0, define WМғ by rounding each entry of W
to the nearest multiple of Пө. By definition, W вҲ’ WМғ           вүӨ Пө. We also see that
                                                          вҲһ

                            uвҠӨ
                             y (W вҲ’ WМғ )ex вүӨ W вҲ’ WМғ               uy eвҠӨ
                                                                      x 1 вүӨ dПө.
                                                              вҲһ
                   1
Thus choosing Пө < 8d , the margin of the quantized network satisfies
                   ОіМғxy := (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ WМғ ex
                        вүҘ (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ W ex вҲ’ (uf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ uy )вҠӨ (W вҲ’ WМғ )ex
                          1
                        вүҘ    вҲ’ 2dПө
                          2
                        > 0.
Finally, the number of bits required to store each weight is log(2N/Пө) = log(16N d) = O(log d).


We remark that a similar quantization argument was proven in Jelassi et al. (2024).

C     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
Lemma 1. Let V (h) вҠӮ S вҲӘ R. Assume that d вүі V (h) log(|V|/Оҙ). Define v :=
                                                                                      P
                                                                                          zвҲҲV (h) ПҶ(z) +
1
2 ПҶ(EOS). Then, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the draw of the embeddings,
                                                          1                  1
                            вҹЁv, ПҶ(z)вҹ© > вҹЁv, ПҶ(EOS)вҹ© +       > вҹЁv, ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ© +
                                                          4                  2
for any z вҲҲ V (h) and z вҖІ МёвҲҲ V (h) .

Proof. Define Оіz as
                                                                z вҲҲ V (h)
                                      пЈұ
                                      пЈІвҹЁv, ПҶ(z)вҹ© вҲ’ 1
                                 Оіz := вҹЁv, ПҶ(EOS)вҹ© вҲ’ 21         z = EOS
                                        вҹЁv, ПҶ(z)вҹ©               z МёвҲҲ V (h)
                                      пЈі

We first see that E[Оіz ] = 0.
Next, observe that
                                 (P
                                                          вҖІ
                                     вҖІ    (h) вҹЁПҶ(z), ПҶ(z )вҹ©      z МёвҲҲ V (h)
                             Оіz = Pz вҲҲV                      вҖІ          (h)
                                   z вҖІ вҲҲV (h) \{z} вҹЁПҶ(z), ПҶ(z )вҹ© z вҲҲ V

Since each of the вҹЁПҶ(z), ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ© are independent subGaussian variables with variance proxy 1/d, by
HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality we have that, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ ,
                                             s
                                               V (h) В· log(1/Оҙ вҖІ )
                                     |Оіz | вүІ                       .
                                                       d
Setting Оҙ вҖІ = Оҙ/|V| and union bounding over all z вҲҲ V yields the desired result.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1    C ONSTRUCTION VIA S ELF -ATTENTION

Lemma 2. Let V (h) вҠӮ V, and for each z вҲҲ V (h) , let Az вҠӮ V.                                               Assume that d вүі
maxzвҲҲV (h) |Az | log6 (|V|/Оҙ) and dh вүі V (h) log6 (|V|/Оҙ) Define
                                                          dh
                                                d X X X
                                     W :=                    ПҶ(a)ПҶ(z)вҠӨ wi wiвҠӨ ,
                                                dh     z i=1
                                                   (h)
                                                    zвҲҲV      aвҲҲA
where wi are chosen uniformly on the sphere of radius 1, conditioned on being orthogonal to
ПҶ(EOS). Then, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the draw of the embeddings and the wi ,
                                                               1
                              ПҶ(a)вҠӨ W ПҶ(z) вҲ’ 1(a вҲҲ Az ) вүӨ
                                                               5
for all z вҲҲ V (h) , a вҲҲ V.

Proof. Define
                                                     Оіaz := ПҶ(a)вҠӨ W ПҶ(z).
We first see that пЈ®                                                                            пЈ№
                             X        X                                                               dвҲ’1
      E[Оіaz ] = EпЈ°                             вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©вҹЁПҶ(z), PПҶ(EOS)
                                                                     вҠҘ
                                                                            ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©пЈ» =                   В· 1(a вҲҲ Az ).
                                                                                                       d
                           z вҖІ вҲҲV (h) aвҖІ вҲҲAz
We next compute the variance. For a МёвҲҲ Az ,
                        пЈ®пЈ«                                                             пЈ¶2 пЈ№
                     2                       dh
            2   d пЈҜ            X X X
         E Оіaz  = 2 EпЈ°пЈӯ                         вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©вҹЁПҶ(z), wi вҹ©вҹЁwi , ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©пЈё пЈ»
                                                                                          пЈә
                   dh        вҖІ  (h) вҖІ   z вҖІ i=1
                                        z вҲҲV        a вҲҲA

Define ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ i = вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©вҹЁПҶ(z), wi вҹ©вҹЁwi , ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©. We see that E[Пүa1 z1 i Пүa2 z2 j ] is nonzero only
if a1 = a2 and z1 = z2 . For i Мё= j, we have that
        E[ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ i ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ j ] = E вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©2 вҹЁПҶ(z), wi вҹ©вҹЁwi , ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©вҹЁПҶ(z), wj вҹ©вҹЁwj , ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©

                                                       h                              i
                              = dвҲ’2 E вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©2 E вҹЁПҶ(z), PПҶ(EOS)
                                                                    вҠҘ
                                                                            ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©2


                                  вүӨ dвҲ’2 ПҒaaвҖІ ПҒzzвҖІ ,

                     1
                    i=j
where ПҒij =                . Also,
                     dвҲ’1
                    i Мё= j
                   E Пүa2вҖІ zвҖІ i = E вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©2 вҹЁПҶ(z), wi вҹ©2 вҹЁwi , ПҶ(z вҖІ )вҹ©2 .


Since E wiвҠ—4 = (dвҲ’1)(d+1)
                       3             вҠҘ
                                           )вҠ—2 ,

                              Sym (PПҶ(EOS)
                                                                                                   !
                                                                 2 2
                                                                             h                   i
                    вҲ’1               вҖІ 2          вҠҘ                                вҠҘ         вҖІ 2
   2            2

E ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ i вүӨ (d вҲ’ 1) E вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(a )вҹ©       E PПҶ(EOS) ПҶ(z)             + 2E вҹЁПҶ(z), PПҶ(EOS) ПҶ(z )вҹ©

          вүӨ dвҲ’2 ПҒaaвҖІ (1 + 2ПҒzzвҖІ ).
Altogether,
                                  dh
   2   d2             X         X X
E Оіaz = 2                                       E[ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ i ПүaвҖІ zвҖІ j ]
       dh
                  z вҖІ вҲҲV (h) aвҖІ вҲҲAzвҖІ i,j=1
               X           X   dh вҲ’ 1            1

         вүӨ                            ПҒaa ПҒzz +
                                         вҖІ   вҖІ     ПҒaa (1 + 2ПҒzz )
                                                      вҖІ         вҖІ

                            zвҖІ
                                 dh             dh
             z вҖІ вҲҲV   (h) вҖІ
                        a вҲҲA
           dh + 2 X          d + dh + 1   X                                    X
         =            ПҒaaвҖІ +                                                            ПҒaaвҖІ
             dh   вҖІ
                                ddh
                    z      a вҲҲA         вҖІ (h)                 z вҲҲV       \{z} aвҖІ вҲҲAzвҖІ
                                                                                                                           вҖІ
                                                                                                      пЈ«                        пЈ¶

                 dh + 2

                                               |Az |

                                                                  d + dh + 1     X                             вҖІ
                                                                                                                      Az
         вүӨ                        1(a вҲҲ Az ) +                  +            В·                        пЈӯ1(a вҲҲ Az ) +            пЈё,
                   dh                           d                    ddh       вҖІ (h)
                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                    z вҲҲV       \{z}



                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and thus
                                       2   dвҲ’1
                        Var(Оіaz ) = E Оіaz   вҲ’     В· 1(a вҲҲ Az )
                                               d
                                                                      вҖІ
                                                     пЈ«                  пЈ¶
                                    |Az |    1 X пЈӯ             вҖІ
                                                                   Az
                                  вүІ       +           1(a вҲҲ Az ) +      пЈё
                                     d      dh вҖІ (h)                d
                                                          z вҲҲV

                                          maxzвҲҲV (h) |Az |   V (h)
                                      вүІ                    +       ,
                                               d              dh
since d вүҘ |Az |, dh вүҘ V (h) Next, since Оіaz is a degree 6 polynomial, with probability 1 вҲ’ |V| VОҙ (h)
                                                                                              |       |
we have that
                                 q
           |Оіaz вҲ’ 1(a вҲҲ Az )| вүІ Var(Оіaz ) log6 (|V|/Оҙ)
                                 s
                                    maxzвҲҲV (h) |Az | log6 (|V|/Оҙ)    V (h) log6 (|V|/Оҙ)
                              вүІ                                   +
                                                  d                         dh
                                 1
                              вүӨ .
                                 5
Union bounding over all z вҲҲ V (h) , a вҲҲ V yields the desired result.

Let us state the formal version of Theorem 3 which we aim to prove:
Theorem 10. Assume that d вүі max(R, D) В· log6 (|V|SR/Оҙ) and Hdh вүі S log6 (|V|SR/Оҙ). Then,
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, there exists a single-layer attention-only transformer FTF ( В· ; ОёTF ) with
embedding dimension d, number of heads H and head dimension dh such that

                                                вҠӨ
                    Pz1:T +1 вҲјD arg max ПҶ(z) FTF (X; ОёTF ) = zT +1 = 1.
                                              zвҲҲV


Remark. When R вүҘ D, one can obtain an accuracy of 100% whenever the total parameter count
is
                                       Hddh вүі SR poly log(|V|SR/Оҙ).

Proof of Theorem 10. Partition S into the sets S (1) , . . . , S (NS ) and R into the sets R(1) , . . . , R(NR ) ,
                                           S                  R
such that S (i) , R(j) вүӨ M and NS = вҢҲ M      вҢү, NR = вҢҲ M        вҢү.
Let us choose M so that d вүҘ dh вүі M log6 (|V|/Оҙ). The total number of attention heads is then
                                                                 S log6 (|V|/Оҙ)
                                      H = NS + NR вүі                             .
                                                                      dh

For each i вҲҲ [NS ], we construct the attention head i as follows. First, let
                     (i) вҠӨ  (i)
                                     X                        ОІ
                 WK WQ = ОІ                  ПҶ(z)ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ + ПҶ(EOS)ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ
                                        (i)
                                                               2
                                             zвҲҲS

for a large constant ОІ. Next, set
                                                       dh
                             (i) вҠӨ     (i)     d X X X
                         WO          WV =                 ПҶ(a)ПҶ(z)вҠӨ wi wiвҠӨ ,
                                               dh     i=1
                                                  (i)
                                                    zвҲҲS     aвҲҲAz

for wi sampled uniformly on the sphere, orthogonal to ПҶ(EOS).
Consider an input sequence (z1 , . . . , zT ), and let s be the subject token in this sequence. On the
event that Lemma 1 holds, if s МёвҲҲ S (i) , then zt МёвҲҲ S (i) , and thus
                             (i) вҠӨ     (i)                                (i) вҠӨ     (i)         ОІ
                ПҶ(zt )вҠӨ WK           WQ ПҶ(EOS) < ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ WK                       WQ ПҶ(EOS) вҲ’
                                                                                                2


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all t < T . As ОІ вҶ’ вҲһ, the self-attention module fully attends to the EOS token. On the other
hand, if s вҲҲ S (i) , then if ztвҲ— = s we have
                              (i) вҠӨ  (i)                  (i) вҠӨ   (i)          ОІ
                  ПҶ(zt )вҠӨ WK WQ ПҶ(EOS) < ПҶ(ztвҲ— )вҠӨ WK WQ ПҶ(EOS) вҲ’
                                                                               2
for all t Мё= tвҲ— . Likewise, as ОІ вҶ’ вҲһ, the softmax converges to a hardmax on the ztвҲ— token. Alto-
gether, we get that
                                                       ПҶ(EOS) s МёвҲҲ S (i)

                                         (i) вҠӨ (i)
                          X вҠӨ S XWK WQ xT =                                 .
                                                       ПҶ(s)       s вҲҲ S (i)
Next, on the event that Lemma 2 holds, since d вүі R log6 (|V|/Оҙ) вүҘ |As | log6 (|V|/Оҙ), we have that
                                       (i) вҠӨ     (i)                       1
                            ПҶ(a)вҠӨ WO           WV ПҶ(s) вҲ’ 1(a вҲҲ As ) вүӨ
                                                                           6

                                    (i) вҠӨ    (i)   (i) вҠӨ (i)
for s вҲҲ S (i) . Defining attni := WO        WV S XWK WQ xT , we have that

                                                   s МёвҲҲ S (i)
                                       пЈұ
                                       пЈІ{0}
                               вҠӨ           1 1
                           ПҶ(a) attni вҲҲ [вҲ’ 5 , 5 ] s вҲҲ S (i) , a МёвҲҲ As .
                                       пЈі4 6
                                        [5, 5]     s вҲҲ S (i) , a вҲҲ As
By an identical construction, for each j вҲҲ [NR ], with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ we can construct the
attention head NS + j such that
                                                      r МёвҲҲ R(i)
                                          пЈұ
                                          пЈІ{0}
                            вҠӨ
                       ПҶ(a) attnNS +j вҲҲ [вҲ’ 15 , 51 ] r вҲҲ R(i) , a МёвҲҲ Ar ,
                                          пЈі4 6
                                            [5, 5]    r вҲҲ R(i) , a вҲҲ Ar
as long as d вүі D log6 (|V|/Оҙ) вүҘ |Ar | log6 (|V|/Оҙ). Therefore by a union bound, with probability
1 вҲ’ 2SRОҙ we have that (where s вҲҲ S (i) and r вҲҲ S (j)
                                                  NSX
                                                    +NR
                     ПҶ(a)вҠӨ FMHSA (X; Оё) =                    ПҶ(a)вҠӨ attnh
                                                       h=1
                                                = ПҶ(a)вҠӨ attni +ПҶ(a)вҠӨ attnNS +j
If a = aвҲ— (s, r), then a вҲҲ As вҲ© Ar , and thus
                                                     4 4        8
                                ПҶ(a)вҠӨ FMHSA (X; Оё) вүҘ    + = .
                                                     5 5        5
Otherwise, either ПҶ(a)вҠӨ attni or ПҶ(a)вҠӨ attnNS +j is вүӨ 15 and thus
                                                   6 1       7
                                ПҶ(a)вҠӨ FMHSA (X; Оё) вүҘ + = .
                                                   5 5       5
Therefore arg maxaвҲҲV ПҶ(a)вҠӨ FMHSA (X; Оё) = aвҲ— (s, r). Replacing 2SRОҙ with Оҙ yields the desired
result.

C.2   C ONSTRUCTION VIA MLP

Lemma 3. Let Пө be a fixed constant. Assume that q in Assumption 3 satisfies q = CПө2 for some
C2 > 2. Assume that d вүҘ S Пө , RПө . Define C(a) = |{(s, r) : aвҲ— (s, r) = a}|.
Let d be odd, and let P, Q be orthogonal вҢҠd/2вҢӢ dimensional subspaces of Rd . Define ПҶМғ(s) =
О P ПҶ(s), ПҶМғ(r) = О Q ПҶ(r).
There exists universal constants C3 , C4 such that if
                                 d вүі (C3 log(|V|/Оҙ)/Пө)C4 /Пө
                                m вүі (C3 log(|V|/Оҙ))C4 /Пө В· max C(a)
                                                                  a

                               md вүі (C3 log(|V|/Оҙ))C4 /Пө В· SR,


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the draw of the embeddings there exists a two-layer neural network
then withP
F (z) = iвҲҲ[m] vi Пғ(wiвҠӨ z) of width m satisfying

                               arg max ПҶ(a)вҠӨ F (ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)) = aвҲ— (s, r)
                                     aвҲҲV

for all s вҲҲ S, r вҲҲ R.

Proof. For odd integers p, k to be determined later, let us set
                          1 X
                   vi =          вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶМғ(s)вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(r)вҠ—k вҹ© В· ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)),
                         m s,r

where Hep+k : Rd вҶ’ (Rd )вҠ—(p+k) is the Hermite        tensor  of degree p + k (see Appendix F.1).
Assume without loss of generality that cp+k := E Пғ (p+k) (z) , the (p + k)th Hermite coefficient of
Пғ is positive (the negative case can be handled by negating all the vi in the construction)
For some (s, r), the margin for some a Мё= aвҲ— (s, r) is
           Оіsra = вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a), F (ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r))
                   1 X X
                =               Пғ(вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©
                  m         вҖІ вҖІ
                        iвҲҲ[m] s ,r

                      В· вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©.
We first see that
        E[Оіsra ]
           X
                E Пғ(вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©

        =
           sвҖІ r вҖІ
           В· (1(aвҲ— (s, r) = aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )) вҲ’ 1(a = aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )))
          X h                                                                                i
        =     E Пғ (p+k) (вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)вҹЁ(ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r))вҠ—(p+k) , ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©
           sвҖІ r вҖІ
              В· (1(aвҲ— (s, r) = aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )) вҲ’ 1(a = aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )))
If either sвҖІ Мё= s or r Мё= rвҖІ , we see that conditioned on ПҶМғ(s), ПҶМғ(r), the quantity ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k
is mean zero. Therefore the only nonzero term in the sum is when (s, r) = (sвҖІ , rвҖІ ), and so
                                              q
                                      (p+k)             2            2            2p        2k
          E[Оіsra ] = EZвҲјN (0,1) Пғ            Z вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ + вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ В· вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ

                         2                  2
The quantities вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ вҲ’ 21 , вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ вҲ’ 12 are subexponential random variables with Orlicz norm
1/d, and therefore we can bound
                                                                        1
                                           E[Оіsra ] вҲ’ cp+k 2вҲ’pвҲ’k вүІ
                                                                        d

We next compute the variance. Define ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ by
ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ = Пғ(вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ© В· вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©
We first observe that E[Пүis1 r1 Пүjs2 r2 ] is zero, unless s1 = s2 and r1 = r2 . Next, we compute the
expectation of ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ , conditioned on the embeddings (i.e with respect to the randomness wi ):
E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ | ПҶ]
         h                          i
= Ewi Пғ (p+k) (вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©) В· вҹЁ(ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r))вҠ—(p+k) , ПҶМғ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©
   В· вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©
                          q
                                      2      2
= EZвҲјN (0,1) Пғ (p+k) Z вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ + вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ          В· вҹЁПҶМғ(s), ПҶМғ(sвҖІ )вҹ©p В· вҹЁПҶМғ(r), ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҹ©k В· вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore for i Мё= j,
                         h               i
                                       2
E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ ПүjsвҖІ rвҖІ ] = E E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ | ПҶ]
                    вүІ c2p+k E вҹЁПҶМғ(s), ПҶ(sвҖІ )вҹ©2p E вҹЁПҶМғ(r), ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҹ©2k E вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©2 .


When (s, r) = (sвҖІ , rвҖІ ), then
               "                                      q                      2                   #
                                                              2          2            4p      4k
                                            (p+k)
                                                                                                   В· 1 + dвҲ’1

E[Пүisr Пүjsr ] = E EZвҲјN (0,1) Пғ                       Z вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ + вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ       вҲҘПҶМғ(s)вҲҘ вҲҘПҶМғ(r)вҲҘ

                    = c2p+k 2вҲ’2pвҲ’2k + O(1/d)

Next, define the quantities
                                                ПҒssвҖІ = E вҹЁПҶМғ(s), ПҶМғ(sвҖІ )вҹ©2p


                                                ПҒrrвҖІ = E вҹЁПҶМғ(r), ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҹ©2k


                                                ПҒaaвҖІ = E вҹЁПҶ(a), ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҹ©2 ,


so that
                           E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ ПүjsвҖІ rвҖІ ] вүІ c2p+k ПҒssвҖІ ПҒrrвҖІ ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ ) .



We see that for s Мё= sвҖІ , r Мё= rвҖІ , a Мё= aвҖІ ,
                                            ПҒssвҖІ вүӨ (2p)p (d/2)вҲ’p = (4p)p dвҲ’p
                                            ПҒrrвҖІ вүӨ (2k)k (d/2)вҲ’k = (4k)k dвҲ’k
                                            ПҒaaвҖІ вүӨ dвҲ’1

Next, see that
   2
E Пүis вҖІ rвҖІ


= E Пғ(вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)2 вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶМғ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©2 E вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (sвҖІ , rвҖІ )), ПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r)) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҹ©2

                                  1/2                                             1/2
вүӨ E Пғ(вҹЁwi , ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)вҹ©)4            E вҹЁHep+k (wi ), ПҶМғ(sвҖІ )вҠ—p вҠ— ПҶМғ(rвҖІ )вҠ—k вҹ©4

                                                                                      ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ )
вүӨ 24q ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ ) ,


where we have applied Lemma 13 to the first two expectations. Altogether, we have that

        2   X mвҲ’1                              1   2
     E Оіsra =             E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ ПүjsвҖІ rвҖІ ] + E ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ
                вҖІ вҖІ
                        m                      m
                         s ,r
                         mвҲ’1                 mвҲ’1                  X                                      1 X   2
                     =       E[Пүisr Пүjsr ] +                                     E[ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ ПүjsвҖІ rвҖІ ] +         E ПүisвҖІ rвҖІ ,
                          m                   m                                                          m вҖІ вҖІ
                                                             (sвҖІ ,r вҖІ )Мё=(s,r)                                  s ,r

and thus
                  2
Var(Оіsra ) = E Оіsra   вҲ’ c2p+k
                      X                                                        24q X
           вүІ c2p+k

                              ПҒssвҖІ ПҒrrвҖІ ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ ) +       ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ )
                    вҖІ вҖІ
                                                                                m вҖІ вҖІ
                           (s ,r )Мё=(s,r)                                                                s ,r

For the first sum, we can bound
   X                                                                       X
             ПҒssвҖІ ПҒrrвҖІ ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ ) вүӨ                            ПҒssвҖІ ПҒrrвҖІ
(sвҖІ ,r вҖІ )Мё=(s,r)                                                     (sвҖІ ,r вҖІ )Мё=(s,r)

                                                                  вүӨ SR В· (4p)p (4k)k dвҲ’pвҲ’k + S(4p)p dвҲ’p + R(4k)k dвҲ’k

For the second sum, we get that
                X                                                                  2SR
                     ПҒaaвҲ— (sвҖІ ,rвҖІ ) + ПҒaвҲ— (s,r)aвҲ— (sвҖІ rвҖІ ) вүӨ C(a) + C(aвҲ— (s, r)) +

                 вҖІ вҖІ
                                                                                    d
                       s ,r



                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Altogether,
 Var(Оіsra )   S(4p)p   R(4k)k   S(4p)p R(4k)k   24q (C(a) + C(aвҲ— (s, r)))   24q SR
            вүІ        +        +       В·       +                           +         .
 E[Оіsra ]2      dp       dk       dp     dk              mc2p+k             mdc2p+k

Let Оҙ вҖІ be a fixed failure probability. We see that, for p = 2вҢҲ 1Пө вҢү + 1
                                                      4C2    4C2
                    24q log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )S(4p)p   2 Пө log Пө +2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )( 8Пө )2/Пө
                                 p
                                               вүІ            1                   вүІ 1,
                               d                           dПө
whenever d вүі (C3 log(1/Оҙ вҖІ )/Пө)C4 /Пө for appropriately chosen constants C3 , C4 . Likewise, setting
k = 2вҢҲ 1Пө вҢү + 1, we get that

                                     24q log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )R(4k)k
                                                                вүІ 1.
                                                 dk
Next, setting m вүі 28q+2 log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )cвҲ’2
                                         p+k В· maxa C(a) and md вүі 2
                                                                   8q+2
                                                                        log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )cвҲ’2
                                                                                         p+k SR
yields
                                                   24q (C(a) + C(aвҲ— (s, r)))
                        24q+2 log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ ) В·                             вүІ1
                                                            mc2p+k
                                                                      24q SR
                                           24q+2 log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ ) В·           вүІ 1.
                                                                      mdc2p+k
Altogether, by choosing constants appropriately, we get that
                                                            Var(Оіsra )
                              24q+2 log4q+2 (1/Оҙ вҖІ )eвҲ’1 В·              вүӨ 1.
                                                            E[Оіsra ]2
Therefore by Lemma 14, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ we have that Оіsra > 0. Union bounding over all
s, r, a and setting Оҙ вҖІ = SR|V|
                            Оҙ
                                yields the desired result.

We next state the formal version of Theorem 4, which we wish to prove:
Theorem 11. Let Пө be a fixed constant. Assume that Пғ is a degree q polynomial, where q = C1 /Пө
for some C1 > 2. Assume that d вүҘ S Пө , RПө . Define C(a) = |{(s, r) : aвҲ— (s, r) = a}|.
Let (d, H, dh , m) satisfy

                                 d вүі (C2 log(|V|/Оҙ)/Пө)C3 /Пө
                               Hdh вүі (S + R) log (|V|/Оҙ)
                                  m вүі (C2 log(|V|/Оҙ))C3 /Пө В· max C(a)
                                                                   a

                                 md вүі (C2 log(|V|/Оҙ))C3 /Пө В· SR,

Then, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, there exists a single-layer transformer FTF ( В· ; ОёTF ) with embedding
dimension d, number of heads H, head dimension dh , and MLP width m such that

                     Pz1:T +1 вҲјD arg max ПҶ(z)вҠӨ FTF (X; ОёTF ) = zT +1 = 1.
                                        zвҲҲV


Remark. Ignoring polylog factors, and treating Пө as a constant, the constraints on the architecture
size become
                        Hdh вүі S + R        and m вүі C(a) and md вүі SR.
We first note that C(a) вүӨ S, and so m вүі S is sufficient. It is possible for C(a) to be much smaller;
on average we expect C(a) вүҲ S/D, and we also note that it is possible for C(a) = 1. The main
constraint is that md вүі SR, i.e that the number of MLP parameters scales linearly with the number
of facts that need to be stored.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem 11. Partition S into the sets S (1) , . . . , S (NS ) and R into the sets R(1) , . . . , R(NR ) ,
such that S (i) , R(j) вүӨ M and NS = вҢҲ M    S
                                             вҢү, NR = вҢҲ M      R
                                                                вҢү. Assume that d = Оҳ(M log(|V|/Оҙ вҖІ ))
Let H = вҢҲd/dh вҢү. For each i вҲҲ [NS ], we construct the H вҖІ attention heads corresponding to h вҲҲ
{(i вҲ’ 1)H вҖІ + 1, . . . , iH вҖІ } as follows. First, for all such h, let
                         (h) вҠӨ    (h)
                                              X                                    ОІ
                   WK            WQ = ОІ                ПҶ(z)ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ +                 ПҶ(EOS)ПҶ(EOS)вҠӨ
                                                                                   2
                                             zвҲҲS (i)

for a large constant ОІ. By an identical argument to as in Theorem 3, on the event that Lemma 1
holds we have that
                                                       ПҶ(EOS) s МёвҲҲ S (i)

                        вҠӨ         (h) вҠӨ    (h)
                      X S XWK WQ xT =                                      .
                                                       ПҶ(s)      s вҲҲ S (i)
The total contribution from these attention heads is then
                                                        пЈ«                                                    пЈ¶
    iH вҖІ                                                                           iHвҖІ
                                                                                                                        ПҶ(EOS) s МёвҲҲ S (i)

                 (h) вҠӨ            (h)    (h)    (h)                                              (h) вҠӨ (h)
    X                                                                              X
             WO        attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ) = пЈӯ                                               WO WV пЈё В·
                                                                                                                        ПҶ(s)   s вҲҲ S (i)
h=(iвҲ’1)H вҖІ +1                                                            h=(iвҲ’1)H вҖІ +1

                            PiH вҖІ           (h) вҠӨ (h)
Since H вҖІ dh вүҘ d, we can let h=(iвҲ’1)H вҖІ +1 WO WV be a projection onto a вҢҲd/2вҢү dimensional
subspace P , orthogonal to ПҶ(EOS), and thus
                     вҖІ
                  iH
                                                                                                       s МёвҲҲ S (i)

                  X           (h) вҠӨ          (h)  (h)  (h)                                     0
                             WO     attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ) =
                                                                                               О P ПҶ(s) s вҲҲ S (i)
             h=(iвҲ’1)H вҖІ +1

Altogether, if the sequence (z1 , . . . , zT ) contains the subject s, then
                           вҖІ
                          HX NS
                                     (h) вҠӨ                 (h)         (h)         (h)
                                  WO         attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ) = О P ПҶ(s)
                           h=1

Similarly, if we let Q be a вҢҲd/2вҢү dimensional subspace orthogonal to P and ПҶ(EOS), then we can
construct the attention heads h вҲҲ {H вҖІ NS + 1, . . . , H вҖІ NS + H вҖІ NR } such that
                    H вҖІ NSX
                          +H вҖІ NR
                                        (h) вҠӨ                    (h)         (h)         (h)
                                     WO         attn(X; WK , WQ , WV ) = О Q ПҶ(r),
                     h=H вҖІ NS +1

where r is the relation in the sequence (z1 , . . . , zT ). Such a construction exists with probability
1 вҲ’ (NS + NR )Оҙ вҖІ . The total number of heads is
                                                        d(S + R)   (S + R) log(|V|/Оҙ вҖІ )
                         H = H вҖІ NS + H вҖІ NR вҲқ                   вҲқ                       .
                                                          dh M             dh

The output of the self-attention component is then
                           FMHSA (X; Оё) = О P ПҶ(s) + О Q ПҶ(r) = ПҶМғ(s) + ПҶМғ(r).
On the event that Lemma 3 holds, we have that there exists a two-layer neural network F (z) =
              вҠӨ
P
  iвҲҲ[m] vi Пғ(wi z) of width m such that

                                  arg max ПҶ(a)вҠӨ F (ПҶ(s) + ПҶМғ(r)) = aвҲ— (s, r).
                                        a

Scaling V by a large enough constant ensures that
                                   arg max ПҶ(z)вҠӨ FTF (X; ОёTF ) = aвҲ— (s, r).
                                        zвҲҲV

Union bounding over all the high probability events and setting Оҙ = Оҙ вҖІ /(NS + NR + 1) yields the
desired result.


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D      P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5
D.1     P RELIMINARIES

Recall that the parameters are Оё := {WOV (a, z)}aвҲҲA,zвҲҲV вҲӘ {WKQ (z)}zвҲҲV , and that the cross
entropy loss is
                       "                                                           !#
                                                        X
       L(Оё) := Ez1:T +1 вҲ’вҹЁПҶ(zT +1 ), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ© + log   exp (вҹЁПҶ(a), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©)
                                                                    aвҲҲA
where
                                                   T
                                                   X
                             ПҶ(a)вҠӨ Flin (X; Оё) =         WOV (a, zt )WKQ (zt ).
                                                   t=1
We consider running gradient flow:
                                         ОёМҮ = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё)
                                                   p
from the initialization WOV (a, z) = Оұ, WKQ (z) = Оұ |A| + 1 for some Оұ > 0.
We also define Оҳ by
                                    Оҳ(a, z) = WKQ (z)WOV (a, z),
and remark that the loss L is convex in Оҳ.
Lemma 4 (Balancedness). Let C(z1:T , z) denote the number of tokens in z1:T equal to z. The loss
gradients are given by
      вҲӮWV O (a,z) L(Оё) = вҲ’WKQ (z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))]
                          X
       вҲӮWKQ (z) L(Оё) = вҲ’    WOV (a, z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))]
                              a
As such, the quantity
                                                    X
                                     WKQ (z)2 вҲ’           WV O (a, z)2
                                                    aвҲҲA
is constant throughout the gradient flow trajectory.

Proof. We first see that
                вҲӮWV O (a,z) ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҠӨ Flin (X; Оё) = 1(a = aвҖІ ) В· C(z1:T , z) В· WKQ (z),


Similarly,
                        вҲӮWKQ (z) ПҶ(aвҖІ )вҠӨ Flin (X; Оё) = C(z1:T , z) В· WOV (aвҖІ , z).


Therefore
вҲӮWV O (a,z) L(Оё)
                                                 exp (вҹЁПҶ(aвҖІ ), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©) В· 1(a = aвҖІ ) В· C(z1:T , z)
                                           P
                                             вҖІ
= WKQ (z) В· E вҲ’1(zT +1 = a) В· C(z1:T , z) + a вҲҲA     P                  вҖІ
                                                       aвҖІ вҲҲA exp (вҹЁПҶ(a ), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©)
= вҲ’WKQ (z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))].
By a similar computation,
         вҲӮWKQ (z) L(Оё)
                 "                                                                                    #
                                                          X
          = Ez1:T вҲ’WOV (zT +1 , z) В· C(z1:T , z) +            pМӮ(a | z1:T )WOV (a, z) В· C(z1:T , z)
                                                          a
                    "                                                                      !#
                                                               X
                                               вҲ—
          = Ez1:T C(z1:T , z) В·     вҲ’WOV (a (z1:T ), z) +            pМӮ(a | z1:T )WOV (a, z)
                                                                a
               X
          =вҲ’        WOV (a, z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))].
                a



                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Under gradient flow, we see that
                                       !
      1 d         2
                     X
                                     2
           WKQ (z) вҲ’      WV O (a, z)
      2 dt
                     aвҲҲA
                 d             X                 d
      = WKQ (z) В· WKQ (z) вҲ’        WV O (a, z) В· WV O (a, z)
                 dt                             dt
                               aвҲҲA
                                   X
      = вҲ’WKQ (z) В· вҲӮWKQ (z) L(Оё) +     WV O (a, z) В· вҲӮWV O (a,z) L(Оё)
                                                aвҲҲA
                        X
       = WKQ (z)              WOV (a, z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))]
                          a
                  X
              вҲ’         WOV (a, z)WKQ (z) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))]
                  aвҲҲA
       = 0.


Corollary 3. Throughout the gradient flow trajectory, WKQ (z) вүҘ Оұ.

Proof. At initialization, WKQ (z)2 вҲ’ aвҲҲA WV O (a, z)2 = Оұ2 . Since this quantity is an invariant
                                       P
of gradient flow, it is impossible for WKQ (z) = 0, and thus WKQ (z) > 0 throughout the entire
trajectory. Furthermore,
                                         X
                             WKQ (z)2 =      WV O (a, z)2 + Оұ2 вүҘ Оұ2 ,
                                                  aвҲҲA

and thus WKQ (z) вүҘ Оұ.

D.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Proof of Theorem 5. Let us select

                           1            вҲ’1 вҲ’2   вҲ’(T вҲ’3) 1    вҲ’1 вҲ’1 вҲ’1
                Пө вүӨ min      Оұp(s, r)|A| T |N |        , Оұ|A| S R Оҙ .
                           2                            2
There exists a time TПө such that for all t вүҘ TПө , вҲҘвҲҮОё L(Оё(t))вҲҘ вүӨ Пө. Let us set tОҙ = TПө . Now, consider
some iterate Оё := Оё(t) for t вүҘ tОҙ .
First, see that for s вҲҲ S,
      вҲӮWOV (a,s) L(Оё) = вҲ’WKQ (s) В· Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ))]
                              = вҲ’WKQ (s) В· p(s) В· Ez1:T [1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s вҲҲ z1:T ].
Consider some a МёвҲҲ As . Then Ez1:T [1(a = aвҲ— (z1:T )) | s вҲҲ z1:T ] = 0, and thus
              вҲӮWOV (a,s) L(Оё) = WKQ (s) В· p(s) В· Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s вҲҲ z1:T ]
                                        X
                              = WKQ (s)      p(s, r) В· Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ]
                                                   rвҲҲR

As such, since вҲӮWOV (a,s) L(Оё) вүӨ Пө,
                                Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ] вүӨ ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 .
By an identical argument, since вҲӮWOV (a,r) L(Оё) вүӨ Пө, then for a МёвҲҲ Ar
                                Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ] вүӨ ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 .
For any a Мё= aвҲ— (s, r), either a МёвҲҲ As or a МёвҲҲ Ar . Therefore Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ] вүӨ
ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 for all a Мё= aвҲ— (s, r), and thus
                    Ez1:T [pМӮ(aвҲ— (s, r) | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 |A|.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              T вҲ’3
There are at most T 2 |N |           sequences z1:T containing (s, r), each of which occurs with equal
probability. Therefore
                                                                 T вҲ’3
                          pМӮ(aвҲ— (s, r) | z1:T ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ T 2 |N |          В· ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 |A|
for all such z1:T . Then, bounding вҲ’ log(1 вҲ’ z) вүӨ 2z for z вҲҲ [0, 21 ],
        E[вҲ’ log pМӮ(aвҲ— (s, r) | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ] вүӨ 2E[1 вҲ’ pМӮ(aвҲ— (s, r) | z1:T )) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ]
                                                          вүӨ 2ПөОұвҲ’1 p(s, r)вҲ’1 |A|.
Altogether, the loss is
                                           X
          E[вҲ’ log pМӮ(zT +1 | z1:T )] =            p(s, r) В· E[вҲ’ log pМӮ(aвҲ— (s, r) | z1:T ) | s, r вҲҲ z1:T ]
                                            s,r

                                         вүӨ 2ПөОұвҲ’1 |A|SR
                                         вүӨ Оҙ,
as desired.

D.3    S EQUENTIAL L EARNING

The goal of this section is to show that the model learns sequentially; first, the relation components
grow, then the subject components grow. This is given formally by Theorem 6
We first prove that weights corresponding to the subject and noise tokens stay bounded during the
beginning of the trajectory.
Lemma 5. For s вҲҲ S,
                                                          p
                              WKQ (z) вүӨ exp(2p(s)t) В· Оұ |A| + 1.
Likewise, for z вҲҲ N ,
                                                                         p
                                 WKQ (z) вүӨ exp(2T t/|N |) В· Оұ                |A| + 1.

Proof. Recall that the update for WKQ (s) is
                WМҮKQ (s) = p(s)вҹЁWOV (В·, s), pвҲ— (В· | s) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | s вҲҲ z1:T ]вҹ©
                         вүӨ p(s)вҲҘWOV (В·, s)вҲҘвҲҘpвҲ— (В· | s) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | s вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ
                         вүӨ 2p(s)вҲҘWOV (В·, s)вҲҘ
                         вүӨ 2p(s)WKQ (s)
Therefore by GronwallвҖҷs inequality,
                                                                        p
                                     WKQ (s) вүӨ exp(2p(s)t) В· Оұ              |A| + 1.
Similarly, the update for WKQ (z) for z вҲҲ N is
              WМҮKQ (z) = вҹЁWOV (В·, z), Ez1:T [C(z1:T , z) В· (1(В· = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | z1:T ))]вҹ©
                       вүӨ вҲҘWOV (В·, z)вҲҘ В· E[C(z1:T , z)вҲҘ1(В· = aвҲ— (z1:T )) вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | z1:T )вҲҘ]
                       вүӨ 2WOV (В·, z)E[C(z1:T , z)]
                          2T
                       вүӨ      WKQ (z).
                         |N |
Again by GronwallвҖҷs inequality,
                                                                         p
                                 WKQ (z) вүӨ exp(2T t/|N |) В· Оұ                |A| + 1.



The following lemma is our key result, and shows that, assuming that the subject and noise weights
stay bounded, the relation weights grow until the output of the model approximates the best relation-
only prediction.


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 6. Let Оұsm , Пө > 0 be arbitrary parameters satisfying
                                                   вҲ’1
                                           Пө2

                            1
                  2
                Оұsm T вүӨ        log                       В· min вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ.
                          150        Оұ2 (|A| + 1)           r
                                1
                     Пө2 вүӨ               В· min вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ
                          50(|A| + 1) r
For a target accuracy Пөmin > 0, define T вҲ— by
                                                                        !
                                              вҲ’1               Пө
       вҲ—
    T = max p(r)     вҲ’1      вҲ—
                          вҲҘp (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ        log       p              + 100(|A| + 1) log |A|ПөвҲ’2 ПөвҲ’2
                                                                                                       min
              r                                          Оұ    |A| + 1
Assume that for z вҲҲ S вҲӘ N that WKQ (z) вүӨ Оұsm . Then, there exists t вүӨ T вҲ— such that
                  X                                                         2
                      p(r)2 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2min .
                     r


Proof. The proof proceeds in three stages. First, we bound the time required for the relation weights
to escape the origin. Next, we prove that the relation weights stay large. Finally, we show conver-
gence.

Stage 1: Escaping the origin. The gradient flow update on WOV (a, r) is
              WМҮOV (a, r) = WKQ (r) В· p(r)(pвҲ— (a | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ])
We thus have
 WМҮOV (В·, r) вҲ’ WKQ (r) В· p(r)(pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 (a)) вүӨ WKQ (r) В· p(r)вҲҘEz1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ


             1
Define p0 = |A| 1A . Observe that
       вҲҘEz1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ вүӨ Ez1:T [вҲҘ[pМӮ(a | z1:T ) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ | r вҲҲ z1:T ]
                                                         "                                        #
                                                           X
                                                 вүӨ Ez1:T       WKQ (zt )вҲҘWOV (В·, zt )вҲҘ | r вҲҲ z1:T
                                                                t
                                                                              2
                                                   вүӨ WKQ (r)вҲҘWOV (В·, r)вҲҘ + T Оұsm
                                                   вүӨ WKQ (r)2 + T Оұsm
                                                                   2
                                                                      .
Thus
       WМҮOV (В·, r) вҲ’ WKQ (r) В· p(r)(pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 (a)) вүӨ p(r)WKQ (r) WKQ (r)2 + T Оұsm
                                                                                     2


Likewise,
              WМҮKQ (r) = p(r)вҹЁWOV (В·, r), (pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(a | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ])вҹ©,
and thus
WМҮKQ (r) вҲ’ p(r)вҹЁWOV (В·, r), (pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 )вҹ© вүӨ p(r)вҲҘWOV (В·, r)вҲҘвҲҘEz1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ
                                                вүӨ p(r)WKQ (r) WKQ (r)2 + T Оұsm    2



Define the vector u вҲҲ R2 by
                                                 WKQ (r)

                                    u=                    вҲ—
                                          вҹЁWOV (В·, r), вҲҘppвҲ— (В·|r)вҲ’p
                                                            (В·|r)вҲ’p0
                                                                    0вҲҘ
                                                                       вҹ©
We see that

                         вҲ—               0         1
                                                      u вүӨ 2p(r)WKQ (r) WKQ (r)2 + T Оұsm
                                                                                     2

            uМҮ вҲ’ p(r)вҲҘp (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В·
                                         1         0


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore
       d      2
          (вҲҘuвҲҘ ) вүӨ 2вҹЁuМҮ, uвҹ©
       dt
                                              2
                 вүӨ 2p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘвҲҘuвҲҘ + 4p(r)вҲҘuвҲҘWKQ (r) WKQ (r)2 + T Оұsm
                                                                              2


                                              2             2   2
                 вүӨ 2p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘвҲҘuвҲҘ + 4p(r)вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲҘuвҲҘ + T Оұsm   2

                                                          2          4
                 вүӨ 2p(r) вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ + 2T Оұsm
                                                  2

                                                       вҲҘuвҲҘ + 4p(r)вҲҘuвҲҘ .
                                    2                         2
where the last inequality bounds WKQ    (r) вүӨ вҲҘuвҲҘ .
Define Оіr := 2p(r) вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ + 2T Оұsm
                                             2

                                                 . By Lemma 7 we have that for
                                                              !
                                       вҲ’1            Оіr
                                t < Оіr log               2 +1 ,
                                               4p(r)вҲҘu0 вҲҘ

                                                                  2
                                         2               Оіr вҲҘu0 вҲҘ exp(Оіr t)
                                    вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ
                                                     Оіr + 4p(r)2 (1 вҲ’ exp(Оіr t))

                                                                           Оіr        2
Let TПө be the first time that вҲҘuвҲҘ вүҘ Пө. If TПө < ОіrвҲ’1 log                   4p(r) вҲҘu0 вҲҘ + 1       , then
                                                 2
                       2           Оіr вҲҘu0 вҲҘ exp(Оіr TПө )         Оіr Оұ2 (|A| + 1) exp(Оіr TПө )
            Пө2 вүӨ вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ                                       вүӨ                               .
                               Оіr + 4p(r)2 (1 вҲ’ exp(Оіr TПө ))   Оіr + 4p(r)2 (1 вҲ’ exp(Оіr TПө ))
Therefore
                                Пө2 Оіr + 4p(r)Пө2 Оұ2 (|A| + 1)                                                Пө2

       TПө вүҘ ОіrвҲ’1 log                                                               вүҘ ОіrвҲ’1 log
                           Оұ2 (|A| + 1)Оіr + 4p(r)Пө2 Оұ2 (|A| + 1)                                      2Оұ2 (|A| + 1)
           Оіr                                           2
                                                       Оіr
                                          Пө
for Пө2 вүӨ 4p(r)   On this assumption, 2Оұ2 (|A|+1) вүӨ 4p(r)вҲҘu   2 , and thus we always have TПө вүҘ
                                                          0вҲҘ
               2
ОіrвҲ’1 log 2Оұ2 (|A|+1)
              Пө
                       .

Define Lr by
                           "                                                                                    !                #
                                                                            X
Lr (Оё) := p(r)Ez1:T +1 вҲ’вҹЁПҶ(zT +1 ), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ© + log                           exp (вҹЁПҶ(a), Flin (X; Оё)вҹ©)          | r вҲҲ z1:T
                                                                           aвҲҲA

Let us define the relation-only model as
                                  ПҶ(a)вҠӨ Frel (X; Оё) = WOV (a, r)WKQ (r)
where r вҲҲ z1:T . We see that
                   ПҶ(a)вҠӨ Frel (X; Оё) вҲ’ ПҶ(a)вҠӨ Flin (X; Оё) вүӨ (T вҲ’ 1)Оұsm
                                                                    2
                                                                      .

Define g : R|A| вҶ’ R by g(z) = log ( a exp(za )). We see that вҲҮz g(z) = S(z), where S is the
                                   P
softmax, and thus
            |g(z1 ) вҲ’ g(z2 )| вүӨ sup вҲҘвҲҮz g(z)вҲҘ1 В· вҲҘg(z1 ) вҲ’ g(z2 )вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ вҲҘg(z1 ) вҲ’ g(z2 )вҲҘвҲһ .
                                    z

Therefore defining the relation-only loss LМ„r as
                 "                                                                                        !#
                                                                  X
LМ„r (Оё) := p(r)Es вҲ’вҹЁПҶ(aвҲ— (s, r), Frel (r; Оё)вҹ© + log                        exp (вҹЁПҶ(a), Flin (r; Оё)вҹ©)
                                                                  aвҲҲA
                                                                                                                                 !
                  X                                                                     X
                                             вҲ—
       = вҲ’p(r)         p(a | r)WOV (a (s, r), r)WKQ (r) + p(r) log                               exp (WOV (a, r)WKQ (r)) ,
                   a                                                                    aвҲҲA



                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we see that
                                                                    2
                                        Lr (Оё) вҲ’ LМ„r (Оё) вүӨ 2(T вҲ’ 1)Оұsm .

Since log-sum-exp is 1-strongly-convex, recalling that Оҳ(a, r) := WOV (a, r)WKQ (r),
                                   !
                  X                                  X 1              1         2
             log      exp(Оҳ(a, r)) вүӨ log(|A|) +              Оҳ(a, r) + вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ .
                   a                                   a
                                                         |A|          2

Therefore
                                                                       1             2
                 LМ„r вүӨ p(r) log |A| вҲ’ p(r)вҹЁОҳ(В·, r), pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҹ© + p(r)вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ
                                                                       2
                                                                1            2
                     = Lr,0 вҲ’ p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В· u1 u2 + p(r)вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ .
                                                                2

We next track the evolution of u1 u2 :
              d
                 (u1 u2 ) = uМҮ1 u2 + u1 uМҮ2
              dt
                                                     2              2   2
                         вүҘ p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘвҲҘuвҲҘ вҲ’ 4p(r)вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲҘuвҲҘ + (T вҲ’ 1)Оұsm  2


                                                           2                    2
                         вүҘ p(r) вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ вҲ’ 4вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲ’ 4(T вҲ’ 1)Оұsm 2
                                                                             вҲҘuвҲҘ
                                                                  2           4
                         вүҘ p(r) вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ вҲ’ 4T Оұsm
                                                         2

                                                               вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲ’ 4p(r)вҲҘuвҲҘ .
for t вүӨ TПө . Since вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ Пө, this is increasing in вҲҘuвҲҘ.
                                    2                                                      2
We first have the bound вҲҘuвҲҘ вүҘ WKQ (r)2 вүҘ Оұ2 . Next, we have the      bound вҲҘuвҲҘ вүҘ 2u1 u2 . Pick
some time П„ вүӨ TПө . Define ОіrвҲ’ := 2p(r) вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ вҲ’ 4T Оұsm
                                                                2
                                                                    . We see that

                                         1 вҲ’ 2                    1
                        (u1 u2 )(П„ ) вүҘ     Оіr Оұ вҲ’ 4p(r)Оұ4 П„ вүҘ ОіrвҲ’ Оұ2 П„
                                         2                        4
Next, by Lemma 7, for t вүӨ TПө we have


                                                 ОіrвҲ’ (u1 u2 )(П„ ) exp(ОіrвҲ’ (t вҲ’ П„ ))
                         (u1 u2 )(t) вүҘ                                                 .
                                              Оіr + 8p(r)(u1 u2 )(П„ ) exp ОіrвҲ’ (t вҲ’ П„ )
                                               вҲ’


                                     Пө2
Plugging in t = ОіrвҲ’1 log        2Оұ2 (|A|+1)       ,
                                                                             вҲ’
                                                                                           Пө2

                                             1                              Оіr
     (u1 u2 )(П„ ) exp ОіrвҲ’ (t вҲ’ П„ )          вүҘ ОіrвҲ’ Оұ2 П„ exp вҲ’ОіrвҲ’ П„ В· exp

                                                                               log
                                             4                              Оіr       2Оұ2 (|A| + 1)
Selecting П„ = 1/ОіrвҲ’ , we get
                                            вҲ—
                               Оұ2                                      2
                                                                                       Пө2

                                            вҲҘp (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ вҲ’ 4T Оұsm
(u1 u2 )(П„ ) exp ОіrвҲ’ (t вҲ’ П„ )

                             вүҘ      В· exp                                  log
                               4e           вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ + 2T Оұsm2         2Оұ2 (|A| + 1)
                                 2            2                                2
                                                                                                       Пө2

                               Оұ            Пө                           вҲ’6T Оұsm
                             вүҘ      В· 2               В· exp                                log
                               4e 2Оұ (|A| + 1)                вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ + 2T Оұsm
                                                                                        2        2Оұ2 (|A| + 1)
                               Оұ2           Пө2                                2
                                                                                                       Пө2

                                                                         6T Оұsm
                             вүҘ      В· 2               В· 1вҲ’ вҲ—                            2
                                                                                           log
                               4e 2Оұ (|A| + 1)                вҲҘp (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ + 2T Оұsm         2Оұ2 (|A| + 1)
                                      Пө2
                             вүҘ                 .
                               50(|A| + 1)
                  T Оұ2

                                         Пө2            1
                      вҲҘ+2T Оұ2 log Оұ2 (|A|+1) вүӨ 150 .
whenever вҲҘpвҲ— (В·|r)вҲ’p0sm
                                sm


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore
                                                 Пө2                1
                             (u1 u2 )(t) вүҘ              В·
                                             50(|A| + 1) 1 + 8 p(r)
                                                                 вҲ’
                                                                              Пө2
                                                                    Оіr    50(|A|+1)

                                                 Пө2                   1
                                         вүҘ              В·                 2
                                             50(|A| + 1) 1 + вҲҘpвҲ— (В·|r)вҲ’p4ПөвҲҘ50(|A|+1)
                                                                              0

                                                Пө2
                                         вүҘ              ,
                                           100(|A| + 1)

Altogether, we get that the loss is
                                                                    Пө2       1
                          LМ„r вүӨ Lr,0 вҲ’ p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В·             + p(r)Пө4
                                                               100(|A| + 1) 2
                                                                    Пө2
                             вүӨ Lr,0 вҲ’ p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В·
                                                               200(|A| + 1)
                      вҲ—
whenever Пө2 вүӨ вҲҘp (В·|r)вҲ’p0 вҲҘ
               100(|A|+1) .


Stage 2: Norm stays large Next, we want to show that WKQ (r) stays large. We first show that
the relation-only loss LМ„ is decreasing. We can compute that
                                             d
                                                LМ„r (Оё) = вҹЁвҲҮОё LМ„r , вҲҮОё Lr вҹ©
                                             dt
Define pМӮ(В· | r) by
                                                  exp(WKQ (r)WOV (a, r))
                                  pМӮ(a | r) = P                       вҖІ
                                                                             .
                                                  aвҖІ exp(WKQ (r)WOV (a , r))

We observe that
               вҲӮWOV (В·,r) LМ„r = WKQ (r)p(r)(pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r))
               вҲӮWOV (В·,r) Lr = WKQ (r)p(r)(pвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ])
and thus
       вҲӮWOV (В·,r) LМ„r вҲ’ вҲӮWOV (В·,r) Lr вүӨ WKQ (r)p(r)вҲҘEz1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r)вҲҘ
                                                              2
                                              вүӨ WKQ (r)p(r)T Оұsm .
Likewise,
      вҲӮWKQ (r) LМ„r вҲ’ вҲӮWKQ (r) Lr = p(r)|вҹЁWOV (В·, r), Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r)вҹ©|
                                         вүӨ p(r)вҲҘWOV (В·, r)вҲҘвҲҘEz1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ] вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r)вҲҘ
                                                         2
                                         вүӨ WKQ (r)p(r)T Оұsm .
Therefore
                           d                 2
                              Lr (Оё) вүҘ вҲҮОё LМ„r вҲ’ вҲҮОё LМ„r вҲҮОё LМ„r вҲ’ вҲҮОё Lr
                           dt
                                             2         вҲҡ              2
                                     вүҘ вҲҮОё LМ„r вҲ’ вҲҮОё LМ„r 2WKQ (r)p(r)T Оұsm .
            d
Assume that dt Lr (Оё) < 0. Then
           вҲҡ
             2WKQ (r)p(r)T Оұsm  2
                                  вүҘ вҲҮОё LМ„r вүҘ WKQ (r)p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r)вҲҘ,
i.e
                                                                    вҲҡ
                                       вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ pМӮ(В· | r)вҲҘ вүӨ           2
                                                                        2T Оұsm .


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                вҲҡ
Assuming that      2T Оұsm2      1
                             < 2S , since pвҲ— (a | r) > S1 for p вҲ— (a | r) > 0 we have that

                  pвҲ— (a | r)                          pМӮ(a | r) вҲ’ pвҲ— (a | r)

   pвҲ— (a | r) log             = pвҲ— (a | r) log 1 +                             вүӨ 2|pМӮ(a | r) вҲ’ pвҲ— (a | r)|
                  pМӮ(a | r)                                  pвҲ— (a | r)
                                                                            вҲҡ
Therefore LМ„r вҲ’ p(r)H(pвҲ— (В· | r)) вүӨ 2p(r)вҲҘpМӮ(В· | r) вҲ’ pвҲ— (В· | r)вҲҘ1 вүӨ 2T Оұsm      2
                                                                                    D. As such, we have
                                                              2
                                       вҲ—                     Пө
that LМ„r stays below Lr,0 вҲ’ p(r)вҲҘp (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В· 200(|A|+1) for the remainder of the gradient flow
trajectory.
By convexity in Оҳ space,
                         Lr,0 вҲ’ LМ„r (Оҳ) вүӨ вҲ’вҹЁвҲҮОҳ(В·,r) LМ„(0), Оҳ(В·, r)вҹ©
                                            вүӨ вҲҮОҳ(В·,r) LМ„(0) вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ
                                            вүӨ p(r) В· вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ В· вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ.
Therefore
                                                             Пө2
                                         вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘ вүҘ
                                                        100(|A| + 1)

Stage 3: Convergence. Next, we can bound the loss decrease by
            d                2
               L(Оё) = вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮОё LвҲҘ
            dt
                       X                 2
                    вүӨвҲ’      вҲӮWOV (В·,r) L
                            r
                         X                       2
                    =вҲ’           вҲӮWOV (В·,r) Lr
                            r
                         X
                    =вҲ’          WKQ (r)2 p(r)2 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ
                            r
                         X                                                                        2
                    вүӨвҲ’          вҲҘОҳ(В·, r)вҲҘp(r)2 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ
                            r
                              Пө2     X                                                        2
                    вүӨвҲ’                  p(r)2 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ
                         200(|A| + 1) r

Since L(Оҳ) вүӨ L(Оҳ0 ) = log |A|, and L(Оҳ) вүҘ 0, there exists some t вүӨ maxr tвҲ— + 100(|A| +
1) log |A|ПөвҲ’2 ПөвҲ’2
               min such that
                   X                                                         2
                       p(r)2 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ Ez1:T [pМӮ(В· | z1:T ) | r вҲҲ z1:T ]вҲҘ вүӨ Пө2min ,
                     r

as desired.

To conclude, we must set Оұ, Оұsm , T вҲ— appropriately in terms of Пө in order to apply Lemma 6.

Proof of Theorem 6. Let Пө = Пөmin вүӨ 100(|A|+1)1
                                                   В· minr вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ be the target accuracy. Let

                                               вҲҡ Пө
us choose the initialization Оұ so that log              = О№, where О№ is chosen so that
                                                 Оұ   |A|+1


                            О№ вүҘ 100(|A| + 1) log |A|ПөвҲ’4 p(r)вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ.
In this case, we see that

                                                                       вҲ’1
                                T вҲ— вүӨ 2О№ max p(r)вҲ’1 вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ      .
                                            r



                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                               вҲ’1
Since pвҲ— (В· | r) is supportedвҲҡon at most D elements, and |A| вүҘ 2D, we have вҲҘpвҲ— (В· вҲҡ
вҲҡ                                                                                 | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ       вүӨ
                     вҲ—
  2D. Therefore T вүӨ 2R D В· О№. Let us compute Оұsm . We see that, since S вүҘ 8R 2D,
                                                  вҲҡ !
                                                4R D         p
                              WKQ (s) вүӨ exp            О№ В· Оұ |A| + 1
                                                  S

                                               1     p
                                       вүӨ exp О№ Оұ |A| + 1
                                               2
                                          вҲҡ
                                       = ПөОұ В· (|A| + 1)1/4
                                          вҲҡ
                                       вүӨ Оұ
                           вҲҡ
Similarly, since N вүҘ 4R 2DT ,
                                                  вҲҡ      !
                                              4R DT          p
                             WKQ (s) вүӨ exp              О№ В· Оұ |A| + 1
                                                 |N |

                                              1     p
                                      вүӨ exp О№ Оұ |A| + 1
                                              2
                                         вҲҡ
                                      вүӨ Оұ
                                            вҲҡ
Therefore the assumption holds for Оұsm = Оұ. To conclude, we must verify that
                                            1 вҲ’1
                                    TОұ вүӨ       О№ В· min вҲҘpвҲ— (В· | r) вҲ’ p0 вҲҘ.
                                           300      r

But since Оұ = вҲҡ Пө              eвҲ’О№ , the RHS scales with eвҲ’О№ and the RHS scales with О№, and thus the
                       |A|+1
condition can be obtained for choosing О№ sufficiently large.
Under the setting of paramters the conditions of Lemma 6 are satisfied, and thus the claim holds.

D.4    H ELPER L EMMA

Lemma 7. Let z(t) вүҘ 0 satisfy
                                                 zМҮ вүӨ Az + Bz 2 .
for positive constants A, B. Then
                                                     Az(0)eAt
                                        z(t) вүӨ                       .
                                                 A + Bz(0)(1 вҲ’ eAt )
Furthermore, if
                                                 zМҮ вүҘ Az вҲ’ Bz 2 ,
             A
and z вҲҲ [0, 2B ] on the interval [0, T ], then
                                                     Az(0)eAt
                                        z(t) вүҘ                      .
                                                 A + Bz(0)(eAt вҲ’ 1)
for all t вҲҲ [0, T ].

Both claims follow from the Bihari-LaSalle inequality.

E     P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 6
E.1    A SSOCIATIVE M EMORIES

Proof of Theorem 7. f вҲ— вҶ’ F вҶ’ fЛҶ is a Markov chain, so by the data processing inequality,
                                            I(f вҲ— ; fЛҶ) вүӨ I(f вҲ— ; F ).


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Also, by definition of mutual information
                                          I(f вҲ— ; F ) вүӨ H(F ) вүӨ B,

where the last inequality follows since F is an B-bit message. Thus I(f вҲ— ; fЛҶ) вүӨ B.
Let qx (В· | fЛҶ) be the conditional distribution of f вҲ— (x) given fЛҶ. Consider some fixed fЛҶ. fЛҶ(x) is also a
probability distribution over [M ], and thus by GibbsвҖҷ inequality
                                    h            i                h               i
                        EyвҲјqx (В·|fЛҶ) вҲ’ log fЛҶ(x)y вүҘ EyвҲјqx (В·|fЛҶ) вҲ’ log qx (y | fЛҶ) .

Therefore, letting q be the marginal distribution over fЛҶ and qx the marginal over f вҲ— (x),
                    h                  i      h             h                ii
            Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ вҲ’ log fЛҶ(x)f вҲ— (x) = EfЛҶ EyвҲјqx (В·|fЛҶ) вҲ’ log fЛҶ(x)y
                                              h             h                   ii
                                         вүҘ EfЛҶ EyвҲјqx (В·|fЛҶ) вҲ’ log qx (y | fЛҶ)
                                                   h                        i
                                         = Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ вҲ’ log qx (f вҲ— (x) | fЛҶ)
                                                   "                                           #
                                                            qx (f вҲ— (x), fЛҶ)             вҲ—
                                         = Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ вҲ’ log                     вҲ’ log qx (f (x))
                                                           q(fЛҶ)qx (f вҲ— (x))
                                          = вҲ’I(f вҲ— (x); fЛҶ) + log M.
where in the last step we use the fact that qx is uniform over [M ], and plug in the definition of mutual
information. The total loss is thus
                                h     i    X
                        Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ L(fЛҶ) вүҘ         p(x) вҲ’I(f вҲ— (x); fЛҶ) + log M .                      (21)
                                            xвҲҲ[N ]

Since the yi are independent,
                                                         X
                                   B вүҘ I(f вҲ— ; fЛҶ) вүҘ              I(f вҲ— (x); fЛҶ).
                                                         xвҲҲ[N ]

Also, 0 вүӨ I(f вҲ— (x); fЛҶ) вүӨ H(f вҲ— (x)) = log M . Therefore equation 21 is minimized when
I(f вҲ— (x); fЛҶ) = log M for the B/ log M most frequent tokens. Altogether,
                                       h     i           X
                               Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ L(fЛҶ) вүҘ log M В·        p(x).
                                                                  x>вҢҲ logBM вҢү


Proof of Corollary 1. Let p(x) = ZОұ xвҲ’Оұ , where ZОұ = xвҲҲ[N ] xвҲ’Оұ . We can bound
                                                      P

                                 n         Pn
                                X                 xвҲ’Оұ
                                   p(x) = Px=kn     вҲ’Оұ
                                                       вүҚ k 1вҲ’Оұ .
                                    x=k       x=1 x

Therefore
                                                                                     1вҲ’Оұ
                      h     i                X                         B
              Ef вҲ— ,fЛҶ L(fЛҶ) вүҘ log M В·                  p(x) вүі log M                       вүі B 1вҲ’Оұ .
                                                                     log M
                                          x>вҢҲ logBM вҢү


E.2   FACTUAL R ECALL
                              h                      i
Proof. Define в„“(s, r) := ED,fЛҶ вҲ’ log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) so that

                                            L = p(s, r) В· в„“(s, r).


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let us define the expanded dataset D := {Ar }rвҲҲR вҲӘ {aвҲ— (s, r)}sвҲҲS,rвҲҲR . We observe that D вҶ’
aвҲ— вҶ’ F вҶ’ fЛҶ is a Markov chain, and thus by the data processing inequality

                                                         B вүҘ I(D; fЛҶ).
Next, by the chain rule, we can decompose

                   I(D; fЛҶ) = I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) + I(aвҲ— ; fЛҶ | A1 , . . . , AR )
                                                        X
                            вүҘ I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) +    I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | A1 , . . . , AR )
                                                                      s,r
                                                                  X
                            = I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) +                     I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar ),
                                                                      s,r

                                                              вҲ—
where the first inequality uses the fact that the a (s, r) are conditionally independent given the Ar ,
and the second uses that aвҲ— (s, r) is independent of ArвҖІ given Ar , for r Мё= rвҖІ .
We can decompose the first mutual information term, using the fact that the Ar are nearly indepen-
dent:
Lemma 8. Assume that |V| вүҘ 2RD. Then
                                                                                            2    2
                                                              X                      2R D
                                I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) вүҘ               I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вҲ’       .
                                                                  r
                                                                                       |V|

We next relate I(Ar ; fЛҶ) to the loss. The intuition for this lemma is that for a fixed r the quantity
P                                        ЛҶ
  s в„“(s, r) is small, then the predictor f must contain information about the answer set Ar .
                                                        q
Lemma 9. Assume that |V| вүҘ 2D. Define О· := C D                      2
                                                           S log(2D log |V|) for a sufficiently large
constant C, and assume that О· вүӨ 1. Then
                             D                X                                 |V| 2D log |V| 2D2
        I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вүҘ вҲ’(1 + О·) В·                       в„“(s, r) + D log              вҲ’          вҲ’      вҲ’ О·D вҲ’ 1
                             S                                                   D     |V|       |V|
                                              sвҲҲ[S]                                |           {z           }
                                                                                                lower order term


Finally, we relate I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar ) to the loss. Similarly, the intuition for this lemma is that if the
loss в„“(s, r) is small, then fЛҶ must contain information about the true association aвҲ— (s, r).
Lemma 10. For all s, r,
                                    I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar ) вүҘ log D вҲ’ в„“(s, r).

The proofs for Lemmas 8 to 10 are deferred to Appendix E.3.
Combining Lemmas 8 to 10, we get
                                X
  B вүҘ I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) +   I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar )
                                    s,r

                 DX                     |V| 2RD log |V| 2RD2               2R2 D2
      = вҲ’(1 + О·)       в„“(s, r) + RD log    вҲ’           вҲ’       вҲ’ О·RD вҲ’ R вҲ’
                 S s,r                   D     |V|       |V|                 |V|
                                           |                 {z                  }
                                                                                         lower order term
                         X
        + SR log D вҲ’             в„“(s, r)
                          s,r
                       X
                 D                                     |V|
      = вҲ’ (1 + О·) + 1      в„“(s, r) + SR log D + RD log     вҲ’ Оөlot ,
                 S     s,r
                                                        D

                  log |V|                 2                                 2   2
where Оөlot := 2RD|V|      + 2RD
                             |V| + О·RD + R +
                                             2R D
                                               |V| вүӘ RD log |V|
                                                             D is a lower order term.


                                                              37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Altogether, we see that in order for all the losses в„“(s, r) to equal zero, we require
                                       |V|                                   |V|
              B вүҘ SR log D + RD log        вҲ’ Пөlot вүҘ SR log D + (1 вҲ’ c)RD log
                                        D                                     D
                             1              1
                                               P
Furthermore, when p(s, r) = RS , then L = SR s,r в„“(s, r), and the bound becomes

                                                                   |V|
                    B вүҘ вҲ’((1 + О·)RD + RS) В· L + SR log D + RD log      вҲ’ Оөlot
                                                                    D
                                                                        |V|
                      вҲ’ ((1 + c)RD + RS) В· L + SR log D + (1 вҲ’ c)RD log     .
                                                                         D



E.3    AUXILIARY L EMMAS

Lemma 11. For random variables X, Y, Z,
                             I(X, Y ; Z) вүҘ I(X; Z) + I(Y ; Z) вҲ’ I(X; Y )

Proof. By standard properties of mutual information:
             I(X, Y ; Z) вҲ’ I(X; Z) вҲ’ I(Y ; Z)
              = H(X, Y ) вҲ’ H(X, Y | Z) вҲ’ H(X) + H(X | Z) вҲ’ H(Y ) + H(Y | Z)
              = I(X; Y | Z) вҲ’ I(X; Y )
              вүҘ вҲ’I(X; Y ).



Proof of Lemma 8. By Lemma 11,
                            X              X
  I(A1 , . . . , AR ; fЛҶ) вүҘ   I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вҲ’   I(Ar ; A1 , . . . , ArвҲ’1 )
                            r                  r
                                                                                                              !
                            X                  X
                        =       I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вҲ’           H(Ar ) + H(A1 , . . . , ArвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ H(A1 , . . . , Ar )
                            r                      r
                            X                  X
                        =       I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вҲ’       H(Ar ) + H(A1 , . . . , AR ).
                            r                  r

Since each Ar is a uniformly random subset of V, we have H(Ar ) = log |V|

                                                                       D . Also, we can bound

                                         |V| |V| вҲ’ D         |V| вҲ’ (R вҲ’ 1)D
             H(A1 , . . . , AR ) = log                   В·В·В·                   .
                                          D       D                 D
Thus
                                                                     |V|

               X
                                                                      D
                     H(Ar ) вҲ’ H(A1 , . . . , AR ) вүӨ R log        |V|вҲ’(RвҲ’1)D

                r                                                     D
                                                                      |V|!(|V| вҲ’ RD)!
                                                       = R log
                                                               (|V| вҲ’ D)!(|V| вҲ’ (R вҲ’ 1)D)!
                                                                     |V|
                                                       вүӨ RD log
                                                                 |V| вҲ’ RD
                                                            2 2
                                                         2R D
                                                       вүӨ         ,
                                                           |V|
                             1
where we used the bound log 1вҲ’x вүӨ 2x on (0, 21 ). Plugging in yields the desired bound.


                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 9. Let (z1 , . . . , zD ) be a random permutation of Ar . We first aim to relate I(A; fЛҶ)
to I(zi ; fЛҶ). By the data processing inequality,
                                         I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вүҘ I(z1 , . . . , zD ; fЛҶ).
By Lemma 11,
                                               X                          X
                   I(z1 , . . . , zD ; fЛҶ) вүҘ            I(zi ; fЛҶ) вҲ’              I(zi ; z1 , . . . , ziвҲ’1 )
                                                   i                        i
                                               X                          X
                                         =              I(zi ; fЛҶ) вҲ’              H(zi ) + H(z1 , . . . , zD ).
                                                   i                        i

The tuple (z1 , . . . , zD ) is chosen uniformly at random from V D , conditioned on all the zi being
distinct. Therefore H(zi ) = log |V|, and H(z1 , . . . , zD ) = log (|V| В· В· В· (|V| вҲ’ D + 1)). Thus
                                                                                       !
                                                                               D
                       X                                                   |V|
                            H(zi ) вҲ’ H(z1 , . . . , zD ) = log
                         i
                                                               |V| В· В· В· (|V| вҲ’ D + 1)
                                                                                    |V|
                                                                    вүӨ D log
                                                                                  |V| вҲ’ D
                                                                         2D2
                                                                    вүӨ         .
                                                                          |V|
Altogether,
                                                                X                      2D2
                                       I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вүҘ                  I(zi ; fЛҶ) вҲ’           .
                                                                i
                                                                                        |V|

Next, using the definition of mutual information and GibbsвҖҷ inequality,
                                         "              #          "              #
                                              P(zi | ЛҶ)
                                                     f                  q(zi | ЛҶ)
                                                                               f
                     I(zi ; fЛҶ) = Ezi ,fЛҶ log             вүҘ Ezi ,fЛҶ log
                                               P(zi )                    P(zi )

for any probability distribution q. Let us define q as follows. First, define fЛң(s, r) := (1 вҲ’ Пө)fЛҶ(s, r) +
 Пө
|V| 1 вҲҲ вҲҶV , for a small constant Пө to be chosen later. Next, define

                                                                    1XЛң
                                          q(z | fЛҶ) :=                  f (s, r)z .
                                                                    S s
                                             1
Plugging in, and observing that P(zi ) = |V|   , we get that
                                           "                        !#
                              ЛҶ                   1XЛң
                       I(zi ; f ) вүҘ Ezi ,fЛҶ log          f (s, r)zi    + log |V|.
                                                  S s

Define Nz := {s : aвҲ— (s, r) = z}. Let E be the event that |Nz | вүҘ M for all z вҲҲ A. On the event E,
we can bound
                                    !       пЈ«                          пЈ¶
                  1 X                         1   X
            log           fЛң(s, r)zi вүҘ log пЈӯ          fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) пЈё
                  S s                         S
                                                sвҲҲNzi
                                            пЈ«                              пЈ¶
                                                1    X                             |Nzi |
                                      = log пЈӯ             fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) пЈё + log
                                              |Nzi |                                 S
                                                                         sвҲҲNzi

                                                         1      X                                              |Nzi |
                                               вүҘ                          log fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + log
                                                       |Nzi |                                                    S
                                                                sвҲҲNzi

                                                 1 X                           M
                                               вүҘ     log fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + log .
                                                 M                             S
                                                          sвҲҲNzi



                                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus
                                            !
        X               1XЛң                         1 X X                              M
                log         f (s, r)zi          вүҘ         log fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + D log
                        S s                         M                                  S
        iвҲҲ[D]                                          iвҲҲ[D] sвҲҲNzi
                                                    1 X                              M
                                                =       log fЛң(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + D log
                                                    M                                S
                                                       sвҲҲ[S]
                                                  1вҲ’Пө X                        SПө                M
                                                вүҘ       log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) вҲ’    log |V| + D log .
                                                   M                           M                 S
                                                         sвҲҲ[S]

On E, we have the naive bound
                                                                      !
                                      X              1XЛң                             Пө
                                             log         f (s, r)zi       вүҘ D log       .
                                                     S s                            |V|
                                     iвҲҲ[D]

Altogether, we have
   X
       I(zi ; fЛҶ)
  iвҲҲ[D]
            пЈ®                               !пЈ№
                 X            1XЛң
  вүҘ Ezi ,fЛҶпЈ°            log       f (s, r)zi пЈ» + D log |V|
                              S s
                iвҲҲ[D]
            пЈ®            пЈ«                                              пЈ¶пЈ№
                     1 вҲ’ Пө X                        SПө                M
  вүҘ Ezi ,fЛҶпЈ°1(E) В· пЈӯ         log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) вҲ’    log |V| + D log пЈёпЈ»
                       M                            M                 S
                                    sвҲҲ[S]
                    Пө
    + P(E) В· D log      + D log |V|
                   |V|
              пЈ®                         пЈ№
     1          X                           SПө                 M                 Пө
  вүҘ    Ezi ,fЛҶпЈ°    log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) пЈ» вҲ’    log |V| + D log   + P(E) В· D log     + D log |V|
    M                                       M                  S                |V|
                      sвҲҲ[S]
          1      X                  SПө                 M                 Пө
  =вҲ’        В·           в„“(s, r) вҲ’      log |V| + D log   + P(E) В· D log     + D log |V|
          M                         M                  S                |V|
                sвҲҲ[S]

By BernsteinвҖҷs inequality and a union bound (a similar such concentration argument was used in the
lower bound proof in Allen-Zhu & Li (2024)), there exists a constant C such that P(E) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ for
                                                r
                                         S         S
                                   M=      вҲ’C         log(D/Оҙ),
                                        D         D
                                                1           1
as long as S вүҘ D log(D/Оҙ).         Set Пө = |V|    , Оҙ = 2D log |V| , and define О·                     :=
   q
2C D         2
     S log(2D log |V|) вүӨ 1. We have that
                                      r            !
                     M      1            D            1     О·
                        =      1вҲ’C         log(D/Оҙ) =    1вҲ’     ,
                      S     D            S            D     2
and thus
                                                S      D
                                                  =         вүӨ D(1 + О·).
                                                M   1 вҲ’ О·/2
Therefore
 X                        D X                   D log |V|         |V|
     I(zi ; fЛҶ) вүҘ вҲ’(1 + О·) В·  в„“(s, r) вҲ’ (1 + О·)           + D log     + D log(1 вҲ’ О·/2) вҲ’ 1
                          S                        |V|             D
iвҲҲ[D]                                  sвҲҲ[S]

                                    D X                 |V| 2D log |V|
                  вүҘ вҲ’(1 + О·)          В· в„“(s, r) + D log    вҲ’           вҲ’ О·D вҲ’ 1.
                                    S                    D     |V|
                                       sвҲҲ[S]



                                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Altogether, we have
                                          2
                      X                2D
       I(Ar ; fЛҶ) вүҘ       I(zi ; fЛҶ) вҲ’
                      i
                                        |V|
                                D X                 |V| 2D log |V| 2D2
                  вүҘ вҲ’(1 + О·)      В· в„“(s, r) + D log    вҲ’          вҲ’     вҲ’ О·D вҲ’ 1,
                                S                    D     |V|      |V|
                                     sвҲҲ[S]

as desired.

Proof of Lemma 10. By the definition of mutual information and GibbsвҖҷ inequality,
                                      "               "                            ##
                                                            P(a вҲ—
                                                                  (s, r) | ЛҶ, Ar )
                                                                           f
           I(a (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar ) = EAr EaвҲ— (s,r),fЛҶ|Ar log
              вҲ—
                                                             P(aвҲ— (s, r) | Ar )
                                      h               h                          ii
                                 = EAr EaвҲ— (s,r),fЛҶ|Ar log P(aвҲ— (s, r) | fЛҶ, Ar ) + log D
                                      h               h                          ii
                                 вүҘ EAr EaвҲ— (s,r),fЛҶ|Ar log q(aвҲ— (s, r) | fЛҶ, Ar ) + log D

where q(В· | fЛҶ, Ar ) is any distribution over V. Let us define q to be

                                  q(a | fЛҶ, Ar ) вҲқ fЛҶ(s, r)a В· 1(a вҲҲ Ar )

Since aвҲ— (s, r) вҲҲ Ar always, we have that q(aвҲ— (s, r) | fЛҶ, Ar ) вүҘ fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) , and thus
                                            h                h                   ii
                I(aвҲ— (s, r); fЛҶ | Ar ) вүҘ EAr EaвҲ— (s,r),fЛҶ|Ar log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + log D
                                           h                    i
                                       = ED log fЛҶ(s, r)aвҲ— (s,r) + log D
                                      = log D вҲ’ в„“(s, r).


F    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS

Lemma 12. Let u, v be drawn uniformly over the d-dimensional sphere of radius 1. Then
                                  E вҹЁu, vвҹ©2p вүӨ (2p)p dвҲ’p


Lemma 13 (Hypercontractivity for product distributions). Let f : (SdвҲ’1 )k Г— Rm вҶ’ R be a poly-
nomial of total degree at most p. Then

                             вҲҘf вҲҘLq (ОҪ вҠ—k вҠ—Вөm ) вүӨ (q вҲ’ 1)p/2 вҲҘf вҲҘL2 (ОҪ вҠ—k вҠ—Вөm ) ,
                                      d


where ОҪd is the uniform distribution over the sphere SdвҲ’1 , and Вөm is the standard Gaussian in m
dimensions.

Hypercontractivity for the Boolean hypercube (which implies hypercontractivity for Gaussian space)
and for the sphere are consequences of Beckner (1975; 1992). To show Lemma 13, one can use
similar techniques to the proof of Corollary 12 in Montanaro (2012).
Lemma 14. Let f : (SdвҲ’1 )k Г— Rm вҶ’ R be a polynomial of total degree at most p. Assume that
Ef вүҘ 0, where the expectation is taken with respect to ОҪdвҠ—k вҠ— Вөm . Then if

                                      2p eвҲ’1 logp (1/Оҙ)Var(f )
                                                               вүӨ 1,
                                               (Ef )2
f вүӨ 0 with probability at most Оҙ.


                                                     41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By MarkovвҖҷs inequality,
                                 P(f вүӨ 0) вүӨ P(|f вҲ’ Ef | вүҘ Ef )
                                                            q
                                          вүӨ P(|f вҲ’ Ef | вүҘ (Ef )q )
                                                            q
                                              E[|f вҲ’ Ef | ]
                                          вүӨ                 .
                                                 (Ef )q
Since f is a degree p polynomial, by Lemma 13 we have that
                                             q 1/q
                                 E[|f вҲ’ Ef | ]       вүӨ q p/2 Var(f )1/2 .
Therefore
                                                p         q/2
                                               q Var(f )
                                   P(f вүӨ 0) вүӨ                 .
                                                 (Ef )2
Setting q = 2 log(1/Оҙ), we see that whenever
                                    2p eвҲ’1 logp (1/Оҙ)Var(f )
                                                             вүӨ 1,
                                             (Ef )2
we have
                                              p         q/2
                                             q Var(f )
                                 P(f вүӨ 0) вүӨ                 вүӨ Оҙ,
                                               (Ef )2
as desired.

F.1   H ERMITE P OLYNOMIALS

Let Вө be the standard Gaussian in 1 dimension, and let L2 (Вө) be the function space of square-
integrable functions with respect to this Gaussian measure. The Hermite polynomials {hk }kвүҘ0
form an orthonormal basis of L2 (Вө). In particular, hk is a degree k polynomial, satisfying
                                        вҹЁhi , hk вҹ©L2 (Вө) = Оҙij .
One useful property of Hermite polynomials is the following:
Lemma 15. Let u, w вҲҲ Rd with вҲҘuвҲҘ = вҲҘwвҲҘ = 1, and let x вҲј N (0, Id ). Then
                              Ex [hk (вҹЁu, xвҹ©)hk (вҹЁw, xвҹ©)] = вҹЁu, wвҹ©k .

Next, let Вөd be the standard Gaussian in d dimensions. The function space L2 (Вөd ) has an orthonor-
                                                                  вҠ—k
mal basis of Hermite tensors {Hek }kвүҘ0 , where Hek : Rm вҶ’ Rd         :
                                                         d вҠ—k
                                                 m

Definition 1. Let the kth Hermite tensor Hek : R вҶ’ R           be defined as
                                                          вҲҮk Вөd (x)
                                    Hek (x) = (вҲ’1)k                 ,
                                                           Вөd (x)

                                    2
where Вөm (x) = (2ПҖ)вҲ’d/2 exp вҲ’ 12 вҲҘxвҲҘ is the Gaussian density. We remark that each entry of
Hek (x) is a degree k polynomial in x, and

The Hermite tensors satisfy the following useful properties:
Lemma 16 (Properties of Hermite Tensors).

       вҖў (Connection to Hermite Polynomials) If w вҲҲ Rd , вҲҘwвҲҘ = 1, then
                                       hk (вҹЁw, xвҹ©) = вҹЁHek (x), wвҠ—k вҹ©

       вҖў (SteinвҖҷs Lemma) For x вҲј N (0, Id ), f вҲҲ L2 (Вөd ),
                                     Ex [f (x)Hek (x)] = Ex вҲҮk f (x) .


                                                     42
