Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OMPUTATIONALLY E FFICIENT RL UNDER L INEAR
B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS FOR D ETERMINISTIC DY-
NAMICS

 Runzhe Wu∗                                                   Ayush Sekhari∗
 Cornell University                                           MIT
 rw646@cornell.edu                                            sekhari@mit.edu

 Akshay Krishnamurthy                                         Wen Sun
 Microsoft Research                                           Cornell University
 akshaykr@microsoft.com                                       ws455@cornell.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

             We study computationally and statistically efficient Reinforcement Learning algo-
             rithms for the linear Bellman Complete setting. This setting uses linear function
             approximation to capture value functions and unifies existing models like linear
             Markov Decision Processes (MDP) and Linear Quadratic Regulators (LQR).
             While it is known from the prior works that this setting is statistically tractable,
             it remained open whether a computationally efficient algorithm exists. Our work
             provides a computationally efficient algorithm for the linear Bellman complete
             setting that works for MDPs with large action spaces, random initial states, and
             random rewards but relies on the underlying dynamics to be deterministic. Our
             approach is based on randomization: we inject random noise into least squares
             regression problems to perform optimistic value iteration. Our key technical con-
             tribution is to carefully design the noise to only act in the null space of the training
             data to ensure optimism while circumventing a subtle error amplification issue.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Various application domains of Reinforcement Learning (RL)—including game playing, robotics,
self-driving cars, and foundation models—feature environments with large state and action spaces.
In such settings, the learner aims to find a well performing policy by repeated interactions with the
environment to acquire knowledge. Due to the high dimensionality of the problem, function approx-
imation techniques are used to generalize the knowledge acquired across the state and action space.
Under the broad category of function approximation, model-free RL stands out as a particularly pop-
ular approach due to its simple implementation and relatively better sample efficiency in practice. In
model-free RL, the learner uses function approximation (e.g., an expressive function class like deep
neural networks) to model the state-action value function of various policies in the underlying MDP.
In fact, the combination of model-free RL with various empirical exploration heuristics has led to
notable empirical advances, including breakthroughs in game playing (Silver et al., 2016; Berner
et al., 2019), robot manipulation (Andrychowicz et al., 2020), and self-driving (Chen et al., 2019).
Theoretical advancements have paralleled the practical successes in RL, with tremendous progress in
recent years in building rigorous statistical foundations to understand what structures in the environ-
ment and the function class suffice for sample-efficient RL. These advancements are supported by
optimal exploration strategies that align with the corresponding structural assumptions, and by now
we have a rich set of tools and techniques for sample-efficient RL in MDPs with large state/action
spaces (Russo & Van Roy, 2013; Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Du et al.,
2021; Jin et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022). However, despite a rigorous statisti-
cal foundation, a significant challenge remains: many of these theoretically rigorous approaches
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for rich function approximation are not computationally feasible, and thus have limited practical
applicability. For example, some require solving complex optimization problems that are compu-
tationally intractable in practice (Zanette et al., 2020b); others require deterministic dynamics and
initial states (Du et al., 2020); and some methods depend on maintaining large and complex version
spaces (Jin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021) which are intractable in terms of memory and computation.
One of the most striking examples of this statistical-computational gap is observed in the Linear
Bellman Completeness setting, which is perhaps one of the simplest learning settings. Linear Bell-
man completeness serves as a bridge between RL and control theory literature as it provides a unified
framework to capture Linear MDPs (Jin et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2019; Zanette et al., 2020b) and
the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR), two popular models in RL and control respectively. In partic-
ular, the linear Bellman completeness setting captures MDPs where the state-action value function
of the optimal policy is a linear function of some pre-specified feature representations (of states
and actions), and the Bellman backups of linear state-action value functions are linear (w.r.t. some
feature representation). Naturally, for this setting, the learner utilizes the function class F con-
sisting of all linear functions over the given feature representation as the value function class for
model-free RL. In addition to considering a linear class, we also assume that the class F exhibits
low inherent Bellman error—a structural assumption that quantifies the error in approximating the
Bellman backup of functions within F. The first assumption, i.e., linearity of optimal state-action
value function, is perhaps the simplest modeling assumption one can make in RL with function ap-
proximation. Furthermore, emerging evidence suggests that linearity is practically useful, as with
adequate feature representation, linear functions can represent value functions in various domains.
The second assumption, i.e. low inherent Bellman error of the class, while being a bit mysterious, is
a natural condition for statistical tractability for classic algorithms such as Fitted Q-iteration (FQI)
and temporal difference (TD) learning with linear function approximation (Munos, 2005; Zanette
et al., 2020b). It is also well-known that linearity alone does not suffice for efficient RL (Wang et al.,
2021; Weisz et al., 2021).
While the prior works have shown that RL with linear bellman completeness is statistically tractable,
and one can learn with sample complexity that scales polynomially with both d and H (where d
is the dimensionality of the feature representation and H is the horizon of the RL problem), the
proposed algorithms that obtain such sample complexity in the online RL setting are not compu-
tationally efficient. Given the simplicity of the problem, it was conjectured that a computationally
efficient algorithm should exist. However, no such algorithms were proposed. Unfortunately, the
classical approaches of combining supervised learning techniques with RL in the online setting, e.g.,
value function iteration, which are computationally efficient by design, fail to extend to be statis-
tically tractable due to exponential blowups from error compounding, especially without making
norm-boundedness assumptions. On the other hand, the techniques of adding quadratic exploration
bonuses, e.g., the one proposed in LinUCB (Li et al., 2010) and used in LSVI for linear MDPs, also
fail here as Bellman backups of quadratic functions are not necessarily within the linear class F. In
fact, the search for a computationally efficient algorithm with large action spaces is open even when
the transition dynamics are deterministic.
In this work, we provide the first computationally efficient algorithm for the linear Bellman com-
plete setting with deterministic dynamics, that enjoys regret bound of O(d ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T 1/2 )
for feature dimension d, horizon H, and number of rounds T . Importantly, our algorithm works
with large action spaces, stochastic reward functions, and stochastic initial states. The key ideas
of our algorithm are twofold: using randomization to encourage exploration and leveraging a span
argument to bound the regret. While adding random noise to the learned parameters has been quite
successful in linear function approximation, unfortunately, for our specific setting, since we need
to add sufficiently large noise to cancel out the estimation error, blind randomization can cause the
corresponding parameters to grow exponentially with the horizon. We avoid paying for this blow-up
by only adding noise to the null space of the data. In particular, when the dynamics are determinis-
tic, by adding exploration noise only in the null space, we can learn the value function exactly for
any trajectories that lie within the span of the data seen so far. Additionally, a simple span argument
bounds the number of times the trajectories fall outside the span of the historical data. Together,
these techniques leads to our polynomial sample complexity bound. The resulting algorithm relies
on linear regression oracles under convex constraints, which we show can be approximately solved
via a random-walk-based algorithm (Bertsimas & Vempala, 2004).



                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Computational Efficient RL under Linear Bellman Completeness. Numerous works have fo-
cused on computationally efficient RL within the scope of linear Bellman completeness (LBC).
The simplest setting is tabular MDPs where computationally efficient and near-optimal algorithms
have been well known (Azar et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2018). Tabular MDPs
can be extended to linear MDPs (Jin et al., 2020), where computationally efficient algorithms are
also known (Jin et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2023; He et al., 2023). However, in the setting of
linear Bellman completeness, which captures linear MDPs, the existence of computationally effi-
cient algorithms remain unclear. Previous works have resorted to various assumptions to achieve
computational efficiency, such as few actions (Golowich & Moitra, 2024) and assuming MDPs are
“explorable” (Zanette et al., 2020c). We provide a detailed overview of the literature in Section 3.2.
Exploration via Randomization. Random noise has been a powerful alternative to bonus-based
exploration in RL literature. A typical approach is Randomized Least-Squares Value Iteration
(RLSVI) (Osband et al., 2016), which injects Gaussian noise into the least-squares estimate and
achieves near-optimal worst-case regret for linear MDPs (Agrawal et al., 2021; Zanette et al., 2020a);
Ishfaq et al. (2023) instead propose posterior sampling via Langevin Monte Carlo for Q-function and
also obtain regret bounds for linear MDPs; Ishfaq et al. (2021) developed randomization algorithms
for general function approximation assuming bounded eluder dimension and Bellman completeness
for any function. Randomization is also explored in preference-based RL, leading to the first com-
putationally efficient algorithm with near-optimal regret guarantees for linear MDPs (Wu & Sun,
2024). However, these approaches either have strong assumptions (e.g., Bellman completeness for
any function), or inject random noise larger than the estimation error, causing exponential blow-
up of parameter values—to mitigate it, they truncate the value, but this is feasible only in low-rank
MDPs and challenging under linear Bellman completeness as the Bellman backup of truncated value
may no longer be linear. Consequently, existing algorithms cannot handle linear Bellman complete
problems, and new techniques capable of managing exponential parameter values are needed.
Beyond Linear Bellman Completeness. Many structural conditions capture linear Bellman com-
pleteness, such as Bilinear class (Du et al., 2021), Bellman eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021),
Bellman rank (Jiang et al., 2017), witness rank (Sun et al., 2019), and decision-estimation coeffi-
cient (Foster et al., 2021). While statistically efficient algorithms exist for these settings, no compu-
tationally efficient algorithms are known.

3   P RELIMINARIES
A finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) is given by a tuple M = (S, A, H, T, r, µ) where
S is the state space, A is the action space, H ∈ N is the horizon, T ∶ S × A → ∆(S) is the transition
function, r ∶ S × A → [0, 1] is the reward function and µ ∈ ∆(S) is the initial state distribution.
Given a policy π ∶ S ↦ ∆(A), we denote Qπh (s, a) = Eπ [∑H       i=h ri ∣ sh = s, ah = a] as the layered
state-action value function of policy π and Vhπ (s) = Qπh (s, π(s)) as the state value function. The
optimal value function is denoted by Vh⋆ (s) = maxπ Vhπ (s), and the optimal policy is π ⋆ .
We focus on the setting of linear function approximation and consider the following linear Bellman
completeness, which ensures that the Bellman backup of a linear function remains linear.
Definition 1 (Linear Bellman Completeness). An MDP is said to be linear Bellman complete with
respect to a feature mapping ϕ if there exists a mapping T ∶ Rd → Rd so that, for all θ ∈ Rd and all
(s, a) ∈ S × A, it holds that
                             ⟨T θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩ =      E         max ⟨θ, ϕ(s′ , a′ )⟩.
                                                s′ ∼T(s,a)    a
                                                              ′



Moreover, we require that, for all h ∈ [H] and (s, a) ∈ S × A, the random reward is bounded in
[0, 1] with mean rh (s, a) = ⟨ωh⋆ , ϕ(s, a)⟩ for some unknown ωh⋆ ∈ Rd .

We assume ∥ϕ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1 for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A. Notably, we do not impose any upper bound on
∥ωh⋆ ∥2 or any ℓ2 -norm non-expansiveness of the Bellman backup, distinguishing us from some exist-
ing works—in Section 3.1, we discuss why many existing definitions of linear Bellman completeness
fail to capture even tabular MDPs or linear MDPs due to certain ℓ2 -norm boundedness assumptions.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We further assume the feature space spans Rd , i.e., span({ϕ(s, a) ∶ s ∈ S, a ∈ A}) = Rd ; otherwise,
we can project the feature space onto its span or use pseudo-inverse in the analysis when needed.
We can verify that the linear Bellman completeness captures both linear MDPs and Linear Quadratic
Regulators (for a convex subset of linear functions). The proof is in Appendix E.
Next, we consider deterministic state transition.
Assumption 1 (Deterministic transitions). For all s ∈ S and a ∈ A, there is a unique state s′ ∈ S to
which the system transitions to after taking action a on state s.

We emphasize that, although the transition is deterministic, the initial state distribution is stochastic
(although we assume that {st,1 }t≤T is independently sampled from an initial distribution µ, our
results extend to the scenarios when {st,1 }t≤T are adversarially chosen). Additionally, the reward
signals can be stochastic. Hence, learning is still challenging in this case. The goal is to achieve low
regret over T rounds. The regret is defined as
                                             T
                               RegT ∶= E [ ∑ (V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))] .
                                             t=1

The expectation here is taken over the randomness of algorithm and reward signals. While it is
defined as an average for simplicity, a concentration inequality can yield the high-probability regret.
                                            ̃ and O(⋅)
In this paper, we use asymptotic notations Θ(⋅)       ̃ to hides logarithmic and constant factors.

3.1   OTHER L INEAR B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS D EFINITIONS IN THE L ITERATURE

Several closely related definitions of Linear Bellman Completeness have been considered in the
literature. In the following, we demonstrate that some of these variant definitions face limitations
due to additional ℓ2 -norm assumptions. We present two commonly imposed assumptions in existing
works below, and subsequently provide examples illustrating their potential limitations.
(1) Assuming Bounded ℓ2 -norm of Parameters. Golowich & Moitra (2024); Zanette et al.
(2020b;c) assume that any value function under consideration has its parameters bounded in ℓ2 -
norm, i.e., when we apply the Bellman backup, the resulting state-action value function always lies
in {Q ∶ Q(s, a) = ⟨ϕ(s, a), θ⟩, ∥θ∥2 ≤ R} where R is a pre-fixed polynomial in the dimension of
the feature space. We will show that this assumption might not hold true since ∥θ∥2 is unnecessarily
bounded under linear Bellman completeness.
(2) Assuming Non-expansiveness of Bellman Backup in ℓ2 -norm. Song et al. (2022) assume that,
after applying the Bellman backup, the ℓ2 -norm of the value function parameters will not increase,
i.e., for any θ, they assume the existence of parameter θ′ such that ∥θ′ ∥2 ≤ ∥θ∥2 and ⟨ϕ(s, a), θ′ ⟩ =
Es′ ∼T(s,a) maxa′ ⟨ϕ(s′ , a′ ), θ⟩ for all s, a. This assumption is stronger than the previous one and
does not hold even in tabular MDPs, as we will show in the second example below.
The following example demonstrates that the two assumptions above do not generally hold under
linear Bellman completeness as the ℓ2 -norm amplification can actually be arbitrarily large.
Example 1 (Arbitrarily Large ℓ2 -norm on Parameters). Consider a layered linear MDP with three
states, s1 , s2 , s3 , and a single action a1 . Here s1 is in the          √ layer and s2 and s3√are in the
                                                                      √ first
second layer. For some    √   ε and   p,  we  define ϕ(s1 , a 1 ) = (  ε,     p − ε), µ(s2 ) = (p/ ε, 0), and
µ(s3 ) = (0, (1 − p)/ p − ε). We further define r(s2 , ⋅) = ε and r(s3 , ⋅) = 1. We can verify that
P (s2 ∣s1 , a1 ) = p and P (s3 ∣s1 , a1 ) = 1 − p. Hence Q(s1 , a1 ) = pε + 1 − p. We assume Q-function is
parameterized by θ. Then, since ∥ϕ(s1 , a1 )∥ = p, it must hold that ∥θ∥ ≥ (pε + 1 − p)/p = ε + p−1 − 1.
While p can be arbitrarily small, the norm of θ can be arbitrarily large.

We may hope to “normalize” the features in this example so that the ℓ2 -norm of the parameters is
bounded. However, it is unclear how to do so since changing either ε or p will change the MDP,
and feature search is likely a hard problem. Essentially, this example breaks one of the assumptions
in the original linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020) which requires the integral ∫ gµ to be bounded for any
function g ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, while being a linear MDP, the original LSVI-UCB algorithm (Jin et al.,
2020) indeed will not work for this example. However, we note that our algorithm can still work.
Nevertheless, as the above example leverages a careful design of the feature, we might hope that
some non-expansiveness properties could hold under stronger representation assumptions (e.g.,


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


when state space is tabular). Unfortunately, the following example shows that Bellman backup
can be expansive even in tabular MDPs.
Example 2 (Expansiveness of Bellman Backup in ℓ2 -norm). Consider a tabular MDP with horizon
H = 2, S states {s1 , . . . , sS } in the first layer, a single state s in the second layer, and a single
action a. On taking action a in any state in the first-layer, the agent deterministically transitions
to s, and on taking action a in s deterministically yields a reward of 1. Since linear Bellman
completeness captures tabular MDPs with one-hot encoded features where ϕ(si , a) = ei ∈ RS+1
for i ≤ S and ϕ(s, a) = eS+1 = (0, . . . , 0, 1)⊺ , the state-action value function at the second layer can
be parameterized by θ2 = (0, . . . , 0, 1)⊺ . However, applying the Bellman backup, since the return-
to-go for any first-layer state si is 1 (because s always yields a reward of 1), the backed-up    √ value
function must be parameterized by θ1 = (1, 1, . . . , 1)⊺ . Here, we find that ∥θ1 ∥2 /∥θ2 ∥2 = S, thus
showing that Bellman backup cannot guarantee non-expansiveness of the ℓ2 -norm.

Hence, in this paper, we aim not to assume any ℓ2 -norm bound or ℓ2 -norm non-expansiveness of
the parameters. Unfortunately, without these assumptions, the ground truth parameter of the optimal
value function can exponentially grow with the horizon as evidenced by the examples above, thus
invalidating prior methods requiring bounded parameter. Our key contribution is an algorithm that
remains efficient even if the parameter norm blows up but requiring deterministic transition.


3.2   OTHER P RIOR W ORKS ON L INEAR B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS

In this section, we review prior efforts on RL under linear Bellman completeness and discuss various
assumptions underlying these approaches.
Efficient Algorithms under Generative Access. A generative model takes as input a state-action
pair (s, a) and returns a sample s′ ∼ T(⋅ ∣ s, a) and the reward signal. With such a generative
model, Linear Least-Squares Value Iteration (LSVI) can achieve statistical and computational effi-
ciency (Agarwal et al., 2019). However, generative access is a big assumption, and our work aims
to operate with only online access.
Efficient Algorithms under Explorability Assumption. Zanette et al. (2020c) propose a reward-
free algorithm under the assumption that every direction in the parameter space is reachable. This
assumption, when translated into tabular MDPs, means that any state can be reached with a prob-
ability bounded below by some (large enough) positive constant. This does not hold if there are
unreachable states or if the probability of reaching them is exponentially small.
Computationally Intractable Algorithms. Zanette et al. (2020b) present a computationally in-
tractable algorithm that requires solving an intractable optimization problem. In our work, we aim
to only utilize a tractable squared loss minimization oracle.
Few action MDPs. Golowich & Moitra (2024) propose a computationally efficient algorithm under
linear Bellman completeness, inspired by the bonus-based exploration approach in LSVI-UCB (Jin
et al., 2020) for Linear MDPs. While their algorithm extends to stochastic MDPs, both the sample
complexity and running time have exponential dependence on the size of the action space. In com-
parison, our algorithm extends to infinite action spaces but relies on the transition dynamics to be
deterministic.
Deterministic Rewards or Deterministic Initial State. Several existing studies provide computa-
tionally and statistically efficient algorithms for more general settings but under stronger assump-
tions; these methods can be extended to linear Bellman completeness settings but similarly strong
assumptions will also apply. Du et al. (2020) provide an algorithm based on a span argument that is
efficient for MDPs that have linear optimal state-action value function (a.k.a. the Linear Q⋆ setting),
deterministic transition dynamics, deterministic initial state, and stochastic rewards. Unfortunately,
their approach cannot extend to settings with stochastic initial states, as we consider in our paper.
Another line of work due to Wen & Van Roy (2017) considers the Q⋆ -realizable setting with deter-
ministic dynamics, deterministic rewards, stochastic initial states, and bounded eluder dimension.
Their approach can be extended to the linear bellman completeness setting when both rewards and
dynamics are deterministic. However, their algorithm fails to converge when rewards are stochastic
and thus may not apply to the problem setting that we consider.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Efficient Algorithm in the hybrid RL setting. Song et al. (2022) develop efficient algorithms for
the hybrid RL setting, where the learner has access to both online interaction and an offline dataset.
However, they do not have a fully online algorithms.
In summary, no previous work addresses the problem with stochastic initial states, stochastic re-
wards, and large action spaces. This is the gap that we aim to fill with this work.


4     A LGORITHM

In this section, we present our algorithm for online RL under linear Bellman completeness. See
Algorithm 1 for pseudocode. The input to the algorithm consists of three components. First, the
noise variances, {σh }H
                      h=1 and σR , control the scale of the random noise. Second, a D-optimal design
(defined below) for the feature space.
Definition 2 (D-optimal design). The D-optimal design for the set of features Φ = {ϕ(s, a) ∶ s ∈
S, a ∈ A} is a distribution ρ over Φ that maximizes log det(∑ϕ∈Φ ρ(ϕ)ϕϕ⊺ ).

There always exist D-optimal designs with at most O(d2 ) support points (Lemma 23). Many ef-
ficient algorithms can be applied to find approximate D-optimal designs such as the Frank-Wolfe.
The algorithm also requires a constrained squared loss minimization oracle Osq , and we introduce
an instantiation of Osq in Section 6.

Algorithm 1 Null Space Randomization for Linear Bellman Completeness
Require: • Noise variances {σh }H
                                h=1 and σR .
         • A D-optimal design for Φ = {ϕ(s, a) ∶ s ∈ S, a ∈ A} given by {(ϕi , ρi )}m
                                                                                    i=1 .
         • Squared loss minimization oracle Osq .
 1: Define Σ1,h ∶= ∑i=1 ρi ϕi ϕ⊺i for all h ∈ [H].
                      m

 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:   Let θt,H+1 ← 0, Qt,H+1 ← 0, V t,H+1 ← 0.
 4:   for h = H, . . . , 1 do
 5:       Let Pt,h be the orthogonal projection matrix onto span({ϕ(si,h , ai,h ) ∶ i = 1, . . . , t − 1})
 6:      For i ∈ [m], define ϕ∥t,h,i = Pt,h ϕi and ϕ⊥t,h,i = (I − Pt,h )ϕi
                                 ∥       ∥      ⊺   ⊥       ⊥      ⊺
 7:      Let Λt,h ← ∑m  i=1 ρi (ϕt,h,i (ϕt,h,i ) + ϕt,h,i (ϕt,h,i ) )
 8:      // Fit value function and reward using squared loss regression //
 9:      Compute θ̂t,h and ω ̂t,h using the squared loss minimization oracle Osq as:
                                             t−1                                          2
                            θ̂t,h ← argmin ∑ (⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ))                 (1)
                                   θ∈O(Wh ) i=1
                                            t−1                              2
                           ̂t,h ← argmin ∑ (⟨ω, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h )
                           ω                                                                            (2)
                                    ω∈O(1) i=1

10:      // Perturb the estimated parameters by adding Gaussian noise //
11:      Update the parameters by sampling:

                                θt,h ∼ θ̂t,h + N (0, σh2 (I − Pt,h )Λ−1
                                                                     t,h (I − Pt,h ))
                                                      2 −1
                                        ̂t,h + N (0, σR
                                ω t,h ∼ ω               Σt,h )

12:      Define Qt,h (s, a) ← ⟨ω t,h + θt,h , ϕ(s, a)⟩ and V t,h (s) ← maxa Qt,h (s, a) for all (s, a)
13:   end for
14:   Define the policy πt such that πt,h (s) = argmaxa Qt,h (s, a)
15:   Generate trajectory (st,1 , at,1 , rt,1 , . . . , st,H , at,H , rt,H ) ∼ πt
16:   Define Σt+1,h ∶= Σt,h + ϕ(st,h , at,h )ϕ⊺ (st,h , at,h ) for all h ∈ [H]
17: end for


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The algorithm begins by initializing the covariance matrix Σ1,h for all h ∈ [H] using the optimal
design, which differs from most standard LSVI-type algorithms where it is initialized to the identity
matrix. We believe that the identity matrix is unsuitable here since we do not assume any ℓ2 -norm
bound on the parameters. Additionally, recalling that we assume the feature space spans Rd , it
ensures Σt,h is invertible for all t and h. Otherwise, pseudo-inverses can be used instead.
At each round t ∈ [T ], the algorithm operates in a backward manner starting from the last horizon
H. For each h ∈ [H], it first constructs the orthogonal projection matrix Pt,h onto the span of the
historical data. It then decomposes the D-optimal design points into the span and null space compo-
nents using the projection and constructs Λt,h . By separating the span and null space components,
it facilitates clearer concentration bounds for the subsequent Gaussian noise.
The algorithm then performs constrained squared loss regression to estimate the value function and
reward function. Here we define O(W ) ∶= {θ ∈ Rd ∶ ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ W for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A} for
any W > 0. This convex constrained set is defined by the ℓ∞ -functional-norm bound instead of
the ℓ2 -norm because we
                      √do notH−h
                               assume any √bound on the ℓ2 -norm of the learned parameters. Here
                 ̃
we define Wh = Θ((d     mH)       (d3/2 + d mH)) (detailed definition deferred to Appendix C).
We note that although Wh appears exponential, which may seem suspicious, this does not affect
our sample efficiency due to the span argument that we introduce in the analysis. We note that
prior RLSVI algorithms used truncation on value functions to explicitly avoid such an exponential
blow-up. However, truncation does not work for linear Bellman completeness setting since the
Bellman backup on a truncated value function is not necessarily a linear function anymore.
Next, the algorithm perturbs the estimated parameters by adding Gaussian noise. The noise for the
value function act only in the null space of the data covariance matrix. This ensures optimism while
keeping the estimate accurate in the span space. It is a key modification from the standard RLSVI
algorithm. The perturbation for the reward function is standard. Finally, the algorithm constructs
the value function for the current horizon and the greedy policy with respect to it. It then generates
the trajectory by executing the greedy policy, and the covariance matrix is updated.

5     A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide the theoretical guarantees of Algorithm 1. A high-level proof sketch can
be found in Appendix B and detailed proofs are in Appendix C. We first consider the case where the
squared loss minimization oracle is exact. We then extend the analysis to the approximate oracle
and the low inherent linear Bellman error setting in subsequent sections.

5.1   P RELUDE : L EARNING WITH E XACT S QUARE L OSS M INIMIZATION O RACLE

We first consider the most ideal setting where the squared loss minimization oracle is exact.
Assumption 2 (Exact Squared Loss Minimization Oracle). Line 9 of Algorithm 1 is solved exactly.
Then, we have the following regret bound. A proof sketch is provided in Appendix B for the readers
convenience.
Theorem 1 (Regret Bound  √with Exact Oracle). Under Assumptions
                                                         √         1 and√2, executing
                                                                              √       Algorithm 1
                      ̃ dH log(HT )) and σh = Θ((d
with parameters σR = Θ(                             ̃       mH)H−h+1 ( d + mH)), we have
                                                              √
                                       ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T ).
                              RegT = O(d

This result has several notable features. First, it does not depend on the number of actions.
                                                                                      √           The only
requirement for the action space is the ability to compute the argmax. Second, the T -dependence
on T is optimal,√as it is necessary even in the bandit setting. Additionally, we emphasize that the
dependence on T arises solely from reward learning due to the application of elliptical potential
lemma. In fact, if the reward function is known, our regret bound can be as small as O(dH         ̃    2
                                                                                                         ),
depending on T up to logarithmic factors. We elaborate on this observation in Appendix B. As a
standard practice, Theorem 1 can be converted into a sample complexity bound below.
Corollary 1 (Sample Complexity Bound). Let ε ≤ 1. Under the same setting as Theorem 1, let-
ting T ≥ Ω(d4 H 3 /ε2 ), we get that the policy ̂   π chosen uniformly from the set π1 , . . . , πT enjoys
performance guarantee E[V ⋆ − V π̂ ] ≤ ε.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   L EARNING WITH A PPROXIMATE S QUARE L OSS M INIMIZATION O RACLE

Assumption 3 (Approximate Squared Loss Minimization Oracle). We assume access to an ap-
proximate squared loss minimization oracle Oapx    sq
                                                      that takes as input a problem of the form:
argminθ∈O(W ) g(θ) ∶= ∑(ϕ(s,a),u)∈D (⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩ − u)2 where O(W ) = {θ ∈ Rd ∣ ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤
W } for some W ∈ R is a convex set, and D is a dataset of tuples {(ϕ(s, a), u)}. The oracle returns a
point θ̂ that satisfies g(θ)
                          ̂ − minθ∈O(W ) g(θ) ≤ ε2 and θ̂ ∈ O(W + ε2 ) where ε1 , ε2 ≤ 1 are precision
                                                 1
parameters of the oracle.

With an approximate oracle, the regret bound depends on an additional quantity defined below.
Assumption 4. There exists a constant γ > 1 such that, for any r ≤ d, and for any ϕ1 , ϕ2 , . . . , ϕr ∈ Φ,
the eigenvalues of the matrix Σ ∶= ∑ri=1 ϕi ϕ⊺i are either zero or at least 1/γ 2 .

As a concrete example, it holds with γ = 1 when the MDP is tabular. This assumption implies
that the eigenvalues of Σ† are at most γ 2 . Consequently, for any vector ϕ ∈ Φ, we have ∥ϕ∥Σ† ≤
∥ϕ∥2 γ ≤ γ—this lower bound on the norm of any vector is exactly what we need for the analysis
of an approximate oracle, while Assumption 4 simply serves as a sufficient condition for it. The
following theorem provides the regret bound with the approximate oracle in terms of parameters
ε1 , ε2 and γ.
Theorem 2 (Regret Bound  √with Approximate Oracle).
                                               √     Under Assumptions
                                                                √     √ 1, 3√and 4, executing
                      ̃ dH) and σh = Θ((d
Algorithm 1 with σR = Θ(                 ̃       mH)H−h+1 (ε1 γ H + d + mH), we have
                                               √                      √
                         ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T + ε1 γ(dH 2 + d3/2 H T )).
                 RegT = O(d

Compared to Theorem 1, the regret bound has an additional term that depends on the approximation
error ε1 γ. Typically, ε1 is from optimization and thus can be exponentially small with respect to the
relevant parameters, as we later discuss in Section 6. Hence, we allow γ to be exponentially large.
Moreover, we note that ε2 does not appear in the regret bound since it only affects the constraint
violation of the regression, whose effect to the statistical guarantees is of lower order and thus
ignored. In addition, we note that the regret bound does not depend on the number of actions, and
the dependence on T remains optimal, similar to the previous theorem.

5.3   L EARNING WITH L OW I NHERENT L INEAR B ELLMAN E RROR

Now we consider the setting where the MDP has low inherent linear Bellman error.
Definition 3 (Inherent Linear Bellman Error). Given εB ≤ 1, an MDP M is said to have εB -
inherent linear Bellman error with respect to a feature mapping ϕ if there exists a mapping
T ∶ Rd → Rd so that, for all θ ∈ Rd and all (s, a) ∈ S × A, it holds that ∣⟨T θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩ −
Es′ ∼T(s,a) maxa′ ⟨θ, ϕ(s′ , a′ )⟩∣ ≤ εB . Moreover, we require that, for all h ∈ [H] and (s, a) ∈ S × A,
the random reward is bounded in [0, 1] with ∣rh (s, a) − ⟨ωh⋆ , ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ εB for some unknown
ωh⋆ ∈ Rd .

With low inherent Bellman error, Assumption 4 is still necessary. The following theorem provides
the regret bound in this case. We assume the exact oracle for simplicity.
Theorem 3 (Regret Bound with Low Inherent Bellman Error). Assume the MDP has εB -inherent
Bellman
   √    error. Under Assumptions√1, 2 and 4, when executing
                                                  √        √Algorithm      √ parameters σR =
                                                                     √ 1 with
̃ dH + εB HT ) and σh = Θ((d
Θ(                           ̃    mH)H−h+1 (εB γ HT + εB T + d + mH)), we have
                              √                 √                              √
        ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T + √εB (d2 H 5/2 T + d3/2 H 3/2 T ) + εB γ(dH 2 T + d3/2 HT )).
RegT = O(d

Compared to Theorem 1, the regret bound includes two additional terms that depend on the in-
herent linear Bellman error εB . For both terms, the dependence on T is linear. We believe the
T -dependence is unavoidable, as it also appears in similar settings (Zanette et al., 2020b). In addi-
tion, it is worth noting that the regret bound does not depend on the number of actions, and the other
dependence on T remains optimal, similar to previous theorems.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     O PENING THE B LACK -B OX : I MPLEMENTING S QUARED L OSS
      M INIMIZATION O RACLES IN A LGORITHM 1

In this section, we detail a practical implementation of the desired squared loss oracle need by our
algorithm. The implementation relies on the observation that a square loss minimization objective
over a convex domain can be cast as a convex set feasibility problem—given a convex set K, return
a point θ̂ ∈ K. Thus, we can use algorithms for convex set feasibility to implement the squared loss
minimization oracles. However, even given this observation, our key challenge for an efficient algo-
rithm is that the corresponding convex set could be exponentially large and only be described using
exponentially many number of linear constraints. Fortunately, various works in the optimization
literature propose computationally efficient procedures to find feasible points within such ill-defined
sets, under mild oracle assumptions.

6.1   C OMPUTATIONALLY E FFICIENT C ONVEX S ET F EASIBILITY

We first paraphrase the work of Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) that provide a computationally ef-
ficient procedure for finding feasible points within a convex set by random walks. Notably, the
computational complexity of their algorithm only depends logarithmically on the size of the convex
set, and thus their approach is well suited for the corresponding convex feasibility problems that
appear in our approach. At a high level, they provide an algorithm that takes an input an arbitrary
convex set K ⊆ Rd , and returns a feasible point ẑ ∈ K. Their algorithm accesses the convex set K
via a separation oracle defined as follows.
Definition 4 (Separation oracle). A separation oracle for a convex set K, denoted by OK  sep
                                                                                             , is defined
such that on any input z ∈ R , the oracle either confirms that z ∈ K or returns a hyperplane ⟨a, z⟩ ≤ b
                             d

that separates the point z from the set K.

In order to ensure finite time convergence for their procedure, they assume that the convex set K is
not degenerate and is bounded in any direction. This is formalized by the following assumption.
Assumption 5. The convex set K is (r, R)−Bounded, i.e. there exist parameters 0 < r ≤ R such that
(a) K ⊆ R∞ (R), and (b) there exists a vector z ∈ Rd such that the shifted cube (z + R∞ (r)) ⊆ K.

The computational efficiency and the convergence guarantee of their algorithm are below.
Theorem 4 (Bertsimas & Vempala (2004)). Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and K ⊂ Rd be an arbitrary convex set
that satisfies Assumption 5 for some 0 ≤ r ≤ R. Then, Algorithm 2 (given in the appendix), when
invoked with the separation oracle OKsep
                                         w.r.t. K, returns a feasible point ẑ ∈ K with probability at
least 1 − δ. Moreover, Algorithm 2 makes O(d log(R/δr)) calls to the oracle OK    sep
                                                                                      and runs in time
O(d log( /δr)).
     7      R


Notice that both the number of oracle calls and the running time only depend logarithmically on R
and r, and thus their procedure can be efficiently implemented for our applications where R/r may
be exponentially large in the corresponding problem parameters.

6.2   C OMPUTATIONALLY E FFICIENT E STIMATION OF VALUE F UNCTION (E QN (1))

We now described how to leverage the method by Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) to estimate the
parameters for the value functions in (1) in Algorithm 1. Note that for any time t and horizon
h ∈ [H], the objective in (1) is the optimization problem
                                      t−1                                        2
                      θ̂t,h ← argmin ∑ (⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) ,                  (3)
                             θ∈O(Wh ) i=1
                  √                 √             √
             ̃
where Wh = Θ((d     mH)H−h (ε1 dγ H + d3/2 + d mH)). We provide a computationally efficient
procedure to approximately solve the above given a linear optimization oracle over the feature space.
Assumption 6 (Linear optimization oracle over the feature space). Learner has access to a
linear optimization oracle Olin that on taking input θ ∈ Rd , returns a feature ϕ(s′ , a′ ) ∈
argmaxs,a ⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The key observation we use is that under linear Bellman completeness (Definition 1) and deter-
ministic dynamics (Assumption 1), any solution θ for (3) must satisfy ∑t−1 i=1 (⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ −
V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) = 0. On the other hand, the converse also holds that any point θ ∈ O(Wh ) for
                  2

which the objective value is 0 must be a solution to (3). Thus, the minimization problem in (3) is
equivalent to finding a feasible point within the convex set
                    ⎧
                    ⎪           RRR                                                           ⎫
                                                                                              ⎪
                    ⎪                                                       2
                                                                                              ⎪
               K ∶= ⎨θ ∈ Rd RRRRR (⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) = 0 for all i ≤ t⎬.       (4)
                    ⎪
                    ⎪             R
                                  RR           ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s,  a)⟩∣ ≤ W    for all s, a            ⎪
                                                                                              ⎪
                    ⎩                                               h
                                                                                              ⎭
Given the above reformulation of the optimization objective (3) as a feasibility problem, we can now
use the procedure of Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) for finding θt,h ∈ K. However, we first need to
define a separation oracle for the set K and verify Assumption 5. Unfortunately, there may not exist
any r > 0 for which (z + R∞ (r)) ⊆ K for some z ∈ Rd in our case and thus the above K may not
satisfy Assumption 5. This can, however, be easily fixed by artificially increasing the set K to allow
for some approximation errors. In particular, let ε > 0 and define the convex set
                       ⎧
                       ⎪         RR ⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) ≤ ε for all i ≤ t ⎫
                                                                                               ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪     d RRR
                                                                                               ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
               KAPX ∶= ⎨θ ∈ R RRR ⟨θ, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) ≥ −ε for all i ≤ t⎬.        (5)
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪          RRR                                                          ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
                       ⎩                     ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ Wh + ε for all s, a              ⎭
Clearly, since there exists at least one point θt,h ∈ K, we must have that (θt,h + R∞ (ε)) ⊆ KAPX . To
ensure an outer bounding box for the set KAPX , we need to make an additional assumption.
Assumption 7. Let Φ = {ϕ(s, a) ∣ s, a ∈ S × A}. There exist some R ≥ 0 such that R1 ei ∈ Φ, where
ei denotes the unit basis vector along the i-th direction in Rd .

The above assumption ensures that K ⊆ B∞ (Wh R). Recall that we can tolerate the parameter R to
be exponential in the dimension d or the horizon H. Finally, a separation oracle can be implemented
using Olin (see Algorithm 4 for details). Thus, one can use Algorithm 2 (given in appendix), due
to Bertsimas & Vempala (2004), and the guarantee in Theorem 4 to find a feasible point in KAPX ,
which corresponds to an approximate solution to (3).
Theorem 5. Let ε > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), and suppose Assumption 7 holds with some parameter R > 0.
Additionally, suppose Assumption 6 holds with the linear optimization oracle denoted by Olin . Then,
there exists a computationally efficient procedure (given in Algorithm 4 in the appendix), that for
any t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H], returns a point θ̂t,h that, with probability at least 1 − δ, satisfies
         t−1                                               2
         ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) ≤ T ε      and       θ̂t,h ∈ O(Wh + ε).
         i=1

                                         R
Furthermore, Algorithm 4 takes O(d7 log( δε )) time in addition to O(d log( T δε
                                                                              HR
                                                                                 )) calls to Olin .

The above techniques and Algorithm 4 can be similarly extended to get a computationally efficient
procedure to estimate the reward parameter in (2). The main difference is that the value of the
optimization objective in (2) is not zero at the minimizer (due to stochasticity). Thus, we need to
construct a set feasibility problem for every desired target value of the objective function within the
grid [0, ε, 2ε, . . . , 2 − ε, 2] and use a separating hyperplane w.r.t. the ellipsoid constraint in (2) to
implement the separating hyperplane for KAPX (which can be implemented using projections).

7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we develop a computationally efficient RL algorithm under linear Bellman complete-
ness with deterministic dynamics, aiming to bridge the statistical-computational gap in this setting.
Our algorithm injects random noise into regression estimates only in the null space to ensure opti-
mism and leverages a span argument to bound regret. It handles large action spaces, random initial
states, and stochastic rewards. Our key observation is that deterministic dynamics simplifies the
learning process by ensuring accurate value estimates within the data span, allowing noise injection
to be confined to the null space. Extending our algorithm to stochastic dynamics remains an open
challenge.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Yuda Song, Zeyu Jia, Noah Golowich, and Sasha Rakhlin for useful discussions. AS ac-
knowledges support from the Simons Foundation and NSF through award DMS-2031883, as well as
from the DOE through award DE-SC0022199. WS acknowledges support from NSF IIS-2154711,
NSF CAREER 2339395, and DARPA LANCER: LeArning Network CybERagents.

R EFERENCES
Marc Abeille and Alessandro Lazaric. Linear thompson sampling revisited. In Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pp. 176–184. PMLR, 2017.

Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, Sham M Kakade, and Wen Sun. Reinforcement learning: Theory and
  algorithms. CS Dept., UW Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA, Tech. Rep, 32:96, 2019.

Alekh Agarwal, Yujia Jin, and Tong Zhang. Vo q l: Towards optimal regret in model-free rl with
  nonlinear function approximation. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
  pp. 987–1063. PMLR, 2023.

Priyank Agrawal, Jinglin Chen, and Nan Jiang. Improved worst-case regret bounds for randomized
  least-squares value iteration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 6566–6573, 2021.

OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
  Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
  dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
  2020.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

Dimitris Bertsimas and Santosh Vempala. Solving convex programs by random walks. Journal of
  the ACM (JACM), 51(4):540–556, 2004.

Rajendra Bhatia. Matrix analysis, volume 169. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

Jianyu Chen, Bodi Yuan, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Model-free deep reinforcement learning for
   urban autonomous driving. In 2019 IEEE intelligent transportation systems conference (ITSC),
   pp. 2765–2771. IEEE, 2019.

Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826–2836. PMLR, 2021.

Simon S Du, Jason D Lee, Gaurav Mahajan, and Ruosong Wang. Agnostic q-learning with func-
  tion approximation in deterministic systems: Tight bounds on approximation error and sample
  complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07125, 2020.

Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.

Noah Golowich and Ankur Moitra. Linear bellman completeness suffices for efficient online re-
  inforcement learning with few actions. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning
  Theory. PMLR, 2024.

David Haussler. Decision theoretic generalizations of the pac model for neural net and other learning
  applications. In The mathematics of generalization, pp. 37–116. CRC Press, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiafan He, Heyang Zhao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement
   learning for linear markov decision processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pp. 12790–12822. PMLR, 2023.

Haque Ishfaq, Qiwen Cui, Viet Nguyen, Alex Ayoub, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Doina Precup,
  and Lin Yang. Randomized exploration in reinforcement learning with general value function
  approximation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4607–4616. PMLR, 2021.

Haque Ishfaq, Qingfeng Lan, Pan Xu, A Rupam Mahmood, Doina Precup, Anima Anandkumar, and
  Kamyar Azizzadenesheli. Provable and practical: Efficient exploration in reinforcement learning
  via langevin monte carlo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18246, 2023.

Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.

Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably effi-
  cient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406–13418, 2021.

Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.

Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.

Aditya Modi, Jinglin Chen, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Model-free rep-
  resentation learning and exploration in low-rank mdps. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  25(6):1–76, 2024.

Rémi Munos. Error bounds for approximate value iteration. In Proceedings of the National Confer-
   ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 20, pp. 1006. Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, MA; London;
   AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999, 2005.

Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, and Zheng Wen. Generalization and exploration via randomized
  value functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2377–2386. PMLR, 2016.

Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Yuda Song, Yifei Zhou, Ayush Sekhari, J Andrew Bagnell, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen
  Sun. Hybrid rl: Using both offline and online data can make rl efficient. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.06718, 2022.

Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 rl in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898–2933. PMLR, 2019.

Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123–6135, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuanhao Wang, Ruosong Wang, and Sham Kakade. An exponential lower bound for linearly realiz-
  able mdp with constant suboptimality gap. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:9521–9533, 2021.
Gellért Weisz, Philip Amortila, and Csaba Szepesvári. Exponential lower bounds for planning in
  mdps with linearly-realizable optimal action-value functions. In Algorithmic Learning Theory,
  pp. 1237–1264. PMLR, 2021.
Zheng Wen and Benjamin Van Roy. Efficient reinforcement learning in deterministic systems with
  value function generalization. Mathematics of Operations Research, 42(3):762–782, 2017.
Runzhe Wu and Wen Sun. Making rl with preference-based feedback efficient via randomization.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Yu Bai, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. The role of coverage in
  online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04157, 2022.
Andrea Zanette, David Brandfonbrener, Emma Brunskill, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric.
  Frequentist regret bounds for randomized least-squares value iteration. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1954–1964. PMLR, 2020a.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020b.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Provably ef-
  ficient reward-agnostic navigation with linear value iteration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:11756–11766, 2020c.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Almost optimal model-free reinforcement learningvia
  reference-advantage decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  15198–15207, 2020.
Yinglun Zhu and Robert Nowak.        Efficient active learning with abstention.    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.00043, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS OF A PPENDIX

1   Introduction                                                                                        1

2   Related Works                                                                                       3

3   Preliminaries                                                                                       3
    3.1   Other Linear Bellman Completeness Definitions in the Literature . . . . . . . . . . . .       4
    3.2   Other Prior Works on Linear Bellman Completeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5

4   Algorithm                                                                                           6

5   Analysis                                                                                            7
    5.1   Prelude: Learning with Exact Square Loss Minimization Oracle . . . . . . . . . . . .          7
    5.2   Learning with Approximate Square Loss Minimization Oracle . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8
    5.3   Learning with Low Inherent Linear Bellman Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8

6   Opening the Black-Box: Implementing Squared Loss Minimization Oracles in Algo-
    rithm 1                                                                                             9
    6.1   Computationally Efficient Convex Set Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
    6.2   Computationally Efficient Estimation of Value Function (Eqn (1)) . . . . . . . . . . .        9

7   Conclusion                                                                                         10

A Table of Notation                                                                                    16

B Proof Overview                                                                                       17
    B.1 Span Argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
    B.2 Exploration in the Null Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
    B.3 Proof Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

C Full Proof for Section 5                                                                             18
    C.1 High-probability Event and Boundedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
    C.2 Value Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
    C.3 Exploration in the Null Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
    C.4 Main Steps of the Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

D Supporting Lemmas                                                                                    35
    D.1 Pseudo Dimension and Covering Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

E Linear MDPs and LQRs imply Linear Bellman Completeness                                               38

F Computationally Efficient Implementations for Optimization Oracles                                   39


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G Missing Details from Section 6.2                                                         39
   G.1 Computationally Efficient Estimation of Reward Function (Eqn. 2) . . . . . . . . . . 39


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    TABLE OF N OTATION
We list the notation used in this paper in table 1, for the convenience of reference.


                                  Table 1: Notation used in the paper.
    Symbol     Description

    O(W )      {θ ∈ Rd ∶ ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ W for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A}
    R∞ (W )    {θ ∈ Rd ∶ ∥θ∥∞ ≤ W }
    R2 (W )    {θ ∈ Rd ∶ ∥θ∥2 ≤ W }
      ηt,h     T (ω t,h+1 + θt,h+1 ) − θ̂t,h
       R
      ηt,h     ωh⋆ − ω
                     ̂t,h
      ξtR              ̂t,h
               ω t,h − ω
       P
      ξt,h            ̂
               θt,h − θt,h
       high
     E         High probability event, defined in Definition 5
     Espan
      t        Event that trajectory at round t is within the span of historical data, defined in (6)
    Eoptm
     t         Optimism event at round t, defined in Lemma 14
     Ut,h      Value function lower bound, defined in Appendix C.2
       R
     Berr                      ωt,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt , defined in Definition 5
               Upper bound of ∥̂
       P
     Berr      Upper bound of ∥θ̂t,h − T (ωt,h + θt,h+1 )∥ ̂ , defined in Lemma 7
                                                           Σt,h
      R
    Bnoise     Upper bound of ∥ξt,h
                                R
                                    ∥Σt,h , defined in Definition 5
     P
    Bnoise,h   Upper bound of ∥ξt,h
                                P
                                    ∥Λt,h , defined in Definition 5
     BϕR       Upper bound of ∑Tt=1 ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                                      t,h
                                                          defined in Lemma 16
     BϕP       Upper bound of ∑Tt=1 1{Espan
                                       t    }∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                              ̂ † , defined in Lemma 16
                                                                  t,h

      BV       Upper bound of ∣V t ∣ conditioning on Espan
                                                      t    and Ehigh , defined in Lemma 13
               ∑i=1 ρi ϕi ϕ⊺i + ∑i=1 ϕ(si,h , ai,h )ϕ⊺ (si,h , ai,h )
                 m                t−1
     Σt,h
     ̂ t,h
     Σ         ∑i=1 ϕ(si,h , ai,h )ϕ⊺ (si,h , ai,h )
                t−1
                                                                 √       √
      Wh       Recursively defined as Wh−1 = Wh + 2ε2 + 2d ⋅ Bnoise,h P
                                                                        + 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                                                R
                                                                                      +1
               with WH+1 = 1


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B            P ROOF OVERVIEW
In this section, we provide a sketch of the proof of Theorem 1 (exact oracle and zero inherent linear
Bellman error) with the full proofs deferred to Appendix C. To better convey the intuition, we now
assume that the reward function is known, as reward learning is largely standard. In particular, we
temporarily remove the estimation and perturbation of rewards (Lines 9 and 11) and simply assume
ω t,h = ωh⋆ in Line 12.

B.1              S PAN A RGUMENT

The very first step of our analysis revolve around two complimentary cases – whether the trajectory
at round t is in the span of the historical data or not. Let Dt,h ∶= {ϕ(si,h , ai,h )}i=1 and define Espan
                                                                                      t
                                                                                                      t
as the event that the trajectory at round t is in the span of the historical data, i.e.,
                                                                    Espan
                                                                     t    ∶= {∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ϕ(st,h , at,h ) ∈ span(Dt−1,h )} .                                                                                                                                                                              (6)

(1) In-span case. When the trajectory generated in the round t is completely within the span of
historical data, we can assert that the value function estimation is accurate under πt . Particularly, by
linear Bellman completeness, the Bayes optimal of the regression in Line 9 zeros the empirical risk,
as formally stated in the following lemma.
Lemma 1. For any t ∈ [T ], we have ∑t−1 (⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ))2 = 0.                          i=1

Define Ut (⋅) as a version of V t (⋅) that minimizes V t (st,1 ) while satisfying the high probability
bound (precise definition provided at the beginning of Appendix C.2). It implies the following.
Lemma 2. For any t ∈ [T ], whenever Espan
                                     t    holds, we have V t (st,1 ) = Ut (st,1 ) = V πt (st,1 ).

To understand Lemma 2, we consider two fact: (1) πt is the optimal policy for the estimated value
function V t , and (2) both V t and Ut has accurate value estimate for the trajectory induced by πt ,
starting from st,1 , because it is in the span of the historical data when Espan
                                                                            t    holds.
(2) Out-of-span case. When any segment of the trajectory is not within the span, we simply pay
H in regret and can assert that this will not occur too many times. To see this, we observe the
following fact: whenever Espan
                           t    does not hold, there must exists h ∈ [H] such that dim span(Dt,h ) =
dim span(Dt−1,h ) + 1 by definition. Since the dimension of spans cannot exceed d for any h ∈ [H],
the case that Espan
               t    does not hold cannot happen for more than dH times. We formally state it in the
following lemma.
Lemma 3. We have ∑Tt=1 1{(Espan
                           t    )∁ } ≤ dH.

Hence, we have the following decomposition:
V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ) = 1{Espan
                                t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )) + 1{(Espan                       t                             )∁ }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))
                                                                     ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶
                                                                ≤ dH 2 when summed over t
                                                      span
Therefore, we only need to focus on the rounds where Et    holds. This will be the aim of the
subsequent sections.

B.2              E XPLORATION IN THE N ULL S PACE

Lemma 1 implies that the estimation error only comes from the null space of the historical data, i.e.,
null({ϕ(si,h , ai,h ) ∶ i = 1, . . . , t − 1}). Therefore, we only need to explore in this null space. While
adding explicit bonus is infeasible under linear Bellman completeness, we add noise (Line 11) that
can cancel out the estimation error in the null space. This achieves the following:
Lemma 4 (Optimism with constant probability). Denote Eoptm     t   as the event that V ⋆ (st,1 ) ≤
V t (st,1 ). Then, for any t ∈ [T ], we have Pr(Et optm
                                                        ) ≥ Γ (−1) where Γ is the cumulative dis-
                                                             2

tribution function of the standard normal distribution.

This result has been the key idea in randomized RL algorithms, such as RLSVI. In the next section,
we will explore how this lemma is utilized.


                                                                                                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3       P ROOF O UTLINE

In this section, we outline the structure of the whole proof. Let Ṽ denote an i.i.d. copy of V , and
̃span , E
E       ̃optm denote the counterpart of Espan , Eoptm for Ṽ . We first invoke Lemma 2 and get
  t      t                                 t     t

1{Espan
   t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )) = 1{Espan
                                           t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − Ut (st,1 )) ≤ V ⋆ (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                                                                               t    }Ut (st,1 )
where the last step is by the non-negativity of V ⋆ . Next, we apply Lemma 4 and get
≤ E [ min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan               ̃optm ]
                                    }Ut (st,1 ) ∣ E
                               t                   t
    ̃t
    V
Split it into two parts:
       ̃span }( min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 )) ∣ E
= E [1{E                                                     ̃optm ]
         t                               t                    t
    ̃t
    V

            ̃span )∁ }( min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 )) ∣ E
    + E [1{(E                                                        ̃optm ]
             t                                   t                    t
         ̃t
         V
Note that the quantity inside the first expectation is non-negative, so we can peel off the conditioning
event; the quantity in the second term is simply upper bounded by H. Hence, we have
      1           ̃span }( min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 ))] +      1             ̃span )∁ }H]
 ≤ 2        E [1{E                                                                  E [1{(E
   Γ (−1) Ṽt       t                                   t
                                                                          Γ (−1) Ṽt
                                                                            2                t

Now we split the first term into two parts again:
      1           ̃span } min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 )]
 = 2        E [1{E
   Γ (−1) Ṽt       t                                 t

         1            ̃span )∁ ∩ Espan }Ut (st,1 )] +      1           ̃span )∁ }H]
   + 2        E [1{(E                                            E [1{(E
     Γ (−1) Ṽt         t           t
                                                        Γ2 (−1) Ṽt     t

      1           ̃span } min{Ṽt (st,1 ), H} − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 )] +     2            ̃span )∁ }H]
 ≤ 2        E [1{E                                                               E [1{(E
   Γ (−1) Ṽt       t                                 t
                                                                        Γ2 (−1) Ṽt       t

where we used the fact that 1{Espan
                                t   }Ut (st,1 ) ≤ H. Taking the expectation over the randomness of
the algorithm and use the tower property, which converts Ṽ into V , we obtain
      1                                                                 2
 ≤ 2        E [1{Et } min{V t (st,1 ), H} − 1{Et }Ut (st,1 )] + 2            E [1{(Et )∁ }H]
                    span                           span                               span
   Γ (−1)                                                            Γ (−1)
The first term is upper bounded by zero due to Lemma 2, and the second term is upper bounded by
dH 2 by Lemma 3 when summed over t. This finishes the proof.
Remark 1 (Span Argument and Exponential Blow-Up). In the proof sketch above, we did not uti-
lize any ℓ2 -norm bound on θt,h or θ̂t,h as did in many prior works. We actually cannot leverage
them since they can be exponentially large due to the addition of exponentially large noise. This
phenomenon is widely observed in the literature (e.g., Agrawal et al. (2021); Zanette et al. (2020a))
and is addressed through truncation. However, truncation does not work under linear Bellman com-
pleteness, as the Bellman backup of a truncated value function is not necessarily linear. This is why
we use the span argument to circumvent this issue.

C        F ULL P ROOF FOR S ECTION 5
In this section, we present and prove the following main theorem, which provides the regret bound
in terms of parameters ε1 , ε2 , and εB . Setting ε1 = ε2 = εB = 0 yields Theorem 1, setting εB = 0
yields Theorem 2, and setting ε1 = ε2 = 0 yields Theorem 3.
Theorem 6. Assume the MDP has εB -inherent linear    √ Bellman  error. Under
                                                                        √ √  Assumptions
                                                                                       √1, 3 and 4,
when executing Algorithm 1 with parameters σR = HBerr      R
                                                              and σh ≥ H( 3γBerr  P
                                                                                     + 8m(Wh +
ε2 )), we have
    T                                                      √                      √
          ⋆                         ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T + ε1 γ(dH 2 + d3/2 H T )
E [ ∑ (V (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ))] = O(d
                      π
    t=1
                                         √               √                              √
                                     +       εB (d2 H 5/2 T + d3/2 H 3/2 T ) + εB γ(dH 2 T + d3/2 HT )).


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Exact value of parameters
                    √       σR and σ√ h in Theorem 6. We define WH+1 = 1 and recursively define
Wh−1 = Wh + 2ε2 + 2d ⋅ Bnoise,h + 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                            P                  R
                                                    + 1. Plugging the definition of all these symbols
involved and ignoring lower order terms (i.e., logarithmic and constant terms), we get
                       √                    √              √        √      √
             Wh−1 ≈ d mH ⋅ Wh + ε1 ⋅ dγ H + εB ⋅ dγ HT + εB ⋅ d T + d3/2 .                        (7)
Solving this recursion, we get
              √       H+1−h       √    H−h          √           √    √      √
    Wh ≈ (d mH)             + (d mH)        (ε1 ⋅ dγ H + εB ⋅ dγ HT + εB ⋅ d T + d3/2 )
              √       H−h         √           √       √       √        √
         ≈ (d mH)         (ε1 ⋅ dγ H + εB ⋅ dγ HT + εB ⋅ d T + d3/2 + d mH).
We insert this into the value of σh and get
                    √       H−h+1        √          √    √    √          √
           σh ≈ (d mH)            (ε1 ⋅ γ H + εB ⋅ γ HT + εB ⋅ T + d1/2 + mH).
We can also get the value of σR as
                                          √ √                  √
                                   σR ≈    H( d log(HT ) + ε1 + εB T ).

                          ⊺
Define Λ = ∑m  i=1 ρi ϕi ϕi . It is straightforward that both Λ and Λt,h (constructed in Line 7 of Algo-
rithm 1) are invertible. We define λ ∶= maxs,a ∥ϕ(s, a)∥Λ−1 and λt,h ∶= maxs,a ∥ϕ(s, a)∥Λ−1    t,h
                                                                                                   .
Lemma 5. The matrices Λ and Λt,h are invertible. Furthermore, we also have that
              √
       • λ≤       d;
                  √
       • λt,h ≤        2d for all t ∈ [T ] and all h ∈ [H].
                                                                          √
Proof of Lemma 5. By the last item √       √ 23, we have λ ≤
                                     in Lemma                                 d. In what follows, we will show
that Λ ⪯ 2Λt,h , which implies λt,h ≤ 2λ ≤ 2d.
For any x ∈ Rd , we have
                         m                 m                        2
           x⊺ Λx = ∑ ρi (x⊺ ϕi )2 = ∑ ρi (x⊺ ϕ∥t,h,i + x⊺ ϕ⊥t,h,i )
                        i=1               i=1
                          m                 2     m
                   ≤ 2 ∑ ρi (x⊺ ϕ∥t,h,i ) + 2 ∑ ρi (x⊺ ϕ⊥t,h,i )
                                                                2
                                                                                  (using (a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2b2 )
                          i=1                     i=1
                           ⊺
                   = 2x Λt,h x.
This implies that Λ ⪯ 2Λt,h .

C.1   H IGH - PROBABILITY E VENT AND B OUNDEDNESS

Lemma 6 (Reward estimation). With probability at least 1 − δ, for any t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H],
                    √
    ωt,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt ≤ 1030(1 + ε2 )4 d log (8(1 + ε2 )e2 T 2 H/δ) + 4ε21 + 16(1 + ε2 )(1 + εB T ).
   ∥̂

Proof of Lemma 6. For the ease of notation, we fixed t and h in the proof and simply write the
regression problem as
                                                        n
                                                                      2
                                          ̂ ← argmin ∑ (ω ⊺ ϕi − ri )
                                          ω
                                                ω∈O(1) i=1

where we have dropped the subscripts t and h for notational simplicity. Here ϕi and ri are abbrevi-
ated notations for ϕ(si,h , ai,h ) and ri,h , respectively, and n = t − 1.
Note that, due to approximate oracle (Assumption 3), ω̂ actually belongs to O(1 + ε2 ) instead of
O(1). Denote C as an ℓ1 -norm α-cover (Definition 6) on O(1 + ε2 ) such that for any ω ∈ O(1 + ε2 ),


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               ̃ ∈ C, such that ∑ni=1 ∣ω ⊺ ϕi − ω
there exists a ω                                ̃⊺ ϕi ∣/n ≤ α. Since O(1 + ε2 ) is a linear function class,
which has pseudo-dimension d (Definition 8), we have
                                                                                                 d
                                                                   ∣C∣ ≤ (8(1 + ε2 )e2 /α)                                          (8)

by Lemma 27. Now define ziω = (ω ⊺ ϕi − ri )2 − ((ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi − ri )2 . Then we have ∣ziω ∣ ≤ 4(1 + ε2 )2 ,
and
                        ⊺       ⋆ ⊺      ⊺       ⋆ ⊺
          E[zi ] = E [(ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi )(ω ϕi + (ω ) ϕi − 2ri )]
             ω
           i                i
                       = E [(ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi ) (ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi + 2((ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi − ri ))]
                            i
                       ≥ (ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi )2 − 4(1 + ε2 )εB ,
and moreover,
                     ⊺       ⋆ ⊺       ⊺       ⋆ ⊺                             ⊺       ⋆ ⊺
    E[(zi ) ] = E [(ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) (ω ϕi + (ω ) ϕi − 2ri ) ] ≤ 16(1 + ε2 ) (ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi )
        ω 2                         2                       2               2                 2
     i                      i


We note that ziω − Ei ziω is a martingale difference sequence and ∣ziω − Ei ziω ∣ ≤ 8(1 + ε2 )2 . Applying
Freedman’s inequality (Lemma 22) and a union bound over ω ∈ C, we have with probability at least
1 − δ, for all ω ∈ C,
                   n                                           n
                            ⊺            ⋆ ⊺
               ∑(ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) − ∑ zi
                                                     2              ω
               i=1                                           i=1
                           n
                                                                                     8(1 + ε2 )2 log(∣C∣/δ)
               ≤ η ∑ 16(1 + ε2 ) (ω ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi )2 +
                                                 2   ⊺
                                                                                                            + 4(1 + ε2 )εB T.       (9)
                           i=1                                                                 η

Recall that ω̂ is the least square solution. Denote ω̃ ∈ C as the point that is closest to ω
                                                                                           ̂, which means
             ω ⊺ ϕi − ω
that: ∑ni=1 ∣̂        ̃⊺ ϕi ∣ ≤ nα. We can derive the following relationship between ω   ̂ and ω
                                                                                               ̃:
 n                                               n                               n                                       n
           ⊺               ⋆ ⊺                           ⊺           ⊺                   ⊺           ⋆ ⊺                        ⊺         ⋆ ⊺
  ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤ 2 ∑(̂
∑(̂                             ̃ ϕi ) + 2 ∑(̃
                         ω ϕi − ω  2
                                             ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤ 2n α + 2 ∑(̃
                                                                           ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ,
                                                                            2                              2    2 2                             2
i=1                    i=1                  i=1                                                                         i=1
 n      n      n
    ̃      ̂       ⊺       ⊺      ⊺      ⊺
∑ zi − ∑ zi = ∑(̃
    ω      ω
                         ̂ ϕi )(̃
                  ω ϕi − ω             ̂ ϕi − 2ri ) ≤ 4(1 + ε2 )nα.
                                ω ϕi + ω
i=1    i=1    i=1


         ̃ into (9) and re-arrange terms, we get:
Now plug ω
n
          ⊺                ⋆ ⊺                      1            n
                                                                      ̃       8(1 + ε2 )2                       4(1 + ε2 )εB T
∑(̃
  ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤                                                    +                       ⋅ log(∣C∣/δ) +
                                   2                                  ω
                                                                ∑   z                                                             .
i=1                                          1 − 16(1 + ε2 )2 η i=1  i
                                                                          η(1 − 16(1 + ε2 )2 η)                1 − 16(1 + ε2 )2 η
Setting η = (32(1 + ε2 )2 )−1 , we get
                       n                                            n
                     ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi )2 ≤ 2 ∑ ziω̃ + 512(1 + ε2 )4 log(∣C∣/δ) + 8(1 + ε2 )εB T.
                   ∑(̃
                   i=1                                             i=1

                                ̂ and ω
Using the relationships between ω     ̃ that we derived above, we have:
               n
                            ⊺           ⋆ ⊺
               ∑(̂
                 ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi )                    2
               i=1
                                       n
               ≤ 2n2 α2 + 4 ∑ ziω̃ + 1024(1 + ε2 )4 log(∣C∣/δ) + 16(1 + ε2 )εB T.
                                       i=1
                                        n
               ≤ 2n α + 4 ∑ ziω̂ + 1024(1 + ε2 )4 log(∣C∣/δ) + 16(1 + ε2 )nα + 16(1 + ε2 )εB T.
                           2 2
                                       i=1

      ̂ is the (approximate) least square solution, we have ∑i ziω̂ ≤ ε21 . This implies that:
Since ω
         n
               ⊺                 ⋆ ⊺
         ∑(̂
           ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤ 2n α + 4ε1 + 1024(1 + ε2 ) log(∣C∣/δ) + 16(1 + ε2 )(nα + εB T ).
                                             2           2 2            2                    4
         i=1



                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now plugging the covering number (8) and setting α = 1/n, we obtain
  n
            ⊺       ⋆ ⊺
  ∑(̂
    ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤ 2 + 4ε1 + 1024(1 + ε2 ) d log(8(1 + ε2 )e n/δ) + 16(1 + ε2 )(1 + εB T )
                           2              2                      4                          2
  i=1
                                ≤ 1026(1 + ε2 )4 d log(8(1 + ε2 )e2 n/δ) + 4ε21 + 16(1 + ε2 )(1 + εB T ).
Finally, we have
                                         n                                       m
                      ω − ωh⋆ ∥Σt = ∑(̂
                                      ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi )2 + ∑ ρi (̂
                                                                     ω ⊺ ϕi − (ω ⋆ )⊺ ϕi )2 .
                                 2
                     ∥̂
                                         i=1                                 i=1

Here, with some abuse of notation, the ϕi ’s in the right term are the support points of the optimal
design. The first term is already bounded above. The second term can be bounded by
                          m                                      m
                                     ⊺         ⋆ ⊺
                          ∑ ρi (̂
                                ω ϕi − (ω ) ϕi ) ≤ ∑ ρi ⋅ 4(1 + ε2 ) = 4(1 + ε2 ).
                                                        2
                          i=1                                   i=1

We add it into the constant of the first term. Then, we apply the union bound over all t ∈ [T ] and
h ∈ [H] to get the desired result.
Lemma 7 (Value function estimation). Suppose that T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 ) ∈ O(Wh ). Then,
                          t−1
                          ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) ≤ ε1 + T εB .
                                                                                        2       2       2
                          i=1
                                                            √
Furthermore, ∥θ̂t,h − T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )∥Σ
                                          ̂ t,h ≤               2ε21 + 4T ε2B =∶ Berr
                                                                                  P
                                                                                      .

Proof of Lemma 7. The Bayes optimal T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 ) should achieve the empirical risk of at
most εB , i.e.,
                ∀i ∈ [t − 1] ∶       ∣⟨ϕ(si,h , ai,h ), T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )∣ ≤ εB .

Since T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 ) is realizable (i.e., T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 ) ∈ O(Wh )), and θ̂t,h minimizes the
objective up to precision ε1 , it should satisfy the following
                          t−1                                                           2
                          ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) ≤ ε1 + T εB .
                                                                               2      2
                          i=1

Combining the above two results, we arrive at the following:
t−1
∑ ⟨ϕ(si,h , ai,h ), θ̂t,h − T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )⟩
                                                 2

i=1
      t−1                                                   2         t−1                                                           2
≤ 2 ∑ (⟨ϕ(si,h , ai,h ), θ̂t,h ⟩ − V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )) + 2 ∑ (V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) − ⟨ϕ(si,h , ai,h ), T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )⟩)
      i=1                                                             i=1
                                                                                                    (using (a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2b2 )
≤ 2ε21 + 4T ε2B .
This implies that
                                  ∥θ̂t,h − T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )∥Σ
                                                                      2
                                                               ̂                 ≤ 2ε21 + 4T ε2B .
                                                                           t,h


Definition 5 (High-probability events). Define event Ehigh as
                                                           √
          Ehigh ∶= {∀t ∈ [T ], ∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ∥ξt,h
                                            P
                                                ∥Λt,h ≤ σh 2d log(6dH 2 T 2 ) =∶ Bnoise,h
                                                                                  P
                                                                                          }
                                                             √
                    ∩ {∀t ∈ [T ], ∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ∥ξt,h
                                                R
                                                   ∥Σt,h ≤ σR 2d log(6dHT 2 ) =∶ Bnoise
                                                                                    R
                                                                                          }

                       ∩ {∀t ∈ [T ], ∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ∥ηt,h
                                                  R
                                                      ∥Σ                   ≤ Berr
                                                                              R
                                                                                  }
                                                                     t,h
                 √
       R
where Berr ∶=     1030(1 + ε2 )4 d log (24(1 + ε2 )e2 T 3 H 2 ) + 4ε21 + 16(1 + ε2 )(1 + εB T ).


                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 8. We have Pr(Ehigh ) > 1 − 1/(HT ).

Proof of Lemma 8. Below we show that each event defined in Definition 5 holds with probability
at least 1 − 1/(3HT ). Then, by union bound, we have the desired result.
Proof of the first event. The way we generate ξt,h     P
                                                           is equivalent to first sampling ζt,h ∼
           2 −1
N (0, (σh ) Λt,h ) and then set ξt,h ← (I − Pt,h )ζt,h . By Lemma 20 and the union bound, we
                                 P

have
                                                      √
            Pr (∀t ∈ [T ], ∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ∥ζt,h ∥Λt,h > σh 2d log(6dH 2 T 2 )) ≤ 1/(3HT ).

Then, by definition, we have
            ∥ξt,h
              P 2
                  ∥Λt,h = ∥(1 − Pt,h )ζt,h ∥2Λt,h
                                                 m
                           ⊺
                        = ζt,h (I − Pt,h ) ∑ (ϕ∥t,h,i (ϕ∥t,h,i )⊺ + ϕ⊥t,h,i (ϕ⊥t,h,i )⊺ )(I − Pt,h )ζt,h
                                                 i=1
                                 m
                           ⊺      ⊥       ⊥      ⊺
                        = ζt,h ∑ ϕt,h,i (ϕt,h,i ) ζt,h
                                 i=1
                                  m
                           ⊺       ∥       ∥      ⊺   ⊥       ⊥      ⊺
                        ≤ ζt,h ∑ (ϕt,h,i (ϕt,h,i ) + ϕt,h,i (ϕt,h,i ) )ζt,h
                                 i=1

where the third step holds by the fact that ϕ⊥ is in the null space and ϕ∥ is in the span. Hence, we
conclude that ∥ξt,h
                P
                    ∥Λt,h ≤ ∥ζt,h ∥Λt,h .
Proof of the second event. Applying Lemma 20 and the union bound, we have
                                                √
                   Pr (∀t ∈ [T ] ∶ ∥ξtR ∥Σt > σR 2d log(6dHT 2 )) ≤ 1/(3HT ).

Proof of the third event. This is directly from Lemma 6.
Lemma 9 (Boundness of parameters). Under Assumption 4, conditioning on Ehigh , the following
hold for all t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H]:

      1. maxs,a ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θ̂t,h ⟩∣ ≤ Wh + ε2 ;

      2. maxs,a ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )⟩∣ ≤ Wh ;

      3. ∥ηt,h ∥Σ
                ̂ t,h ≤ Berr ;
                         P

                                 √
      4. ∥ηt,h ∥Λ ≤ 2(Wh + ε2 ) m;
                      √             √
      5. ∥ηt,h ∥Λt,h ≤ 3γBerrP
                                 + 8m(Wh + ε2 ) ;
                                           √
      6. maxs,a ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θt,h ⟩∣ ≤ Wh−1 − 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                  R
                                                        − 1 − ε2

      7. maxs V t,h (s) = maxs,a ∣Qt,h (s, a)∣ ≤ Wh−1 .

Proof of Lemma 9. Fix t ∈ [T ]. We prove these items by induction on h. The base case (h = H +1)
clearly holds since there is actually nothing at (H + 1)-th step. Now assume they hold for h + 1, and
we will show that they hold for h as well.
Proof of Item 1. It is simply by Line 9 of Algorithm 1 and Assumption 3.
Proof of Item 2. By linear Bellman completeness (Definition 1), for any s, a, we have,

∣⟨ϕ(s, a), T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )⟩∣ = ∣         E       max⟨ϕ(s′ , a′ ), ω t,h + θt,h+1 ⟩∣
                                       s′ ∼T(s,a)     ′a

                                  ≤ max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ω t,h + θt,h+1 ⟩∣
                                       s,a


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  ≤ max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ω̂t,h ⟩∣ + max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ξt,h
                                                                                R
                                                                                   ⟩∣ + max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θt,h+1 ⟩∣
                                     s,a                      s,a                        s,a
                                                                                           √
                                  ≤ (1 + ε2 ) + max ∥ϕ(s, a)∥Σ−1     ∥ξt,h ∥Σt,h + (Wh − 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                                       R                             R
                                                                                                         − 1 − ε2 )
                                                s,a              t,h
                                              √                       √
                                  ≤ 1 + ε2 + 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                     R
                                                            + (Wh − 2d ⋅ Bnoise R
                                                                                      − 1 − ε 2 ) = Wh .

Proof of Item 3. This is directly from Lemma 7.
Proof of Item 4. By triangle inequality, we have
                                                                                                √
    ∥ηt,h ∥Λ = ∥θ̂t,h − T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )∥Λ ≤ ∥θ̂t,h ∥Λ + ∥T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 )∥Λ ≤ 2(Wh + ε2 ) m.
where the last step is by
                               ¿                 ¿
                               Ám                Ám
                   ∥θ̂t,h ∥Λ = Á                 À∑(Wh + ε2 )2 = (Wh + ε2 )√m
                               À∑⟨ϕi , θ̂t,h ⟩ ≤ Á
                                              2

                                   i=1                              i=1

and the similar for T (ω t,h + θt,h+1 ).
Proof of Item 5. By definition, we have
                     m                         2
      ∥ηt,h ∥2Λt,h = ∑ ρi (⟨ϕ∥t,h,i , ηt,h ⟩ + ⟨ϕ⊥t,h,i , ηt,h ⟩ )
                                                                          2

                    i=1
                     m
                                                2                             2
                  = ∑ ρi (⟨Pt,h ϕi , ηt,h ⟩ + ⟨(I − Pt,h )ϕi , ηt,h ⟩ )
                    i=1
                     m
                                                    2                     2
                  ≤ ∑ ρi (3⟨Pt,h ϕi , ηt,h ⟩ + 2⟨ϕi , ηt,h ⟩ )                              (using (a + b)2 ≤ a2 + b2 )
                    i=1
                      m                  2
                  ≤ 3 ∑ ρi ( ∥ϕ∥t,h,i ∥ ̂ † ∥ηt,h ∥Σ
                                                          2
                                                   ̂ t,h ) + 2∥ηt,h ∥Λ
                                                                     2
                                                                                        (Cauchy-Schwartz, Lemma 25)
                       i=1               Σt,h


We have ∥ϕ∥t,h,i ∥Σ
                  ̂†       = ∥Pt,h ϕi ∥Σ
                                       ̂†       = ∥ϕi ∥Σ
                                                       ̂†           by Lemma 26. By Assumption 4, this is upper
                     t,h                 t,h                  t,h

bounded by γ. The second term, ∥ηt,h ∥Σ                            P
                                      ̂ t,h , is upper bounded by Berr by Item 3.

Hence, we have
                                 ∥ηt,h ∥2Λt,h ≤ 3γ 2 (Berr
                                                       P 2
                                                           ) + 2∥ηt,h ∥2Λ
                                                   ≤ 3γ 2 (Berr
                                                            P 2
                                                                ) + 8(Wh + ε2 )2 m.                           (Item 4)

Proof of Item 6. We have
                  max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θt,h ⟩∣ = max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θ̂t,h + ξt,h
                                                                   P
                                                                       ⟩∣
                    s,a                             s,a

                                               ≤ max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θ̂t,h ⟩∣ + max ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ξt,h
                                                                                           P
                                                                                               ⟩∣
                                                    s,a                           s,a

                                               ≤ Wh + ε2 + max ∥ϕ(s, a)∥Λ−1  ∥ξt,h
                                                                               P
                                                                                   ∥Λt,h
                                                           s,a           t,h
                                                           √
                                               ≤ Wh + ε2 + 2d ⋅ Bnoise,h
                                                                  P
                                                                                                           (Lemma 5)
                                                        √
                                               = Wh−1 − 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                                R
                                                                    − 1 − ε2 .

Proof of Item 7. We have
               ∣Qt,h (s, a)∣ = ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θt,h ⟩ + ⟨ϕ(s, a), ω t,h ⟩∣
                                                                ̂t,h ⟩∣ + ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ξtR ⟩∣
                              ≤ ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), θt,h ⟩∣ + ∣⟨ϕ(s, a), ω
                                          √                                        √
                              ≤ (Wh−1 − 2d ⋅ Bnoise  R
                                                          − 1 − ε2 ) + (1 + ε2 ) + 2d ⋅ Bnoise
                                                                                            R

                              = Wh−1 .
and also, maxs ∣V t,h (s)∣ = maxs,a ∣Qt,h (s, a)∣ ≤ Wh−1 .


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2    VALUE D ECOMPOSITION

We note that, at any round t ∈ [T ], conditioning on all information collected up to round t − 1, the
randomness of V t only comes from the Gaussian noise {ξt,h   P     R H
                                                                , ξt,h }h=1 . In other words, V t can be
considered a functional of the Gaussian noise. In light of this, we define
                                                  Vt,h [ξˇ1P , . . . , ξˇH
                                                                         P ˇR
                                                                           , ξ1 , . . . , ξˇH
                                                                                            R
                                                                                              ](⋅)
as a functional of the noise variable, which maps the given noise variable to the value func-
tion produced by the algorithm by replacing the random Gaussian noise with the variable
ξˇ1P , . . . , ξˇH
                 P ˇR
                   , ξ1 , . . . , ξˇH
                                    R
                                      . By definition, we immediately have
                                    V t,h (⋅) = Vt,h [ξt,1
                                                       P              P
                                                           , . . . , ξt,H    R
                                                                          , ξt,1            R
                                                                                 , . . . , ξt,H ](⋅).
Next, we define Ut as the minimum of the following program
                                   min                   Vt,1 [ξˇ1P , . . . , ξˇH
                                                                                P ˇR
                                                                                  , ξ1 , . . . , ξˇH
                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                     ] (st,1 )
                                     P ,ξ̌ R ,...,ξ̌ R
                         ξ̌1P ,...,ξ̌H    1         H

                        s.t.      ∀h ∈ [H] ∶ ∥ξˇt,h
                                                P
                                                    ∥Λt,h ≤ Bnoise,h
                                                             P
                                                                     ,                      ∥ξˇt,h
                                                                                               R
                                                                                                   ∥Σt,h ≤ Bnoise
                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                  .
In other words, Ut achieves the minimum value at st,1 while satisfying the high-probability con-
straints (Ehigh ) on the noise variable. We denote ξ P  1
                                                          , . . . , ξP , ξR, . . . , ξR
                                                                     H 1              H
                                                                                        as the minimizer of the
above program, and will always use underlined variables to represent the intermediate variables cor-
responding to Ut (such as θ, ̂ θ, ω
                                  ̂, ω, Q, V ) to distinguish them from the variables corresponding to
       ̂     ̂, ω, Q, V ). We note that, under Ehigh , we directly have Ut (st,1 ) ≤ V t (st,1 ).
V t , (θ, θ, ω
Below is a decomposition lemma under deterministic transition. Note that it slightly differs from
the usual value decomposition lemma under stochastic transitions, where we have to take the expec-
tation over trajectory randomness. This distinction is crucial to our analysis: by not accounting for
trajectory randomness, we can effectively leverage our span argument.
We denote {st,h , at,h }H    h=1 as the trajectory generated by executing πt with initial state st,1 , and
{s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h }H                                             ⋆                    ⋆
                h=1 as the trajectory generated by executing π with initial state st,1 = st,1 .
Lemma 10 (Value decomposition under deterministic transition). Under deterministic transition
(Assumption 1), we have
                                     H
  V πt (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ) = ∑ (V t,h+1 (st,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩);
                                   h=1
                                                                                                                                (10)
                                     H
   V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ) ≤ ∑ (V t,h+1 (s⋆t,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩).
                                   h=1
                                                                                                                                (11)
Similarly, we have
                                     H
  V πt (st,1 ) − Ut (st,1 ) ≤ ∑ (Ut,h+1 (st,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
                                    h=1
                                                                                                                                (12)

Proof of Lemma 10. We will prove (10) and (11) altogether, and then prove (12).
Proof of (10) and (11). We consider an arbitrary policy π. Let {s′t,h , a′t,h }H  h=1 denote the determin-
istic trajectory generated by π with initial state s′t,1 = st,1 . By definition, we have

  V π (s′t,1 ) − V t (s′t,1 )
   = Qπ1 (s′t,1 , π(s′t,1 )) − max Qt,1 (s′t,1 , a)
                                   a

   ≤ Q1 (st,1 , π(st,1 )) − Qt,1 (s′t,1 , π(s′t,1 ))
       π ′           ′
                                                                                                                                (13)
   = V2π (s′t,2 ) + rh (s′t,1 , a′t,1 ) − ⟨θt,1 , ϕ(s′t,1 , π(s′t,1 ))⟩ − ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(s′t,1 , π(s′t,1 ))⟩              (by definition)


                                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   = (V2π (s′t,2 ) − V t,2 (s′t,2 )) + (V t,2 (s′t,2 ) − ⟨θt,1 , ϕ(s′t,1 , π(s′t,1 ))⟩) + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(s′t,1 , a′t,1 )⟩

Recursively expanding the first term, we obtain
                                H
  V π (s′t,1 ) − V t (s′t,1 ) ≤ ∑ (V t,h+1 (s′t,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(s′t,h , a′t,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(s′t,h , a′t,h )⟩).
                                h=1

This proves (11) by specifying π = π ⋆ . Similarly, (10) can be proved by observing that the only
inequality (13) becomes equality when π = πt .
Proof of (12). The proof is quite similar. We have
  V πt (st,1 ) − Ut (st,1 )
  = Qπ1 t (st,1 , πt (st,1 )) − max Qt,1 (st,1 , a)
                                  a

  ≤ Qπ1 t (st,1 , πt (st,1 )) − Qt,1 (st,1 , πt (st,1 ))
  = V2πt (st,2 ) + rh (st,1 , at,1 ) − ⟨θt,1 , ϕ(st,1 , πt (st,1 ))⟩ − ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,1 , at,1 )⟩           (by definition)


  = (V2πt (st,2 ) − Ut,2 (st,2 )) + (Ut,2 (st,2 ) − ⟨θt,1 , ϕ(st,1 , πt (st,1 ))⟩) + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(st,1 , at,1 )⟩

Recursively expanding the first term, we obtain
                                 H
  V πt (st,1 ) − Ut (st,1 ) ≤ ∑ (Ut,h+1 (st,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
                                h=1

This completes the proof.
Lemma 11. For any t ∈ [T ], conditioning on Espan
                                             t    , we have the following (in)equalities:
                           H
            V t (st,1 ) = ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩),
                          h=1
                           H
            Ut (st,1 ) ≥ ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
                          h=1


Proof of Lemma 11. We will prove the two statements separately, but the proofs are quite similar.
Proof of the first statement. By Lemma 10, we have
  V t (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )
        H
   = ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ξt,h
                                      P
                                          , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ − V t,h+1 (st,h+1 ) + ⟨ω t,h − ωh⋆ , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩)
     h=1

By linear Bellman completeness (Definition 1), there exists a vector, denoted by T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ),
such that V t,h+1 (⋅) = ⟨ϕ(⋅, a), T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 )⟩. Hence, we can rewrite the above as

V t (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )
    H
= ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ξt,h
                                                          P
                                                              , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h − ωh⋆ , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
   h=1

                                                              ⋆
Note that by definition of V πt we have V πt (st,1 ) = ∑H
                                                        h=1 ⟨ω , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩. Hence, the above
implies
                      H
        V t (st,1 ) = ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ) + ξt,h
                                                           P
                                                               , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
                     h=1

               P
We can remove ξt,h since ⟨ξt,h
                           P
                               , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ = 0 conditioning on Espan
                                                                       t    .


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of the second statement. By Lemma 10, we have
                                    H
  V πt (st,1 ) − Ut (st,1 ) ≤ ∑ (Ut,h+1 (st,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩)
                                    h=1

Again, by the definition of V πt , we conclude that
                        H
           Ut (st,1 ) ≥ ∑ (⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ) + ξ P
                                                                                          t,h
                                                                                              , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩).
                       h=1

We can remove ξ P
                t,h
                    since ⟨ξ P
                             t,h
                                 , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ = 0 conditioning on Espan
                                                                         t    .

The following lemma shows that, conditioning on the span event Espan
                                                                t    , the value function V t cannot
deviate too much from the value function V πt on average.
Lemma 12. For any t ∈ [T ], under Assumption 4 and conditioning on Espan
                                                                    t    and Ehigh , we have
                            T
                          ∑ (V t (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 )) ≤ Berr γH + (Bnoise + Berr ) ⋅ Bϕ .
                                               π                  P           R         R        R
                          t=1


Proof of Lemma 12. We apply Lemma 11 to decompose V t and obtain
  T
 ∑ (V t (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ))
                            π
 t=1
       T
 = ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h − ωh⋆ , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩)
      t=1

Applying Cauchy-Schwartz yields
       T
 ≤ ∑ (∥θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 )∥Σ
                                     ̂
                                                                                       ⋆
                                                                       ̂ † + ∥ω t,h − ωh ∥Σt,h , ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1 )
                                                      ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                t,h                     t,h                                          t,h
      t=1

We apply Lemma 7 and Assumption 4 to the left term and Lemmas 6 and 16 and Definition 5 to the
right. Then, we obtain
 ≤ H ⋅ Berr
        P
            γ + (Bnoise
                  R
                        + Berr
                           R
                               ) ⋅ BϕR .
This completes the proof.

The following lemma establishes upper bounds on the value functions when conditioning on the
span event Espan
            t    .
Lemma 13. For any t ∈ [T ], conditioning on Espan
                                               t    and Ehigh , we have
                                                       √
                  ∣Ut (st,1 )∣ ≤ H ⋅ (Bnoise
                                       R
                                             + Berr
                                                 R
                                                    ) ⋅ d + H ⋅ (1 + Berr
                                                                       P
                                                                          γ).
Moreover, we have
                                                          √
                    ∣V t (st,1 )∣ ≤ H ⋅ (Bnoise
                                            R
                                                + Berr
                                                   R
                                                       ) ⋅ d + H ⋅ (1 + Berr
                                                                         P
                                                                             γ).
                                             √
We abbreviate BV ∶= H ⋅ (Bnoise
                            R
                                   + Berr
                                       R
                                          ) ⋅ d + H ⋅ (1 + Berr
                                                             P
                                                                γ).

Proof of Lemma 13. We will first prove the second statement and then the first statement.
Proof of the second statement. Applying Lemma 11 and the triangle inequality, we have the follow-
ing
                                H                             H
            ∣V t (st,1 )∣ ≤ ∣ ∑ ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩∣ + ∣ ∑ ⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩∣
                             h=1                              h=1
                        =∶ T1 + T2 .


                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We bound the two terms separately. For T1 , we have
             H
                                   ωt,h − ω ⋆ ) + ωh⋆ , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩∣
                         ̂t,h ) + (̂
      T1 = ∣ ∑ ⟨(ω t,h − ω
            h=1
            H
         ≤ ∑ (∥ω t,h − ω             ωt,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt,h ) ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                       ̂t,h ∥Σt,h + ∥̂                                    t,h
                                                                              + V πt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Cauchy-Schwartz)
           h=1
                                                        √
         ≤ H ⋅ (Bnoise
                 R
                       + Berr
                          R
                              )⋅                                     d + H.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Definition 5 and lemma 5)
For T2 , we can use Cauchy-Schwartz:
              H
      T2 = ∣ ∑ ⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩∣
             h=1
             H
          ≤ ∑ ∥θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 )∥Σ
                                             ̂ t,h ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                                    ̂†                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Cauchy-Schwartz, Lemma 25)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t,h
            h=1

          ≤ Berr
              P
                 γH.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Assumption 4 and lemma 7)
Proof of the first statement. We prove it by establishing a lower bound and an upper bound of
Ut (st,1 ) separately. We start with the lower bound, whose derivation is similar to the second state-
ment we just proved above:
                    H
   Ut (st,1 ) ≥ ∑ (⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩ + ⟨ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Lemma 11)
                   h=1
                                           H
                 ≥ −Berr
                     P
                         γH − ∣ ∑ ⟨(ω t,h − ω         ω t,h − ωh⋆ ) + ωh⋆ , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩∣
                                            ̂t,h ) + (̂
                                       h=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (following a similar argument as above)
                                      H
                 ≥ −Berr
                     P
                         γH − ∑ (∥ω t,h − ω             ω t,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt,h ) ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                          ̂t,h ∥Σt,h + ∥̂                                     t,h
                                  h=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                                                                                                                                                               √
                 ≥ −Berr
                     P
                         γH − H ⋅ (Bnoise
                                    R
                                          + Berr
                                             R
                                                 )⋅                                                                                                                         d.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Lemma 8)
The upper bound of Ut (st,1 ) is a consequence of the second statement we just proved above:
                              Ut (st,1 ) ≤ E[V t (st,1 ) ∣ Ehigh ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (by definition)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    √
                                                                           ≤ Berr
                                                                              P
                                                                                  γH + H ⋅ (Bnoise
                                                                                             R
                                                                                                   + Berr
                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                          )⋅                                                                                                                                                                                     d + H.
We finish the proof by combining the lower and upper bounds.

C.3     E XPLORATION IN THE N ULL S PACE

Lemma 14 (optimism with constant probability). For any t ∈ [T ], denote Eoptm
                                                                         t    as the event that
                                                                                V ⋆ (st,1 ) ≤ V t (st,1 ) + Berr
                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                 γH.
Then, under Assumption 4 and conditioning on the high-probability event Ehigh , we have
                                                                                                             Pr (Eoptm
                                                                                                                  t    ) ≥ Γ2 (−1)
where Γ(⋅) is the CDF of the standard normal distribution.

Proof of Lemma 14. By Lemma 10, we have:
                                    H
  V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ) ≤ ∑ (V t,h+1 (s⋆t,h+1 ) − ⟨θt,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩ + ⟨ωh⋆ − ω t,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩)
                                h=1
                                    H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H
                              = ∑ (V t,h+1 (s⋆t,h+1 ) − ⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩) − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                                           P
                                                                                               , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩
                                h=1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h=1
                                ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶
                                                                                                                                                         (i)                                                                                                                                                                                                             (ii)


                                                                                                                                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     H                                                                                                                                                                            H
                              + ∑ ⟨ωh⋆ − ω
                                         ̂t,h , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩ − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                         R
                                                                             , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩ .
                                 h=1                                                                                                                                                                          h=1
                                 ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶
                                                                                                       (iii)                                                                                                                                                         (iv)

Note that, given any state-action-state triple (s, a, s′ ), we have

        V t,h+1 (s′ ) − ⟨θ̂t,h , ϕ(s, a)⟩ = ⟨T (ω t,h+1 + θt,h+1 ) − θ̂t,h , ϕ(s, a)⟩ = ⟨ηt,h , ϕ(s, a)⟩.
Plugging this back to (i), we obtain
                                                            H                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                        (i) − (ii) ≤ ∑ ⟨ηt,h − ξt,h
                                                P
                                                    , ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h )⟩ =∶ ∑ ⟨ηt,h − ξt,h
                                                                                       P
                                                                                           , ϕ⋆h ⟩
                                                        h=1                                                                                                                                                                                   h=1

where we abbreviate ϕ⋆h ∶= ϕ(s⋆t,h , a⋆t,h ). Next, we split it into two parts:
                 H                                                              H                                                                                                                                                H
  (i) − (ii) ≤ ∑ ⟨ηt,h , Pt,h ϕ⋆h ⟩ + ∑ ⟨ηt,h , (I − Pt,h )ϕ⋆h ⟩ − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                       P
                                                                           , ϕ⋆h ⟩
               h=1                                                          h=1                                                                                                                                              h=1
                 H                                                                                                                   H                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                     ⋆                                   ⋆                   ⋆
             ≤ ∑ ∥ηt,h ∥Σ               ̂ † + ∑ ∥ηt,h ∥Λt,h ∥(I − Pt,h )ϕh ∥Λ−1 − ∑ ⟨ξt,h , ϕh ⟩
                        ̂ t,h ∥Pt,h ϕh ∥Σ
                                                                                      P
                                                                             t,h                    t,h
               h=1                                                                                                               h=1                                                                                                                                                                                                   h=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Cauchy-Schwartz, Lemma 25)
                                 H                                                                                                                                                                                                 H
             ≤ Berr
                P
                    γH + ∑ ∥ηt,h ∥Λt,h ∥(I − Pt,h )ϕ⋆h ∥Λ−1
                                                         t,h
                                                             − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                   P
                                                                       , ϕ⋆h ⟩
                               h=1                                                                                                                                                                                             h=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (Assumption 4 and Lemmas 7 and 26)
                      ¿
                      Á H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H
             ≤ B γH + Á
                P
                  err
                      ÀH ∑ ∥η                                                                                    ⋆ 2
                                                                                          t,h ∥Λt,h ∥(I − Pt,h )ϕh ∥Λ−1
                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                     − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               , ϕ⋆h ⟩ (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t,h
                                                          h=1                                                                                                                                                                                                    h=1

             P
Recall that ξt,h is sampled from N (0, σh2 (I − Pt,h )Λ−1
                                                       t,h (I − Pt,h )). Therefore,

                                 H                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                       ⋆                                                                                                                                                                             ⋆ 2
                                 ∑ ⟨ξt,h , ϕh ⟩ ∼ N (0, ∑ σh ∥(I − Pt,h )ϕh ∥Λ−1 ) .
                                                          P                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t,h
                                 h=1                                                                                                                    h=1
             √
Since σh ≥       H∥ηt,h ∥Λt,h under high-probability event Ehigh , we have

                                                                      Pr ((i) − (ii) ≤ Berr
                                                                                        P
                                                                                            γH) ≥ Γ(−1).

Next, we consider (iii) − (iv). By a similar argument, we have
                                                                  H                                                                                                                      H
                     (iii) − (iv) = ∑ ⟨ωh⋆ − ω
                                             ̂t,h , ϕ⋆h ⟩ − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                R
                                                                    , ϕ⋆h ⟩
                                                              h=1                                                                                                                    h=1
                                                                  H                                                                                                                                                                              H
                                                   ≤ ∑ ∥ωh⋆ − ω
                                                              ̂t,h ∥Σt,h ∥ϕ⋆h ∥Σ−1
                                                                                t,h
                                                                                    − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                                          R
                                                                                              , ϕ⋆h ⟩
                                                              h=1                                                                                                                                                                            h=1
                                                    ¿
                                                    Á    H                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                   ≤Á
                                                    ÀH ⋅ ∑ ∥ω ⋆ − ω
                                                                  ̂                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                    ⋆ 2
                                                                                                                                                                        t,h ∥Σt,h ∥ϕh ∥Σ−1
                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                                           − ∑ ⟨ξt,h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   , ϕ⋆h ⟩.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t,h
                                                                                                      h=1                                                                                                                                                                            h=1

                                       2 −1
Recall that ξtR is sampled from N (0, σR Σt,h ), and thus, we have
                                                              H                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                ⋆                                                                                                                    ⋆ 2
                                                            ∑ ⟨ξt , ϕh ⟩ ∼ N (0, ∑ σR ∥ϕh ∥Σ−1 ) .
                                                                                         R                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t,h
                                                          h=1                                                                                                                    h=1
                             √
Therefore, since σR ≥            H∥ωh⋆ − ω
                                         ̂t,h ∥Σt (Lemma 9), we have
                                                                                    Pr ((iii) − (iv) ≤ 0) ≥ Γ(−1).
Since the two events are independent, the probability that both events happen is at least Γ2 (−1).


                                                                                                                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 15. The number of times Espan
                               t    does not hold will not exceed dH, i.e.,
                                                    T
                                                              span ∁
                                                   ∑ 1 {(Et            ) } ≤ dH.
                                                   t=1


Proof. By definition, when Espan t     does not hold, there exists h ∈ [H] such that ϕ(st,h , at,h ) is not
in the span of {ϕ(si,h , ai,h )}i=1
                                t−1
                                    . That means, the dimension of the span should increase by exactly
one after this iteration, i.e.,
                dim (span ({ϕ(si,h , ai,h )}ti=1 )) = dim (span ({ϕ(si,h , ai,h )}t−1
                                                                                  i=1 )) + 1.

However, the dimension cannot exceed d, so it can only increase at most d times. This argument
holds for any h ∈ [H], and thus, the total number of times Espan
                                                            t    does not happen will not exceed
dH.
Lemma 16. For any h ∈ [H], it holds that
                                       T                          √
                                       ∑ ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                                           t,h
                                                               ≤ d 2T log(T + 1) =∶ BϕR ,
                                      t=1
                        T                                               √
                        ∑ 1{Et
                                    span
                                           }∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                             ̂†     ≤ γd 2dT log (2T γ 2 ) =∶ BϕP .
                                                              t,h
                        t=1


Proof of Lemma 16. We prove the two inequalities separately.
Proof of the first inequality. For any t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H], we have the following bound on the norm
of features (Lemma 5):
                                                                              √
                             ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                               t,h
                                                   ≤ ∥ϕ(st,h , a t,h )∥ Λ−1 ≤   d.

Hence, by Cauchy-Schwartz, we have
                            ¿
       T                    Á      T
       ∑ ∥ϕ(s , a )∥ −1 ≤ Á
                  t,h
                            ÀT ⋅ ∑ ∥ϕ(s
                            t,h    Σt,h                       t,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                                                           2
                                                                              t,h
        t=1                                         t=1
                                            ¿
                                            Á    T
                                           =Á
                                            ÀT ⋅ ∑ min {∥ϕ(s
                                                                        t,h , at,h )∥Σ−1 , d}
                                                                                     2
                                                                                     t,h
                                                    t=1
                                            ¿
                                            Á      T
                                           ≤Á
                                            ÀT d ⋅ ∑ min {∥ϕ(s
                                                                         t,h , at,h )∥Σ−1 , 1}
                                                                                      2
                                                                                      t,h
                                                        t=1
                                               √
                                           ≤  T d ⋅ 2d log(T + 1)                (elliptical potential lemma, Lemma 21)
                                              √
                                           = d 2T log(T + 1).
Proof of the second inequality. We divide the rounds into d consecutive blocks, in each of which the
rank of Σ̂ t,h remains the same. To be specific, let t1 , t2 , . . . , td , td+1 be a sequence of integers such
that for any i ∈ [d] and any t ∈ {ti , ti+1 , . . . , ti+1 − 1}, we have rank(Σ  ̂ t,h ) = i.
We will apply the elliptical potential lemma to each block separately. Now let’s fix i ∈ [d] and
consider the i-th block. Let the reduced eigen-decomposition of Σ         ̂ t ,h be Σ  ̂ t ,h = U DU ⊺ where
                                                                             i            i

U ∈ R and D ∈ R . For each t ∈ {ti , ti+1 , . . . , ti+1 − 1}, since ϕ(st,h , at,h ) is in the span of Σ
      d×i           i×i                                                                                 ̂ t,h
conditioning on Espan
                  t   , there exists a vector x t such that ϕ(st,h , a t,h ) = U x t .
For any t ∈ {ti , ti+1 , . . . , ti+1 − 1}, we have

     ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥2Σ
                       ̂†
                                                     ̂ † ϕ(st,h , at,h )
                                  = ϕ(st,h , at,h )⊺ Σ
                            t,h
                                                       t,h
                                                                                                     †
                                                    ⊺ ⎛̂                                      ⎞
                                                                  t−1
                                                                                           ⊺
                                  = ϕ(st,h , at,h ) Σti ,h + ∑ ϕ(sj,h , aj,h )ϕ (sj,h , aj,h ) ϕ(st,h , at,h )
                                                    ⎝        j=ti                             ⎠

                                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                †
                                              ⎛         t−1            ⎞
                                     = x⊺t U ⊺ U DU ⊺ + ∑ U xj x⊺j U ⊺              U xt
                                              ⎝         j=ti           ⎠
                                                       −1
                                        ⊺⎛          ⊺⎞
                                              t−1
                                     = xt D + ∑ xj xj     xt .
                                         ⎝    j=ti    ⎠

Define Dt = D + ∑j=t
                 t−1
                     i
                       xj x⊺j . Hence, we have
                             ti+1 −1                                      ti+1 −1
                              ∑ 1{Et }∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                       ̂ † = ∑ 1{Et    }∥xt ∥Dt−1 .
                                   span                           span
                                                         t,h
                              t=ti                                           t=ti

By Assumption 4, the eigenvalues of D are lower bounded by 1/γ 2 . And clearly, its eigenvalues are
upper bounded by ti ≤ T . Therefore, we have
                            ¿
  ti+1 −1                   Á ti+1 −1
    ∑ 1{E
           span
                }∥xt ∥ −1 ≤ Á
                   t
                            ÀT ⋅ ∑ 1{Espan }∥xt ∥2
                                Dt                          t            Dt−1
    t=ti                                         t=ti
                                        ¿
                                        Á ti+1 −1
                                       =Á
                                        ÀT ⋅ ∑ 1{Espan } min {∥xt ∥2
                                                            t                        Dt−1
                                                                                            , γ2}
                                                 t=ti
                                          ¿
                                          Á ti+1 −1
                                       ≤ γÁ
                                          ÀT ⋅ ∑ 1{Espan } min {∥xt ∥2
                                                                t                       Dt−1
                                                                                               , 1}
                                                  t=ti
                                          √
                                       ≤ γ T ⋅ 2d log (T γ 2 (1 + 1/d)) (elliptical potential lemma, Lemma 21)
                                          √
                                       ≤ γ T ⋅ 2d log (2T γ 2 ).
This finishes the summation of one block. Notice that we have d such blocks, we complete the proof
by multiplying the above by d.

C.4        M AIN S TEPS OF THE P ROOF
                                                                                   ̃optm and E
Let Ṽt (st,1 ) denote an i.i.d. copy of V t conditioned on initial state st,1 and E         ̃high denote
                                                                                    t
the counterparts of Et  optm
                               and Ehigh         ̃
                                         but for Vt (st,1 ).
The proof starts with the following decomposition of the regret:
               T                                                         T
                   ⋆
           E [ ∑ (V (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ))] ≤ E [1{E
                               π                    high
                                                         } ∑ 1{Espan
                                                                t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
              t=1                                                        t=1
                                                                                    T
                                                         + E [1{(Ehigh )∁ } ∑ (V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                                                                                    t=1
                                                                    T
                                                         + E [ ∑ 1{(Espan
                                                                     t    )∁ }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                                                                t=1

We will later show that the second and third terms can be easily bounded separately by observing
the following two fact: (1) the probability that Ehigh doesn’t hold is very small, and (2) the number
of times Espan
           t    doesn’t hold is also small. Hence, it remains to bound the first term, which is the
most challenging. The most of the proof below is devoted to bounding it.
As the first step, we will add some necessary event conditions to the first term, using the following
lemma.
Lemma 17 (Adding necessary event conditions). It holds that
                       T
E [1{E
            high
                   } ∑ 1{Espan
                          t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                       t=1
                T
       1                ̃high ∩ E
                                ̃span ∩ Ehigh }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                                                                               ̃high ∩ E
                                                                                       ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
≤           E [ ∑  E [1{E
    Γ2 (−1)        ̃
               t=1 Vt
                                 t                              t                       t



                                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           1
            +                   ⋅ (dHBV + Berr
                                           P
                                               γH + (Bnoise
                                                      R
                                                            + Berr
                                                               R
                                                                   ) ⋅ BϕR + dH 2 + 1)
                        Γ2 (−1)
where the expectation EṼt is taken over the randomness of Ṽt (an i.i.d. copy of V t ) only.

Proof of Lemma 17. We have
                                                                                              T
                     E [1{E
                                                             high
                                                                                  } ∑ 1{Espan
                                                                                         t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                                                                                          t=1
                                                                                                          T
                      ≤ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ (V ⋆ (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                                         t    }V πt (st,1 ))]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (V ⋆ is non-negative)
                                                                                                      t=1

                          ̃optm (Lemma 14), we get
Plugging the condition on Et
                                                                                                          T
                      ≤ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [min{H, Ṽt (st,1 )} − 1{Espan                 ̃optm ]] + B P γH
                                                                        }V πt (st,1 ) ∣ E
                                                                   t                     t          err
                                                                                                          ̃t
                                                                                                      t=1 V

                                    ̃high and E
We aim to add two event indicators, E         ̃span , and thus split the whole thing into several
                                               t
terms:
                                                                                                          T
                                            ̃high ∩ E
                      ≤ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{E       ̃span } (Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan }V πt (st,1 )) ∣ E
                                                                                                    ̃optm ]]
                                                     t                        t                       t
                                                                                                          ̃t
                                                                                                      t=1 V
                                                                                                                      T
                                                          ̃high )∁ } (min{H, Ṽt (st,1 )} − 1{Espan }V πt (st,1 )) ∣ E
                                   + E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{(E                                                          ̃optm ]]
                                                                                               t                      t
                                                                                                                       ̃t
                                                                                                                   t=1 V
                                                                                                                      T
                                                          ̃span )∁ } (min{H, Ṽt (st,1 )} − 1{Espan }V πt (st,1 )) ∣ E
                                   + E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{(E                                                          ̃optm ]]
                                                           t                                   t                      t
                                                                                                                       ̃t
                                                                                                                   t=1 V

                                   + Berr
                                      P
                                          γH
                      =∶ T1 + T2 + T3 + Berr
                                         P
                                             γH.
Below we bound each term separately.
                                                                      ̃optm to make things cleaner.
Bounding T1 . To bound T1 , we will first drop the conditioning event Et
To that end, we re-arange it in the following way
       ⎡
       ⎢
                          ⎡
                          ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RRRR             ⎤⎤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ⎥⎥
       ⎢            T     ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RRR           ⎥⎥
       ⎢    high          ⎢ ̃high ̃span ̃                                                                                                                                                                                                                              span                                                                                                                                                    span ∁                                                                                     R      optm ⎥⎥
T1 = E ⎢1{E      } ∑ E ⎢1{E                                                       ∩ Et } (Vt (st,1 ) − 1{Et }Ut (st,1 )) + 1{(Et ) } ⋅ BV RR Et                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R    ̃      ⎥⎥
       ⎢               ̃  ⎢
                   t=1 Vt ⎢´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ R    R           ⎥⎥
       ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RRR         ⎥⎥
       ⎢                  ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (∗)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RR        ⎥⎥
       ⎣                  ⎣                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ⎦⎦
                                                                                                       T
                          + E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{E
                                                ̃high ∩ E
                                                        ̃span
                                                          t   }1{Espan
                                                                  t    }(Ut (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )) ∣ E
                                                                                                      ̃optm
                                                                                                       t    ]]
                                                                                                       ̃t
                                                                                                   t=1 V
                                                                                                       T
                          − E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{(Espan
                                                  t    )∁ } ⋅ BV ∣ E
                                                                   ̃optm
                                                                     t   ]]
                                                                                                       ̃t
                                                                                                   t=1 V

              =∶ T1.1 + T1.2 + T1.3 .
 The reason we did this is that we want to make sure (∗) is non-negative, so we can drop the
conditioning event Ẽoptm . To see why it is non-negative, we consider two cases: first, if Espan
                     t                                                                                t
holds, then we already have 1{E ̃high }(Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 )) ≥ 0 by definition of Ut (st,1 );
                                                          t
second, if Espan does not hold, then we have 1{E    ̃high ∩ E
                                                            ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) + 1{(Espan )∁ } ⋅ BV ≥ 0 by
            t                                                t                       t
Lemma 13.
Hence, for T1.1 , we can drop the conditioning event using the following rule (for non-negative
variable X):
                                                                                                                                  E[X ∣ E] = E[X ⋅ 1{E}]/ Pr(E) ≤ E[X]/ Pr(E)
and using Lemma 14 to get
                                                    T
                                 1
T1.1 ≤                                E [1{Ehigh
                                                 } ∑        ̃high ∩ E
                                                       E [1{E       ̃span
                                                                      t   } (Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                                                                              t    }Ut (st,1 )) + 1{(Espan
                                                                                                                      t    )∁ } ⋅ BV ]]
                              Γ2 (−1)                  ̃t
                                                   t=1 V



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                T
            1
    =           E                     ̃high ∩ E
                    [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{E       ̃span
                                                t   } (Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                                                        t    }Ut (st,1 ))]]
        Γ2 (−1)                    ̃t
                               t=1 V
                                   T
               1
        +           E [1{E high
                                } ∑   1{(Espan
                                          t    )∁ } ⋅ BV ]
            Γ2 (−1)               t=1
                              T
           1          high            ̃high ∩ E
                                              ̃span
    ≤           E [1{E     } ∑   E [1{E         t   } (Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                                                        t    }Ut (st,1 ))]]
        Γ2 (−1)                  ̃
                             t=1 Vt
             1
        + 2       ⋅ dHBV                                                                           (Lemma 15)
          Γ (−1)
For T1.2 , we apply Lemma 12 to get
                               T
                                   ̃high ∩ E
        T1.2 ≤ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{E       ̃span }1{Espan }(V t (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 )) ∣ E
                                                                                          ̃optm ]]
                                            t        t                                     t
                                   ̃t
                               t=1 V
                                                                            (V t ≥ Ut conditioning on Ehigh )
              ≤ Berr
                 P
                     γH + (Bnoise
                            R
                                  + Berr
                                     R
                                         ) ⋅ BϕR .
We simply upper bound T1.3 by zero. Plugging all these upper bounds back, we obtain
                             T
          1                           ̃high ∩ E
                                              ̃span } (Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan }Ut (st,1 ))]]
T1 ≤             [1{E     }      E [1{E
                     high
               E            ∑
       Γ2 (−1)              t=1 Ṽt
                                                t                       t

            1
       + 2       ⋅ dHBV + Berr P
                                  γH + (Bnoise
                                          R
                                               + Berr
                                                  R
                                                      ) ⋅ BϕR
         Γ (−1)
                   T
          1                ̃high ∩ E
                                   ̃span ∩ Ehigh }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                                                                                  ̃high ∩ E
                                                                                          ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
   =           E [ ∑  E [1{E
       Γ2 (−1)        ̃
                  t=1 Vt
                                    t                              t                       t

            1
       + 2       ⋅ dHBV + Berr
                             P
                               γH + (Bnoise
                                        R
                                             + Berr
                                                  R
                                                     ) ⋅ BϕR
         Γ (−1)
This is the final bound of T1 we need. Next, we go back to bound T2 and T3 .
Bounding T2 . We upper bound the value function inside the expectation by H and obtain
                                                        T
                                                          ̃high )∁ } ∣ E
                            T2 ≤ H ⋅ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{(E            ̃optm ]]
                                                                        t
                                                         ̃t
                                                     t=1 V
                                             T
                                                 ̃high )∁ } ∣ E
                               ≤ H ⋅ E [ ∑ E [1{(E            ̃optm ]]                        (dropping Ehigh )
                                                               t
                                              ̃t
                                          t=1 V
                                             T
                                                ̃high )∁ ∩ E
                               = H ⋅ E [ ∑ Pr ((E          ̃optm ) / Pr (E
                                                                         ̃optm )]
                                                            t             t
                                          t=1
                                 HT
                               ≤ 2      ⋅ Pr ((Ehigh )∁ )
                                Γ (−1)
                                   1
                               ≤ 2     .                                                           (Lemma 8)
                                Γ (−1)

Bounding T3 . Similar, we upper bound the value function inside the expectation by H and obtain
                                                    T
                                                        ̃span )∁ } ∣ E
                          T3 ≤ H ⋅ E [1{Ehigh } ∑ E [1{(E            ̃optm ]]
                                                         t            t
                                                       ̃t
                                                   t=1 V
                                         T
                                                ̃span )∁ } ∣ E
                              ≤ H ⋅ E [ ∑ E [1{(E            ̃optm ]]                         (dropping Ehigh )
                                                 t            t
                                            ̃t
                                        t=1 V
                                         T
                                                ̃span )∁ ∩ E
                              = H ⋅ E [ ∑ E [1{(E          ̃optm }] / Pr(E
                                                                         ̃optm )]
                                                 t          t             t
                                            ̃t
                                        t=1 V
                                         T
                                                ̃span )∁ }] / Pr(E
                              ≤ H ⋅ E [ ∑ E [1{(E                ̃optm )]
                                                 t                t
                                            ̃t
                                        t=1 V


                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  T
                                       H
                                ≤           ⋅ E [ ∑  1{(Espan )∁ }]                              (tower rule)
                                    Γ2 (−1)      t=1
                                                         t

                                     dH 2
                                ≤                                                               (Lemma 15)
                                    Γ2 (−1)
Plugging all these back, we conclude the proof.

The following lemma refines the event conditions established in Lemma 17 to make the whole thing
more manageable.
Lemma 18 (Refining event conditions). It holds that
       T
               ̃high ∩ E
    E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span ∩ Ehigh }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                                                                      ̃high ∩ E
                                                                              ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
                        t                              t                       t
           ̃t
       t=1 V
           T
                 ̃high ∩ E
    ≤ E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )]]
                          t                      t
               ̃t
           t=1 V
      + dHBV + 2BV /H.

Proof of Lemma 18. We start with refining the event conditions on the first term. We remove un-
needed events by splitting the first term into two parts:
       T
               ̃
    E [ ∑ E [1{E
                        high    ̃span ∩ Ehigh }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                               ∩E                                              ̃high ∩ E
                                                                                       ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
                                 t                              t                       t
           ̃t
       t=1 V
           T
                 ̃high ∩ E
    = E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                                                                ̃high ∩ E
                                                                        ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
                          t                      t                       t
               ̃t
           t=1 V
                T
                   ̃high ∩ E
      − E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span ∩ (Ehigh )∁ }Ṽt (st,1 )]]
                            t
                   ̃t
               t=1 V

Here, using Lemma 13, the last term can be bounded by
            T                                                            T
                  ̃high ∩ E
     − E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span ∩ (Ehigh )∁ }Ṽt (st,1 )]] ≤ E [ ∑ 1{(Ehigh )∁ }BV ] ≤ BV /H
                           t
               ̃t
           t=1 V                                                         t=1

where we used Lemma 8 in the last inequality.
Now we seek to remove unneeded event conditions on Ut as well. We notice the following decom-
position
                                    1{Espan           ̃high ∩ E
                                            ∩ Ehigh ∩ E       ̃span }Ut (st,1 )
                                       t                       t
                                     ≥ 1{Espan
                                          t    ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )
                                       − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ (Ẽhigh )∁ }Ut (st,1 )
                                              t
                                       − 1{Espan            ̃span )∁ }Ut (st,1 ).
                                                 ∩ Ehigh ∩ (E
                                            t                t

Plugging this back, we obtain
       T
               ̃high ∩ E
    E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span ∩ Ehigh }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh ∩ E
                                                                      ̃high ∩ E
                                                                              ̃span }Ut (st,1 )]]
                        t                              t                       t
           ̃t
       t=1 V
           T
                 ̃high ∩ E
    ≤ E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )]]
                          t                      t
               ̃t
           t=1 V
                T
      + E [ ∑ E [1{Espan            ̃high )∁ }Ut (st,1 )]]
                         ∩ Ehigh ∩ (E
                    t
                   ̃t
               t=1 V
                T
      + E [ ∑ E [1{Espan            ̃span )∁ }Ut (st,1 )]]
                         ∩ Ehigh ∩ (E
                    t                t
                   ̃t
               t=1 V
      + BV /H


                                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first term is exactly what we want. Now we bound the middle two terms separately below:
                                     T
                                 E [ ∑ E [1{Et
                                                       span              ̃high )∁ }Ut (st,1 )]]
                                                              ∩ Ehigh ∩ (E
                                         ̃t
                                     t=1 V
                                         T
                                 ≤ E [ ∑ E [1{Espan            ̃high )∁ }BV ]]
                                                    ∩ Ehigh ∩ (E                                                    (Lemma 13)
                                               t
                                             ̃t
                                         t=1 V
                                           ̃high )∁ )BV
                                 ≤ T ⋅ Pr((E
                                 ≤ BV /H                                                                                 (Lemma 8)
and for the other term we also have
                                     T
                                 E [ ∑ E [1{Et
                                                       span              ̃span )∁ }Ut (st,1 )]]
                                                              ∩ Ehigh ∩ (Et
                                        ̃t
                                    t=1 V
                                         T
                                               ̃span )∁ }]BV ]
                                 ≤ E [ ∑ E [1{(E                                                                    (Lemma 13)
                                                t
                                             ̃t
                                         t=1 V
                                                 T
                                 = BV E [ ∑ 1{(Espan
                                                t    )∁ }]                                                           (tower rule)
                                                 t=1
                                 ≤ dHBV .                                                                           (Lemma 15)
Hence, putting all together, we complete the proof.

The following lemma provides a final bound for the first term in Lemma 18.
Lemma 19 (Final bound). It holds that
                           T
                                  ̃high ∩ E
                       E [ ∑ E [1{E       ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )]]
                                           t                      t
                              ̃t
                          t=1 V

                       ≤ 2HBerrP
                                 BϕP + 2(Berr
                                          R
                                              + Bnoise
                                                 R
                                                       ) ⋅ HBϕR .

Proof of Lemma 19. By tower rule, we have
         T
                ̃
     E [ ∑ E [1{E
                          high    ̃span }Ṽt (st,1 ) − 1{Espan ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )]]
                                 ∩Et                      t
            ̃t
        t=1 V
             T
     = E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                        t    }V t (st,1 ) − 1{Espan
                                               t    ∩ Ehigh }Ut (st,1 )]
             t=1

We plug in the result in Lemma 11 and get
             T                               H
     ≤ E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                        t    } ∑ ⟨θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ), ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩]
             t=1                          h=1
                   T                             H
       + E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                          t    } ∑ ⟨T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ) − θ̂t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩]
                 t=1                             h=1
                   T                             H
       + E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                          t    } ∑ ⟨ω t,h − ω t,h , ϕ(st,h , at,h )⟩]
                 t=1                             h=1

Applying Cauchy-Schwartz inequality to each term yields
             T                               H
     ≤ E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                        t    } ∑ ∥θ̂t,h − T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 )∥Σ
                                                                ̂                        ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                                                                          ̂† ]
                                                                                   t,h                       t,h
             t=1                          h=1
                   T                             H
       + E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                          t    } ∑ ∥T (θt,h+1 + ω t,h+1 ) − θ̂t,h ∥Σ
                                                                   ̂                           ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ
                                                                                                                ̂† ]
                                                                                         t,h                       t,h
                 t=1                             h=1
                   T                             H
       + E [ ∑ 1{Ehigh ∩ Espan
                          t    } ∑ (∥ω t,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt,h + ∥ωh⋆ − ω t,h ∥Σt,h )∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1
                                                                                               t,h
                                                                                                   ]
                 t=1                             h=1


                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        P
The first two terms can be bounded by HBerr BϕP using Lemmas 7 and 16. For the last term, condi-
             high
tioning on E      , we have
                 ∥ω t,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt,h ≤ ∥ω t,h − ω             ωt,h − ωh⋆ ∥Σt,h ≤ Berr
                                               ̂t,h ∥Σt,h + ∥̂                   R
                                                                                     + Bnoise
                                                                                        R


and similarly for ∥ωh⋆ − ω t,h ∥Σt,h . Also, applying Lemma 16, we have
                                     T    H
                                    ∑ ∑ ∥ϕ(st,h , at,h )∥Σ−1  ≤ HBϕ .     R
                                                          t,h
                                    t=1 h=1

Inserting all these back, we get the upper bound of
                                     P
                                  2HBerr BϕP + 2(Berr
                                                  R
                                                      + Bnoise
                                                         R
                                                               ) ⋅ HBϕR .
Hence, we complete the proof.

Proof of Theorem 6. We have
            T                                                 T
                ⋆
        E [ ∑ (V (st,1 ) − V t (st,1 ))] ≤ E [1{E
                            π                    high
                                                      } ∑ 1{Espan
                                                             t    }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
           t=1                                               t=1
                                                                    T
                                                + E [1{(Ehigh )∁ } ∑ (V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                                                                   t=1
                                                       T
                                                + E [ ∑ 1{(Espan
                                                            t    )∁ }(V ⋆ (st,1 ) − V πt (st,1 ))]
                                                       t=1
                                              =∶ TA + TB + TC .
For TA , by Lemmas 17 to 19 and re-arranging the results, we have
         1
TA ≤          ⋅ (2BV (dH + 1/H) + HBerrP
                                         γ + dH 2 + 1 + (Berr
                                                          R
                                                              + Bnoise
                                                                 R
                                                                       )(2H + 1)BϕR + 2HBerr
                                                                                         P
                                                                                             BϕP )
      Γ2 (−1)
                            √                      √
      ̃ 5/2 H 5/2 + d2 H 3/2 T + ε1 γ(dH 2 + d3/2 H T )
    = O(d

                √               √                              √
            +       εB (d2 H 5/2 T + d3/2 H 3/2 T ) + εB γ(dH 2 T + d3/2 HT ))

For TB , by Lemma 8, we have
                                         TB ≤ HT ⋅ Pr ((Ehigh )∁ ) ≤ 1.

For TC , by Lemma 15, we have
                                                  T
                                  TC ≤ H ⋅ E [ ∑ 1{(Espan
                                                     t    )∁ }] ≤ dH 2 .
                                                 t=1

Putting everything together, we complete the proof.

D      S UPPORTING L EMMAS
Lemma 20 (Gaussian concentration). (Abeille & Lazaric, 2017) Let x ∼ N (0, cΣ−1 ) for c ∈ R+ and
                                                                     √
Σ a positive definite matrix. Then, for any δ > 0, we have Pr (∥x∥Σ > 2cd log(2d/δ)) ≤ δ
Lemma 21 (Elliptical potential lemma). Assume that X ⊆ {x ∶ ∥x∥2 ≤ 1} is compact and
span(X) = Rd . Let x1 , . . . , xT ∈ X be a sequence of vectors, Σ1 be a positive definite matrix
with each eigenvalue bounded within the range of [a, b] for some a, b > 0, and Σt+1 = Σt + xt x⊺t .
Then, we have
                                  T
                                            ⊺ −1                b T
                                 ∑ min {1, xt Σt xt } ≤ 2d log ( + ) .
                                 t=1                            a ad

                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, if Σ1 is constructed via optimal design, i.e., Σ1 = Ex∼ρ xx⊺ where ρ ∈ ∆(X) is an
optimal design over X, then we have
                                       T
                                                               ⊺           −1
                                       ∑ min {1, xt Σt xt } ≤ 2d log (T + 1) .
                                       t=1


Proof of Lemma 21. First we claim that
                                             min {1, x⊺t Σ−1         ⊺ −1
                                                          t xt } ≤ 2xt Σt+1 xt                                                                                                                                                                                                             (14)
To show this, we use Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula (Bhatia, 2013) for rank-one updates to
a matrix inverse:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4                                                     2
                                  −1           ⎛     Σ−1     ⊺ −1
                                                      t xt xt Σ t ⎞
                                                                                      ∥xt ∥Σ−1     ∥xt ∥Σ−1
x⊺t Σ−1        ⊺           ⊺
                                       xt = x⊺t Σ−1
                                                                              2
     t+1 xt = xt (Σt + xt xt )                   t −                xt = ∥xt ∥Σ−1 −             =
                                                                                             t            t
                                                                                                              .
                                               ⎝     1 + ∥xt ∥Σ−1 ⎠
                                                              2                 t             2            2
                                                                                    1 + ∥xt ∥Σ−1 1 + ∥xt ∥Σ−1
                                                                                                                           t                                                                                                                              t                                           t

Now let us consider two cases for the right-hand side of the above:

    Case 1 : x⊺t Σ−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                  t xt ≤ 1. Then, we can lower bound the right-hand side above by ∥xt ∥Σ−1 /2.                                                                                                                                                                        t


    Case 2    : x⊺t Σ−1
                     t xt ≥ 1. Then the right-hand side above is directly at least 1/2 since the function
              x/(1 + x) is increasing in x.

Hence, in both cases, we have x⊺t Σ−1                ⊺ −1
                                   t+1 xt ≥ min {1, xt Σt xt } /2, which finishes the proof of (14).

Since the log-determinant function is concave, we can obtain that log det (Σt ) − log det Σt+1 ≤
tr (Σ−1
     t+1 (Σt − Σt+1 )) via first-order Taylor approximation. This gives us the following

    T                   T                                                          T
         ⊺   −1                   −1                                                                                                                                                                                                            det ΣT +1
   ∑ xt Σt+1 xt = ∑ tr (Σt+1 (Σt+1 − Σt )) ≤ ∑ (log det Σt+1 − log det Σt ) = log (                                                                                                                                                                       )
   t=1                 t=1                                                      t=1                                                                                                                                                              det Σ1
where the last step follows from telescoping. Since each eigenvalue of Σ1 is lower bounded by a,
we have det Σ1 ≥ ad . Towards an upper bound of det ΣT +1 = det(Σ1 + ∑Tt=1 xt x⊺t ), let (λ1 , . . . , λd )
denote the eigenvalues of ∑Tt=1 xt x⊺t , and then we have
                                                                                                                           d                                                                                                       d
               T            d
                                          1 d                 1     T
                                                                                      T d
    det (Σ1 + ∑ xt x⊺t ) ≤ ∏ (b + λi ) ≤ ( ∑ (b + λi )) ≤ (b + tr ( ∑ xt x⊺t )) ≤ (b + )
              t=1          i=1            d i=1               d t=1                   d
Here, the first step is Weyl’s inequality, the second step is AM-GM inequality, and the last step is
because the trace is bounded by T . Plugging this upper bound back, we have
                                                   det ΣT +1            b T
                                           log (             ) ≤ d log ( + ) .
                                                    det Σ1              a ad
This completes the proof of the first statement.
For the case where Σ1 is constructed via optimal design, we can rewrite ΣT +1 in the following way:
                             T                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                         1                                                                                                                                     1
   ΣT +1 = E xx⊺ + ∑ xt x⊺t = (T + 1) (                                                                ⋅ E xx⊺ + ∑                                                                                                                           ⋅ xt x⊺t ) =∶ (T + 1) E xx⊺
             x∼ρ            t=1                          1 + T x∼ρ                                                                                                      t=1 1 + T                                                                                                          x∼ρ′
                                                     ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶
                                                                                                                           (∗)

where we consider (∗) as an expectation of xx⊺ over a new distribution that we denote by ρ′ . Recall
that Σ1 is constructed via optimal design, which implies det Σ1 ≥ det Ex∼ρ′ xx⊺ (Lemma 23). This
gives us
                  det ΣT +1           (T + 1)d det Ex∼ρ′ xx⊺                 d
         log (              ) = log (                        ) ≤ log ((T + 1) ) = d log (T + 1) .
                   det Σ1                    det Σ1
This completes the proof.


                                                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The following inequality is well-known; we use the version stated in Zhu & Nowak (2022).
Lemma 22 (Freedman’s inequality). Let {Xt }t≤T be a real-valued martingale different sequence
adapted to the filtration Ft , and let Et [⋅] ∶= E[⋅ ∣ Ft−1 ]. If ∣Xt ∣ ≤ B almost surely, then for any
η ∈ (0, 1/B), the following holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
                                   T          T
                                                             B log(1/δ)
                                  ∑ Xt ≤ η ∑ Et [Xt ] +
                                                       2
                                                                        .
                                  t=1         t=1                 η

Lemma 23. (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) Assume that Φ ⊆ Rd is compact and span(Φ) = Rd .
For a distribution ρ over Φ, define Λ(ρ) = ∑ϕ∈Φ ρ(ϕ)ϕϕ⊺ and g(ρ) = maxϕ∈Φ ∥ϕ∥2Λ(ρ)−1 . Then, the
following are equivalent:

       • ρ is a minimizer of g.
       • ρ is a maximizer of f (ρ) ∶= log det Λ(ρ).
       • g(ρ) = d.

Furthermore, there exists a minimizer ρ of g such that ∣supp(ρ)∣ ≤ d(d + 1)/2.

Below we show that the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality is still valid when the matrix is not invertible
under some conditions. We start with the following lemma.
Lemma 24. Let A be a positive semi-definite matrix. Let B be a square root of A, i.e., A = BB ⊺ .
Then range(A) = range(B).

Proof of Lemma 24. We first show that range(A) ⊆ range(B). To see this, for any y ∈ range(A),
there exists x such that y = Ax = BB ⊺ x = B(B ⊺ x). Hence y ∈ range(B). Next, we show
that range(B) ⊆ range(A). To see this, for any y ∈ range(B), there exists x such that y = Bx.
Let x = x0 + x1 where x0 ∈ null(B) and x1 ∈ rowspace(B). Then, y = Bx = Bx1 . Since
x1 ∈ rowspace(B), there exists z such that x1 = B ⊺ z. Thus, y = Bx1 = BB ⊺ z = Az. Hence,
y ∈ range(A).

Lemma 25 (Cauchy-Schwarz under pseudo-inverse). Let Σ be a positive semi-definite matrix (that
is unnecessarily invertible). Then, for any x ∈ range(Σ) and any y ∈ Rd , we have
                                            x⊺ y ≤ ∥x∥Σ† ∥y∥Σ .

Proof of Lemma 25. Let B denote the square root of Σ and force B to be positive semi-definite.
One can verify that BB † is the orthogonal projection matrix onto range(B), and hence, range(Σ)
(recalling that range(B) = range(Σ) by Lemma 24). Therefore, for any x ∈ range(Σ), we have
BB † x = x. Then, we have
                                        √            √
                      x⊺ y = x⊺ B † By ≤ x⊺ B † B † x y ⊺ BBy = ∥x∥Σ† ∥y∥Σ
where the inequality follows from the standard Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

Lemma 26 (Invariance under projection). Let Σ ∈ Rd×d be a positive semi-definite matrix of rank r.
For any vector ϕ ∈ Rd , we have ∥ϕ∥Σ† = ∥P ϕ∥Σ† where P is the projection onto the range of Σ.

Proof of Lemma 26. Assume the eigen-decomposition of Σ = U ΛU ⊺ , so Σ† = U Λ† U ⊺ . Without
loss of generality, we assume Λ has all its non-zero elements at the front and zero elements at the
back on the diagonal. Denote Ur as the matrix obtained by replacing the last n − r columns of U by
0. Note that the first r columns of U is in the range of Σ, so we must have P U = Ur . Then, we have
the following

∥P ϕ∥2Σ† = ϕ⊺ P ⊺ Σ† P ϕ = ϕ⊺ P ⊺ U Λ† U ⊺ P ϕ = ϕ⊺ P ⊺ Ur Λ† Ur⊺ P ϕ = ϕ⊺ Ur Λ† Ur⊺ ϕ = ϕ⊺ U Λ† U ⊺ ϕ = ∥ϕ∥2Σ† .
This completes the proof.


                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.1    P SEUDO D IMENSION AND C OVERING N UMBER

Definition 6 (ℓ1 -Covering number). (Definition 4 of Modi et al. (2024)) Given a hypothesis class
H ⊆ (Z ↦ R) and Z n = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ Z n , ε > 0, define N (ε, H, Z n ) as the minimum cardinality
of a set C ⊆ H, such that for any h ∈ H, there exists h′ ∈ C such that ∑ni=1 ∣h(zi ) − h′ (zi )∣/n ≤ ε. We
define N (ε, H, n) = maxZ n ∈Z n N (ε, H, Z n ).

Below we define the pseudo-dimension (Haussler, 2018; Modi et al., 2024).
Definition 7 (VC-dimension). For hypothesis class H ⊆ (X → {0, 1}), we define its VC-
dimension VC-dim(H) as the maximal cardinality of a set X = {x1 , . . . , x∣X∣ } ⊆ X that sat-
isfies ∣HX ∣ = 2∣X∣ (or X is shattered by H), where HX is the restriction of H to X, i.e.,
{(h (x1 ) , . . . , h (x∣X∣ )) ∶ h ∈ H}.
Definition 8 (Pseudo-dimension). For hypothesis class H ⊆ (X → R), we define its pseudo dimen-
sion Pdim(H) as Pdim(H) = VCdim (H+ ), where H+ = {(x, ξ) ↦ 1[h(x) > ξ] ∶ h ∈ H} ⊆
(X × R → {0, 1})

The following lemma provides a bound on the covering number of a hypothesis class via pseudo
dimension.
Lemma 27. (Corollary 42 of Modi et al. (2024)) Given a hypothesis class H ⊆ Z ↦ [a, b] with
Pdim(H) ≤ d, then, for any n, we have
                                                                   d
                                    N (ε, H, n) ≤ (4e2 (b − a)/ε) .
Note that the right-hand side is independent of n.

E     L INEAR MDP S AND LQR S IMPLY L INEAR B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS
It is already well known that linear Bellman completeness captures linear MDPs, as demonstrated
in works such as Agarwal et al. (2019); Zanette et al. (2020b). Here, we show that it also captures
LQRs for a convex subset of linear functions (specifically, when the value function is parameterized
by a PSD matrix). We start with the definition.
Definition 9 (Linear Quadratic Regulator). A linear quadratic regulator (LQR) problem is defined
by a tuple (A, B, Q, R) where A ∈ Rd×d , B ∈ Rd×m , Q ∈ Rd×d , and R ∈ Rm×m . The objective is to
find a policy π that minimizes the following:
                                               H
                                   J(π) = E [ ∑ x⊺h Qxh + u⊺h Ruh ]
                                               h=1

where xh+1 = Axh + Buh + wh where wh ∼ N (0, Σ).

Let us focus on an arbitrary step h and simply write the transition as the following (ignoring the
subscript h for notational simplicity):
                             x′ = Ax + Bu + w,       where   w ∼ N (0, Σ).                           (15)
We consider state-action value functions of the form:
                                                ⊺
                                            x   P         Pxu x
                                 Q(x, u) = [ ] [ xx          ] [ ] + c.                              (16)
                                            u   Pux       Puu u
It is linear in the quadratic feature ϕ(x, u) = [x2 , u2 , xu, x, u, 1]. Without loss of generality, we
                  ⊺
assume Pxu = Pux    . Note that we may not have the Bellman completeness for any such Q. However,
                                             P     Pxu
it does hold under the restriction that P = [ xx         ] is PSD. Recall that P is PSD if and only if
                                             Pux Puu
                                                              −1
(1) Puu is PSD, and (2) its Schur complement Pxx − Pxu Puu       Pux is PSD. We note that such a set of
feasible P is a convex set.
Then, we consider the Bellman backup of Q (ignoring the per-step reward (cost) for now):
̃ u) = Ex′ [min Q(x′ , u′ )]
Q(x,                                                                                                 (17)
             ′   u


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     ⊺
                       Ax + Bu + w    P        Pxu Ax + Bu + w
         = Ew [min [               ] [ xx          ][          ] + c]                                (18)
                ′ u         u′        Pux      Puu      u′

                   {[Ax + Bu + w] Pxx [Ax + Bu + w] + 2 [Ax + Bu + w] Pxu u′ + u′T Puu u′ }] + c.
                                      T                                           T
         = Ew [min
                ′ u
                                                                                                     (19)
                                                           ′
Using first-order condition, we know that the optimal u (for a fixed w) satisfies
                                    u′ = −Puu
                                           −1
                                              Pux (Ax + Bu + w),                                     (20)
which implies that, the term in (17) is equal to
                 Q(x′ , u′ ) = [Ax + Bu + w] [Pxx − Pxu Puu
                                                         −1
                                               T
             min                                            Pux ] [Ax + Bu + w] + c                  (21)
              u
              ′


Plugging the above in (19), we get
    ̃ u) = Ew [[Ax + Bu + w]T [Pxx − Pxu P −1 Pux ] [Ax + Bu + w] + c]
    Q(x,                                                                                             (22)
                                          uu
                           T       −1                                      −1
           = [Ax + Bu] [Pxx − Pxu Puu Pux ] [Ax + Bu] + c + Tr((Pxx − Pxu Puu Pux )Σ) (23)
                                   −1 ⊺
                                      Pxu ] [Ax + Bu] + c′
                           T
           = [Ax + Bu] [Pxx − Pxu Puu                                                                (24)
                  T    T
              x   A                −1 ⊺                     x
           = [ ] [ T ] (Pxx − Pxu Puu Pxu ) [A          B] [ ] + c′                                  (25)
              u   B                                         u

where c′ is some constant. The middle matrix above is PSD if Pxx ⪰ Pxu Puu
                                                                        −1 ⊺
                                                                           Pxu , which holds since
P is PSD. Thus, we conclude that Q̃ is also linear for some PSD matrix.
We can also easily verify that the reward (cost) function is linear in the quadratic feature. Hence, we
complete the proof.

F     C OMPUTATIONALLY E FFICIENT I MPLEMENTATIONS FOR O PTIMIZATION
      O RACLES
The convex programming algorithm given in Algorithm 2 is due to Bertsimas & Vempala (2004).
In the following, we provide an informal description of Algorithm 2 below but refer the reader to
Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) for the full details.
At an iteration t ≤ T , Algorithm 2 stars with a set Dt which contains the set K, and a set of 2N points
Ut sampled (approximately) uniformly from Dt using the S AMPLER subroutine in Algorithm 3. It
then uses the first N samples from Ut to compute an approximate centroid zt of the set Dt in Line 23;
the remaining points from Ut are denoted by Vt . It then queries the separation oracle OK       sep
                                                                                                    at the
point zt . If zt ∈ K, then we terminate and return zt . Otherwise, we use the separating hyperplane
between zt and K to shrink the set Dt further into Dt+1 in Line 29. Finally, it calls S AMPLER again
using the set of points Vt as a warm start to get 2N new (approximately) i.i.d. sample from Dt+1 in
Line 30. Equipped with the sets Dt+1 and Ut+1 , another iteration of the algorithm follows.
On receiving a convex set D and a set of points V, the S AMPLER protocol in Algorithm 3 first refines
V to V ′ by disposing off any points z ∈ V that do not lie in D. Then, it starts a random ball walk from
the samples in V ′ : in order to update the current point ẑ we first sample a point z ′ uniformly from
the ellipsoid ẑ + ηΛ /2 Bd (1) (where Λ is defined using the points in V ′ ) and then updates ẑ ← z ′
                      1

    ′
if z ∈ D. The analysis of Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) shows that this ball walk mixes fast to a
uniform distribution over the set D.

G     M ISSING D ETAILS FROM S ECTION 6.2

G.1     C OMPUTATIONALLY E FFICIENT E STIMATION OF R EWARD F UNCTION (E QN . 2)

The convex set feasibility procedure of Bertsimas & Vempala (2004) can also be used to estimate
the parameters for the reward functions in Equation (2) in Algorithm 1. Note that for any time t and


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Solving Convex Programs by Random Walks (Bertsimas & Vempala (2004))
Require: • Separation oracle OKsep
                                   for the convex set K ⊆ Rd .
         • Parameters r, R, δ.
 1: Let T = 2d log(R/δr) and N = O(d log(1/δ))
 2: Let D1 be the axis-aligned cube with width R with center z1 = 0.
 3: Sample 2N points U1 ∶= {z11 , . . . , z12N } ← Uniform(D1 ).
 4: Let V1 ∶= {z11 , . . . , z1N } and V̄1 ∶= U1 ∖ V1 .
 5: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 6:   Compute the point zt ← N1 ∑z∈Vt z.
 7:   if zt ∈ K then
 8:       Return zt and terminate.
 9:   else
10:       // If zt ∉ K, shrink the set Dt using a separating hyperplane //
11:       Let ⟨at , z⟩ ≤ b be the separating hyperplane returned by OKsep
                                                                           (zt ).
12:       Let Dt+1 ← Dt ∩ Ht where Ht denotes the halfspace {z ∣ ⟨at , z⟩ ≤ ⟨at , zt ⟩}.
13:       Sample 2N points Ut+1 ∶= {z11 , . . . , z12N } ← S AMPLER(Dt+1 , N, Vt ).
14:       Let Vt+1 ∶= {z11 , . . . , z1N } and V̄t+1 ∶= Ut+1 ∖ Vt+1 .
15:   end if
16: end for
17: Terminate and report that K is empty.


Algorithm 3 S AMPLER used in Algorithm 2
Require: • Convex set D.
         • Parameter N .
         • Points V = {z 1 , . . . , z N }.
                          √                                   ̃ 3 N ).
 1: Let step size η = Θ(1/ d), and number of iterations N ′ = O(d
          ′
 2: Let V ∶= {z ∈ V ∣ z lies in D}, and define
                                  1                        1
                          z̄ =          z    and     Λ=           ∑ (z − z̄)(z − z̄) .
                                                                                    T
                                 ∣V ′ ∣                   ∣V ′ ∣ z∈V ′

 3: Let U = ∅ and z ̂ ∈ V ′ be any arbitrary stating point (note that ẑ ∈ D).
 4: while ∣U∣ ≤ 2N do
 5:   Initialize i ← 1.
 6:   while i ≤ N ′ do
         Sample z ′ ∼ Uniform(̂   z + ηΛ /2 Bd (1)).
                                          1
 7:                                                                                    // Ball walk //
             ′
 8:      if z ∈ D then
 9:         Update ẑ ← z ′ and i ← i + 1.
10:      end if
11:   end while
12:   Update U = U ∪ {̂   z }.
13: end while
14: Return U.                    // Distribution of samples in U closely approximates Uniform(D) //


horizon h ∈ [H], the objective in Equation (1) is the optimization problem
                                               t−1                            2
                           ̂t,h ← argmin ∑ (⟨ω, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h ) .
                           ω                                                                     (27)
                                        ω∈O(1) i=1

In the following, we provide a computationally efficient procedure, based off on Algorithm 2, to
approximately solve the above squared loss minimization problem given a linear optimization oracle
over the feature space (Assumption 6). Note that since ri,h ∈ [0, 1], the constraint on the point
ω implies that the objective value in Equation (27) is at most 2. Thus, we can solve the above


                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 Computationally Efficient Implementation of Oapx
                                                         sq
                                                             for Value Estimation
Require: • Data samples {(si , ai , ui )}i≤t .
         • Convex domain O(W ).
         • Approximation parameter ε.
         • Linear optimization oracle Olin defined in Assumption 6.
 1: // Convert Square Loss Minimization into a Set Feasibility Problem //
 2: Define the convex set
                                 ⎧
                                 ⎪         RR ⟨θ, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ui ≤ ε for all i ≤ t ⎫
                                                                                      ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪     d RRR
                                                                                      ⎪
                                                                                      ⎪
                         KAPX ∶= ⎨θ ∈ R RRR ⟨θ, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ui ≥ −ε for all i ≤ t⎬                 (26)
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪          RR ∣⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ Wh + ε for all s, a ⎪
                                            R                                         ⎪
                                                                                      ⎪
                                 ⎩                                                    ⎭
 3: // Define a Separation Oracle for the set KAPX using O lin //
 4: Definition OKAPX (Input: parameter θ ∈ Rd )
                  sep

         ● For all i ≤ t, verify if −ε ≤ ⟨θ, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ui ≤ ε for all i ≤ t.
                 ▸ Output any violating constraint as a separating hyperplane. Terminate.
         ● Then, verify if max{maxs,a ⟨θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩, maxs,a ⟨−θ, ϕ(s, a)⟩} ≤ W + ε using the linear
            optimization oracle Olin (Assumption 6).
                 ▸ If violated, use Olin to compute a violating constraint and return it as the separat-
                   ing hyperplane. Terminate.
                 ▸ Otherwise, return that the point θ ∈ KAPX . Terminate.
 5: EndDefinition
 6: // Find a feasible point in KAPX //
 7: Invoke Algorithm 2 to return a feasible point in the set KAPX with OKAPX as the separation oracle.
                                                                                sep


optimization problem upto precision ε, by iterating over the set ∆ ∈ {0, ε, 2ε, . . . , 2 − ε, 2} in order
to solve the set feasibility problem
                              ⎧
                              ⎪          RR                                              ⎫
                                                                                         ⎪
                              ⎪      d RRR ∑i=1 (⟨ω, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h ) ≤ ∆ + ε⎪
                                               t−1                            2
                    K∆APX ∶= ⎨ω ∈ R R     RR                                             ⎬             (28)
                              ⎪
                              ⎪            RRR   ∣⟨ω, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ 1 + ε for all s, a     ⎪
                                                                                         ⎪
                              ⎩                                                          ⎭
and stopping at the smallest point ∆ for which K∆       APX has a feasible solution. It is easy to see that
for any ∆, either K∆  APX is empty or the shifted cube ω     ̂t,h + R∞ (ε) ⊆ K∆    APX . Furthermore, under
Assumption 7 we also have that KAPX ⊆ R∞ (R) for any ∆. Thus, for any ∆, whenever a feasible
                                       ∆

solution exists, the set K∆  APX satisfies the prerequisites for Theorem 4, where recall that we can
tolerate the parameter R to be exponential in the dimension d or the horizon H. Furthermore, a
separation oracle OK  sep
                        ∆   can be easily implemented by using the linear optimization oracle Olin
                        APX
w.r.t. the feature space (Assumption 6) and by explicitly constructing a separation oracle for the
ellipsoidal constraint
                                  t−1
                                                                2
                                  ∑ (⟨ω, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h ) ≤ ∆ + ε.
                                  i=1
We provide the implementation of the above in Algorithm 5, which relies on Algorithm 2 for solving
the corresponding set feasibility problems. The guarantee in Theorem 4 to find a feasible point in
K∆APX (for each ∆) gives the following guarantee on computational efficiency for Algorithm 5.

Theorem 7. Let ε > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), and suppose Assumption 7 holds with some parameter R > 0.
Additionally, suppose Assumption 6 holds with the linear optimization oracle denoted by Olin . Then,
for any t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H], Algorithm 5 returns a point ω̂t,h that, with probability at least 1 − δ,
satisfies
t−1                                         t−1
                              2                                          2
∑ (⟨̂
    ω , ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h ) ≤ min ∑ (⟨ω, ϕ(si,h , ai,h )⟩ − ri,h ) + ε       and      ̂t,h ∈ O(1 + ε).
                                                                                            ω
i=1                                ω∈O(1) i=1
                                        7
                                          R
Furthermore, Algorithm 5 takes O( dε log( δε )) time in addition to O( dε log( T δε
                                                                                 HR
                                                                                    )) calls to Olin .


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 Computationally Efficient Implementation of Oapx
                                                         sq
                                                             for Reward Estimation
Require: • Data samples {(si , ai , ri )}i≤t .
         • Convex domain O(1).
         • Approximation parameter ε.
         • Linear optimization oracle Olin defined in Assumption 6.
 1: for ∆ ∈ {0, ε, 2ε, . . . , 2 − ε, 2} do
 2:   // Define a Set Feasibility Problem using ∆ //
 3:   Define the convex set
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎪         RR                                        ⎫
                                                                                        ⎪
                                    ⎪     d RRR ∑i=1 (⟨ω, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ri ) ≤ ∆ + ε⎪
                                                    t−1                      2
                             APX ∶= ⎨ω ∈ R R
                            K∆                 R
                                               R                                        ⎬        (29)
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪          RRR ∣⟨ω, ϕ(s, a)⟩∣ ≤ 1 + ε for  all s, a ⎪
                                                                                        ⎪
                                    ⎩                                                   ⎭

 4:   // Define a Separation Oracle for K∆
                                         APX using O
                                                     lin
                                                         //
 5:   Definition OK∆ (Input: parameter ω ∈ R )
                    sep                             d
                      APX
                                                          2
              ●               i=1 (⟨ω, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ri ) ≤ ∆ + ε.
                  Verify if ∑t−1
                    ▸     If not,       return a separating hyperplane for the ellipsoid
                                                       2
                          ∑i=1 (⟨ω, ϕ(si , ai )⟩ − ri ) ≤ ∆ + ε w.r.t. ω. Terminate.
                            t−1

            ● Then, verify if max{maxs,a ⟨ω, ϕ(s, a)⟩, maxs,a ⟨−ω, ϕ(s, a)⟩} ≤ 1 + ε using the
                  linear optimization oracle Olin (Assumption 6).
                    ▸     If violated, use Olin to compute a violating constraint and return it as the
                          separating hyperplane. Terminate.
                    ▸     Otherwise, return that the point ω ∈ K∆   APX . Terminate.
 6:   EndDefinition
 7:   // Find a feasible point in K∆APX //
 8:   Invoke Algorithm 2 with OK    sep
                                      ∆ as the separation oracle.
                                       APX

              ●                                            ̂ ∈ K∆
                  If succeeded in finding a feasible point ω                 ̂ and terminate.
                                                                APX . Return ω
              ●   Else, continue.
 9: end for


                                                     42
