Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I NTERPRETING L ANGUAGE R EWARD M ODELS
VIA C ONTRASTIVE E XPLANATIONS

 Junqi Jiang†‡∗, Tom Bewley‡ , Saumitra Mishra‡ , Freddy Lecue‡ , Manuela Veloso‡
 †
   Imperial College London ‡ J.P. Morgan AI Research
 junqi.jiang@imperial.ac.uk,{firstname.surname}@jpmorgan.com



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Reward models (RMs) are a crucial component in the alignment of large language
             models’ (LLMs) outputs with human values. RMs approximate human prefer-
             ences over possible LLM responses to the same prompt by predicting and com-
             paring reward scores. However, as they are typically modified versions of LLMs
             with scalar output heads, RMs are large black boxes whose predictions are not
             explainable. More transparent RMs would enable improved trust in the alignment
             of LLMs. In this work, we propose to use contrastive explanations to explain any
             binary response comparison made by an RM. Specifically, we generate a diverse
             set of new comparisons similar to the original one to characterise the RM’s local
             behaviour. The perturbed responses forming the new comparisons are generated
             to explicitly modify manually specified high-level evaluation attributes, on which
             analyses of RM behaviour are grounded. In quantitative experiments, we validate
             the effectiveness of our method for finding high-quality contrastive explanations.
             We then showcase the qualitative usefulness of our method for investigating global
             sensitivity of RMs to each evaluation attribute, and demonstrate how representa-
             tive examples can be automatically extracted to explain and compare behaviours
             of different RMs. We see our method as a flexible framework for RM explanation,
             providing a basis for more interpretable and trustworthy LLM alignment.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The training of safe and capable large language models (LLMs) typically involves a fine-tuning
step to align their outputs with human preferences. Recent work by Xu et al. (2024) suggests that
fine-tuning by reinforcement learning using a language reward model (RM), which represents these
preferences by rating the quality of LLM responses to user prompts, remains the state-of-the-art
alignment method. In such frameworks, the effectiveness of alignment heavily depends on the qual-
ity of the RM itself (Chaudhari et al., 2024). While a growing body of research aims at improving
the performance of RMs (Bai et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a), evaluating and
understanding RMs has received “relatively little study” (Lambert et al., 2024). This is despite it
being identified as a key aspect of the AI safety research agenda (Curtis et al., 2024). Among the
limited prior works, several focus on characterising certain failure modes of RMs, such as unwanted
biases towards longer answers (Singhal et al., 2023), an inability to generalise to slightly perturbed
responses (Pikus et al., 2023), and a susceptibility to being over-optimised (Gao et al., 2023). Re-
cently, Zeng et al. (2024) and Park et al. (2024) curate datasets by perturbing responses along certain
evaluation aspects for responses, (e.g. instruction following, response length, correctness), and sys-
tematically evaluate RM responses to these changes to gain more insights.
A complementary approach for achieving better understandings of complex machine learning mod-
els is to apply explainable AI (XAI) techniques, which aim to uncover reasons behind their predic-
tions. In addition to the complexity of the language domain, a particular challenge for understanding
RMs is the lack of direct meaning in their predicted rewards. RMs are typically trained and evalu-
ated on binary response comparisons Ouyang et al. (2022) using the preference model of Bradley &
Terry (1952), which converts the RM’s scalar reward for each response into a probabilistic prefer-
ence for one response or the other. Outside of such a comparison, the meaning of the output scalars
    ∗
        Corresponding author. Work done during an internship at J.P. Morgan AI Research.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


themselves is unclear, but traditional XAI techniques usually require being able to interpret the out-
put values as part of the explanation. Recent studies propose to provide more information in RM
outputs by decomposing one reward into multiple evaluation aspects like correctness, relevance and
verbosity (Wang et al., 2023; Go et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). However, this does not provide
upstream explanations for why the model assigns the aspect-level rewards. In the XAI literature,
explanations are achieved by methods like feature importance analysis, i.e. highlighting parts of the
input which are most relevant to the model output, and contrastive explanations, i.e. altering the
input to produce a desired change in model output (see Karimi et al. (2023); Aryal & Keane (2023)
for recent overviews). To our knowledge, no such XAI techniques have been explored for RMs.
In this work, we adapt the contrastive explanation paradigm to explain RM predictions. The two
most common variants are counterfactual (CF) explanations (Wachter et al., 2017) and semifactual
(SF) explanations (Kenny & Keane, 2021), which are defined for classification settings as follows.
A CF is a perturbed input that yields an alternative prediction from the model, providing information
about a what if scenario: had the input been different, the prediction would have been different. An
SF is a perturbed input for which the prediction does not change, indicating how even if the input
were different, the prediction result would be the same. Contrastive explanations are commonly ad-
vocated for as they align with human explanatory reasoning, thus helping improve user trust (Miller,
2019; Celar & Byrne, 2023; Aryal & Keane, 2023). In the case of RMs, the fundamental prediction
task is to output rewards for two responses (to the same user prompt) and choose the higher-reward
response. Since there are two choice options, such binary comparisons can be reinterpreted as binary
classification tasks, to which CF/SF analysis can be naturally applied.
We begin by formalising the notion of contrastive                      Chosen
explanations for binary comparisons made by                                                       Semifactual
                                                         Prompt
RMs. Our explanations are a set of new compar-                                      Helpfulness
isons over perturbed responses, obtained by mod-
ifying the original ones in controlled ways. In
                                                                      Rejected                    Counterfactual
general, the RM predictions over the set of new                                   Harmlessness
comparisons yield both CFs (preference is flipped)
and SFs (preference stays), thus characterising the       "How can I pass my molecular chemistry exam?"
RM’s local behaviour and sensitivities in the neigh-
                                                          "Revise bonding types and practise with a friend."
bourhood of the original responses. We then pro-                        Helpfulness
pose desiderata for the perturbed responses, and a           "Revise some things and practise with a friend."
                                                                                                Harmlessness
method for prompting an LLM to generate them                 "Revise bonding types and copy from a friend."
from the original responses by modifying high-            "Sounds tricky... maybe read a book?"
level attributes such as helpfulness and harmless-
ness. Figure 1 illustrates this method and its results        Figure 1: Illustration of method.
for an exemplar prompt requesting school exam ad-
vice. In this example, perturbing the higher-reward (chosen) response to reduce its helpfulness (by
answering vaguely) reduces the reward but not below that of the rejected response. Since this per-
turbation does not flip the preference of the RM, we classify it as an SF. On the contrary, perturbing
to reduce harmlessness (by encouraging cheating) does flip the RM’s preference, yielding a CF.
We obtain a global summary of an RM’s sensitivity to each evaluation attribute by aggregating
CFs and SFs over multiple comparisons, as similarly done in other settings such as global recourse
(Rawal & Lakkaraju, 2020) and global feature importance (Ribeiro et al., 2016). For example, if
perturbing a response to be more or less harmful always causes an RM’s preference to flip, we then
understand that this RM is very sensitive to harmful content. We then present a workflow for finding
representative example comparisons for which the reward changes over the local perturbations best
match the pattern in an RM’s global sensitivity. Explanations for these examples provide informative
demonstrations of typical RM behaviour, complementing the global analysis.
We summarise our contributions as follows:
       • We are the first to propose contrastive explanations of binary comparisons made by RMs.
       • We introduce a novel method for computing meaningful textual perturbations via high-
         level evaluation attributes, and categorising them into CFs and SFs. This is a post hoc,
         local, model-agnostic XAI method, requiring only black-box access to RMs (Section 2).
       • Through a quantitative evaluation involving three datasets, three open source RMs and two
         baselines, we show that our method yields high-quality explanations (Section 3).


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We demonstrate the qualitative usefulness of our method for explaining RM preferences.
         We quantify global sensitivities of RMs to high-level evaluation attributes and present a
         workflow for automatically finding examples that illustrate these sensitivities (Section 4).


2     C ONTRASTIVE E XPLANATIONS FOR L ANGUAGE R EWARD M ODELS

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

Let x denote a natural language prompt and y denote an LLM-generated response. An RM is
a parameterised model trained to predict human evaluations of candidate responses to the same
prompt. In the standard training pipeline of Bradley-Terry (BT) modelling (Bradley & Terry, 1952),
RMs are typically modified LLMs topped with scalar output heads (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022). Given a prompt-response pair (x, y), the RM assigns a scalar reward, denoted as rBT (x, y).
Given two responses y+ and y− such that rBT (x, y+ ) > rBT (x, y− ), we say that the RM has a
preference for y+ ≻ y− as a response to prompt x. In the context of such a binary comparison, we
refer to y+ as the chosen response and y− as the rejected response. The RM is trained on datasets
with ground truth human preferences typically provided by teams of human annotators.
Alternatively, multi-dimensional regression RMs (rM R ), implemented as language models with re-
gression heads (Dong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; 2024b;a), are trained to predict a vector of
rewards, with each dimension representing an evaluation aspect of the response (Cui et al., 2023).
To compare responses overall, a scalarisation function (e.g. a weighted sum function or another
machine learning model) g is applied to convert reward vectors into single numbers. Given a prompt
x, an overall preference y+ ≻ y− is predicted if g(rM R (x, y+ )) > g(rM R (x, y− )).
In this work, we focus on explaining binary comparisons made by RMs because this is their most
basic functionality and facilitates a definition of contrastive explanation. In doing so, we need not
distinguish between the two types of RM, and use r to denote either rBT (·, ·) or g(rM R (·, ·)).

2.2   C ONTRASTIVE E XPLANATIONS

We now introduce contrastive explanations for any binary comparison made by an RM, involving
a user prompt x and a pair of chosen and rejected responses y+ , y− such that the RM’s preference
is y+ ≻ y− . We assume access to two sets of perturbed responses, Y+ and Y− , which are per-
turbations of y+ and y− respectively. In this section, we remain agnostic to the nature of these
perturbations for the sake of generality. However, we propose specific requirements and a genera-
tion method for perturbed responses in Section 2.3 below. Contrastive explanations of the original
comparison are obtained by making new comparisons between the original and perturbed responses.
As discussed in Section 1, we can distinguish two classes of perturbation, namely counterfactuals
(CFs) and semifactuals (SFs), based on whether the RM’s preference flips for the new comparisons.
                                                        ′              ′
Concretely, given Y+ and Y− , we denote YC    + = {y+ ∈ Y+ | r(x, y+ ) < r(x, y− )} and Y− =
                                                                                                 C
   ′                 ′
{y−   ∈ Y− | r(x, y−   ) > r(x, y+ )} as the sets of CF perturbations of the original chosen and
                                                                ′                ′
rejected responses respectively. Similarly, we refer to YS+ = {y+ ∈ Y+ | r(x, y+   ) ≥ r(x, y− )} and
  S       ′                ′
Y− = {y− ∈ Y− | r(x, y− ) ≤ r(x, y+ )} as the sets of SF perturbations. A perturbation is a CF if
comparing it to the other original response causes the RM’s preference to flip, and an SF otherwise.
Collectively, the sets of categorised perturbations YC        C    S        S
                                                        + , Y− , Y− and Y− can be understood as a
dataset of new binary comparisons in the neighbourhood of the original one, revealing sensitivities
in the RM’s local behaviour and thereby helping to explain the original preference. As will be shown
later, these contrastive explanations are not only useful for explaining local preferences, but can also
be aggregated over many comparisons to form insights into global RM behaviour.

2.3   G ENERATING P ERTURBED R ESPONSES

The preceding conceptual formulation requires a set of perturbed responses Y+ and Y− for cate-
gorising into CFs and SFs. In this section, we suggest desiderata for the content and structure of
these perturbations, and propose a novel LLM prompting method for generating them from y+ and
y− while satisfying the desiderata.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Desiderata For explanations to provide meaningful insight, the perturbed responses should be
well-formed sentences which are grammatically correct and semantically interpretable. This makes
naı̈ve methods based on randomly replacing characters, tokens or words unsuitable. Additionally,
the RM’s preferences on comparisons involving the perturbations should thoroughly characterise its
local behaviour near the original responses. This requires that the perturbed responses be similar
to the original responses such that the explanations are local, and that the original responses be
perturbed in a variety of significantly different ways, forming a diverse set of texts. Finally, the
perturbation method should move each response in a direction opposing the RM’s original evalua-
tion, i.e. make y+ (y− ) a worse (better) response, in order to better cover both counterfactual and
semifactual scenarios straddling the model’s local decision boundary. These highlighted desiderata
are consistent with those previously suggested for CFs for text classification (Nguyen et al., 2024).
Response perturbation via LLMs prompting Generative language models have proven effec-
tive at producing well-formed sentences for use in explanation (Sen et al., 2023) and RM evaluation
(Zeng et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024), and we follow this precedent here. In the literature on CFs
for text classification, LLMs have been used to obtain perturbed texts that change the prediction
outcome, are diverse, and are similar to original texts. Earlier works by Yang et al. (2020) and Wu
et al. (2021) rely on masked language models and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) to perform elemen-
tary perturbations like word insertion, deletion and replacement. More recently, various prompting
strategies have been proposed to utilise publicly available LLMs like GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023)
and Llama (AI@Meta, 2024) for perturbing texts to obtain CFs (Gat et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024;
Bhattacharjee et al., 2024). However, these strategies give no guarantee of flipping the prediction
because the texts are first perturbed and then tested on the model to explain. Therefore, in practice,
perturbed texts usually consist of a mix of CFs and SFs, both of which are leveraged in our work.
Attribute-conditioned prompting strategy To satisfy the desiderata of locality and diversity, we
propose a two-step LLM prompting strategy to generate Y+ and Y− . The core of this strategy lies in
defining a list of high-level evaluation attributes for the content and structure of responses. In Step 1,
we ask the LLM to identify words in y+ and y− that are relevant to one attribute from this list. Then,
in Step 2, we prompt the LLM to perturb either y+ or y− in the opposing direction (i.e. making y+
worse; making y− better) along that attribute. We ask the LLM to focus its perturbations around the
words identified in Step 1, which restricts the extent of modification and keeps perturbed responses
similar to the original ones. We empirically validate the effectiveness of this focusing through abla-
tion (see Appendix D). In our experiments, Y+ and Y− both contain 15 perturbed responses, each
associated with one attribute from the following list: avoid-to-answer, appropriateness,
assertiveness, clarity, coherence, complexity, correctness, engagement,
harmlessness, helpfulness, informativeness, neutrality, relevance,
sensitivity, verbosity. See Appendix A for descriptions and justifications of these
attributes, and Appendix B for further details on prompts.
As well as helping to achieve diversity, attribute-conditioned perturbation allows us to perform anal-
ysis at an attribute level, enabling generalised insights such as that one RM is more aware of privacy
risks than another (see Section 4). The approach is related to recent work on decomposing reward
signals into multiple attributes, providing a more fine-grained task specification (Wang et al., 2023;
2024a). Similar techniques have been explored to evaluate RMs’ ability to correctly identify biases
along these directions (Zeng et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024). To our knowledge, we are the first to
leverage such attributes for generating diverse sets of perturbed responses for explanatory purposes.
Our list of 15 attributes is partly constructed from ones used in these prior works, combined with
others identified by prompting LLMs (see Appendix A). The list is a general starting point for sim-
ple conversation tasks, but could be customised to match any specific dataset characteristics, e.g.
instruction following (Cui et al., 2023) or various types of harmfulness (Köpf et al., 2023).

2.4   OVERALL P IPELINE

Figure 2 gives an overview of our method. For each binary comparison to explain (x, y+ , y− ), our
method first prompts an LLM using the two-step strategy to obtain Y+ and Y− . Using the prediction
function of the RM r, we get the rewards of all perturbed responses. CF and SF responses are then
identified by comparing these perturbed rewards to those of the original responses and checking
if the RM’s preference is flipped. The sets of CFs and SFs for many comparisons provide a rich
information source for follow-up explanatory analysis, such as global attribute sensitivity extraction
and representative example identification. This analysis pipeline is discussed in detail in Section 4.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Generating contrastive explanations for a language reward model                                                         Counterfactuals
              Prompt                                                                                                       lower reward
                                                                                                                           than     ?
                                                                                                                                                  attr     attr
                                                                   Perturbed responses                                          Yes               Semifactuals
               Chosen         2-Step prompting                                                           Using RM to test for
                              with external LLM                                                           counterfactual or     No
                                                                    attr 1 attr 2     attr M                                                      attr     attr
                                                                                                        semifactual response
                                                                                                                                                Counterfactuals
LLM                RM                                              Perturbed responses                                          Yes
                                 External
             Rejected              LLM                                                                              RM                             attr    attr
                                                                                                                                No
                                                                    attr 1 attr 2     attr M                                                      Semifactuals
                         A list of M                                                                                     higher reward
                         evaluation                                                                                      than     ?
                         attributes                                                                                                                attr    attr


                        Example analysis pipeline using contrastive explanations                                                            How frequently does
                                                                                                                                           perturbing along each
                                                                                                                                              attribute cause
                                                                                                                                                             ?
                          In the perturbed responses for comparison 1,
                                                                                                                                               attr
                          get attributes associated with counterfactuals
                                                                                                   Extracting                               How frequently does
                            In the perturbed responses for comparison 2,                                                                   perturbing along each
                            get attributes associated with counterfactuals                     global sensitivity
Comparison 1                                                                                                                                  attribute cause
                             attr 1      attr M
                                                                                               to each attribute
    Comparison 2                                                                                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                               attr
                                attr 1          attr M
      Comparison N               In the perturbed responses for comparison N,
                             attr 1    attr M
                                 get attributes associated with counterfactuals

                                                                                                                                      Comparison i
                                attr 1          attr M
                                                                                               Finding
                                       attr 1        attr M
                                                                                       representative examples
                                                                                                                                      attr 1   attr M
                                                                                        matching the pattern in
                                                                                           global sensitivity
                                       attr 1        attr M
                                                                                                                                      attr 1    attr M


          Figure 2: Generation and analysis of contrastive explanations for language reward models.


3         Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for generating high-quality con-
trastive explanations. Our experiments are conducted on three open source human preference
datasets and three RMs. For each dataset, we randomly select 30 binary comparisons from the train-
ing set serving as test comparisons (repeated five times with different random seeds, making 150
test comparisons in total), for which we then generate contrastive explanations using our method
and the baselines for each RM. The explanations are evaluated against the requirements discussed
in Section 2.3 using popular metrics from the text CF literature (Nguyen et al., 2024).
Datasets We use HelpSteer2 (hs2) (Wang et al., 2024b), HH-RLHF-helpful, and HH-RLHF-
harmless1 (Bai et al., 2022). We focus on explaining single-turn conversations in our experiments.
hs2 is a multi-regression dataset with five evaluation aspects as the label. We filter hs2 for pairs of
responses where the preference is clear, i.e. the ground truth scores of one response are greater than
the other response across all evaluation aspects, to extract binary comparisons. The two HH-RLHF
variations are both datasets of binary comparisons where the ground truth preference is explicit for
each comparison. The response lengths for HH-RLHF datasets (usually one or a few sentences) are
much shorter than the hs2 dataset (about 800 words).
Reward Models We generate explanations for three open source RMs from the OpenAssistant
community. DeBERTa-large (v1)2 and DeBERTa-large-v23 , comprising 0.4 billion parameters, are
RMs fine-tuned from the DeBERTa model (He et al., 2021) using different datasets (see their model
cards for more details). pythia-1.4b-epoch-2.54 is a larger model with 1.4 billion parameters.
Metrics We use a set of metrics derived from the desiderata in Section 2.3. CF (or SF) Coverage
evaluates the fraction of test comparisons for which at least one valid CF (SF) is found. Having
both high CF and SF coverage indicates that an explainer is better at obtaining a balanced mix of
CFs and SFs. To measure the similarity between perturbed responses and their associated original
      1
     HH-RLHF-helpful and HH-RLHF-harmless are two branches of the HH-RLHF dataset. We treat
them separately because they have distinct characteristics.
   2
     https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large
   3
     https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large-v2
   4
     https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/oasst-rm-2.1-pythia-1.4b-epoch-2.5


                                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


response, we use two distance metrics between sentences. Syntactic distance measures the extent of
syntactic change, for which we use word-level Levenshtein edit distance (Overill, 2001). Semantic
distance, a common metric for measuring differences in meaning, is the cosine distance between
the Sentence-BERT encodings of the two text pieces (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). In both cases,
lower distance values are preferred because we wish to observe and analyse RM behaviour close to
the original responses. Semantic diversity refers to the average semantic distance between every
pair of perturbed responses within the set of perturbed responses for the same response.
Baselines We compare our method to two baselines for generating perturbed responses, from
which CFs and SFs are identified using the same categorisation procedure (Section 2.2). We adapt
Polyjuice (PJ) by Wu et al. (2021), a general-purpose CF generation method for classification tasks
based on a custom fine-tuned GPT-2 model. We configure PJ to generate 15 meaningful perturba-
tions of each response (matching the number in our method). Another baseline is random LLM-
based perturbation (RP), where we prompt GPT-4o to generate 15 random perturbations for each
response, without attribute-conditioning (see Appendix C for detailed prompts). OURS denotes our
method as described in Section 2, also using GPT-4o for obtaining perturbed responses. Note that
the perturbation quality can be sensitive to the LLM used to generate them. We choose the best-
performing one here and refer to Bhattacharjee et al. (2024); Sen et al. (2023) for further analysis.
Table 1 shows results for the CF and SF coverage metrics (mean and standard deviation across
the five random seeds). We separately evaluate how often explanations are found for the chosen
response, the rejected response, and both responses. Table 2 reports the two distances averaged
across CF and SF responses, and the average semantic diversity of each set of CFs or SFs.

                                     Chosen                   Rejected                  Both
         Dataset     Method
                               CF cov.    SF cov.        CF cov.    SF cov.     CF cov.     SF cov.
                      PJ       0.74±.149 0.94±.039       0.40±.016 0.95±.064    0.26±.080 0.89±.061
        harmless      RP       0.64±.118 0.93±.051       0.38±.159 0.92±.082    0.22±.100 0.86±.072
                     OURS      0.76±.086 0.97±.031       0.85±.109 0.91±.059    0.69±.111 0.90±.061
                      PJ       0.97±.035 0.87±.042       0.14±.097 0.99±.008    0.13±.088 0.87±.041
        helpful       RP       0.84±.066 0.81±.081       0.23±.095 0.99±.008    0.21±.088 0.81±.079
                     OURS      0.81±.042 0.99±.020       0.98±.028 0.75±.081    0.80±.047 0.74±.067
                      RP       0.86±.035 0.54±.060       0.05±.038 0.99±.008    0.04±.035 0.54±.060
        hs2
                     OURS      0.83±.069 0.86±.160       0.39±.145 0.95±.047    0.33±.144 0.84±.149

              Table 1: Comparison of CF and SF coverage for our method and baselines.

                          DatasetMethod        syn. dist.     sem. dist   sem. div.
                                   PJ          0.74±.042      0.69±.038   0.49±.024
                         harmless RP           0.81±.015      0.70±.018   0.36±.028
                                  OURS         0.65±.015      0.36±.028   0.31±.023
                                   PJ          0.48±.059      0.40±.047   0.46±.025
                         helpful   RP          0.59±.031      0.34±.022   0.29±.028
                                  OURS         0.61±.018      0.28±.018   0.20±.012
                                   RP          0.44±.023      0.18±.015   0.14±.020
                         hs2
                                  OURS         0.31±.023      0.07±.017   0.07±.010

              Table 2: Perturbation distances and diversity for our method and baselines.

The most notable advantage of our method is CF coverage. It finds CFs for both responses for
over 68% of test inputs for the harmless and helpful datasets and over 33% for hs2, while
the baselines only find valid CFs for no more than 26% of test comparisons. This is mainly due to
the baselines being poor at finding perturbations that make rejected responses more preferred to the
original chosen ones, while our method is explicitly designed to perturb responses in this opposing
direction. SFs are easier to obtain because no change of preference is required, and all methods have
similar performance, with our method achieving better results in harmless and hs2.
The perturbations computed by our method also have lower (better) distances to the original
inputs than the baselines, with better syntactic distances on two datasets and much lower semantic
distances for all datasets. This validates that our explanations are a set of new comparisons which are
very similar to the original ones, while still covering both CF and SF scenarios. Our perturbations are
not as semantically diverse as the baselines. To some extent, this is an unavoidable consequence of


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


them being more semantically similar to the original response. Despite the lower numerical diversity
by this metric, our method has the additional benefit of grounding perturbed responses in 15 distinct
evaluation attributes, so we do still obtain a diversity of changes from the original responses.
To complement the main results reported above, we conduct an ablation study of our method using
different prompting strategies, showing our current configuration is the most effective (Appendix
D). We also include results in Appendix E showing our method can generate explanations regardless
of whether the RM has correct or wrong preferences according to a human ground truth.

4     Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
In this section, we demonstrate how our proposed contrastive explanation approach can be useful
for investigating global behaviours and understanding local preferences of RMs. We validate some
desirable behaviours and reveal interesting undesirable behaviours of v1 and v2. We also show in
Appendix G that some of the weaknesses also exist in state-of-the-art RMs with 8 billion parameters.

4.1   G LOBAL S ENSITIVITY

The key intuition we leverage is that the changed attributes in a CF are more causally relevant to an
original prediction, while those in an SF are less causally relevant (McCloy & Byrne, 2002; Aryal
& Keane, 2023). Therefore in our case, for any given binary response comparison (x, y+ , y− :
r(x, y+ ) > r(x, y− )), the attributes associated with the CF responses, YC        C
                                                                          + and Y− , can be labelled
as strongly relevant, and those of the SF responses, YS+ and YS− , as weakly relevant. Note that
we need to separately consider Y+ and Y− for this analysis because perturbing y+ to become less
preferred than y− is an independent process from perturbing y− to become more preferred than y+
(see Appendix F). On each dataset, aggregating these labels over many test comparisons gives the
RM’s global sensitivity to each evaluation attribute: how often that attribute is (strongly) relevant
to the RM’s preferences. This type of analysis (aggregating local explanations for global insights)
has proven effective for providing rich CF summaries for tabular data settings (Rawal & Lakkaraju,
2020) and global feature attributions (Ribeiro et al., 2016).
Following the experimental setup in Section 3, we randomly select 500 comparisons from each
dataset and filter for the comparisons where the three RMs predict the same preference. We generate
explanations for these test comparisons and perform our analysis on them. We use our method to
first generate perturbed responses, then extract CFs and SFs for the three RMs using the same set of
perturbed responses. This allows us to fairly compare the global behaviour of the models. Then, to
quantify the RMs’ global sensitivity to each attribute, we record each attribute’s preference flip rate
(PFR): the proportion of test comparisons for which the attribute’s associated perturbed response is
a counterfactual response and results in a CF. The PFR is separately calculated for Y+ and Y− .
Figure 3 shows each model’s PFR along each attribute for each dataset. To further investigate the
differences between the three RMs on each dataset, we obtain each RM’s ranking vector over the
PFR of all 15 attributes and calculate Kendall’s τ correlation coefficient (Kendall, 1938) (ranged −1
to 1) between the ranking vectors of each pair of RMs. The results are reported in Table 3.

                                      harmless        helpful          hs2
                                      Y+   Y−         Y+   Y−       Y+    Y−
                        v1, v2        0.16 0.54       0.60 0.75     0.71 0.79
                      v1, pythia      0.68 0.62       0.68 0.77     0.47 0.52
                      v2, pythia      0.10 0.73       0.62 0.79     0.60 0.62

 Table 3: Ranking similarity of global attribute sensitivity between pairs of models on all datasets.

While fine-grained information can be obtained by zooming in Figure 3 about each RM, we highlight
some observed general trends when comparing the three RMs from Figure 3 and Table 3.
On most datasets, the global sensitivity rankings are similar, but the magnitudes differ. For
example, on helpful, Y− , the rankings of three RMs are highly correlated, demonstrating similar
behaviours, with v1 (pythia) being slightly more (less) sensitive to perturbations along the at-
tributes. On hs2, Y− , however, pythia is much more sensitive along every attribute. Overall, the


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  (a) harmless, Y+         (b) helpful, Y+           (c) hs2, Y+


                  (d) harmless, Y−         (e) helpful, Y−           (f) hs2, Y−

Figure 3: Preference flip rates of three RMs, indicating their global sensitivity to each attribute, on
three datasets. Subplots (a)-(c) and (d)-(f) respectively show the PFR for Y+ (whether perturbations
of y+ are less preferred than y− ) and Y− (whether perturbations of y− are more preferred than y+ ).


global sensitivities depend not only on the characteristic differences between the models, but also
on the characteristics of each dataset, which is an important consideration for interpretation.
The behaviour of v2 is distinct from the other two models on the harmless dataset. This
is visible in the low ranking similarities for Y+ in Table 3. Figure 3a shows that v2 is most sen-
sitive to the attribute harmless, avoid-to-answer, sensitivity and neutrality, i.e.
when the originally chosen responses become more harmful, v2 often sees them as worse than the
originally rejected response, showing its ability to better distinguish harmful content. Crucially, this
observation is consistent with the fact that v2 was trained on the harmless dataset and the other
two models were not. It therefore provides an encouraging validation of our analysis approach.

4.2     F INDING R EPRESENTATIVE E XAMPLES FOR RM’ S G LOBAL B EHAVIOUR

Following on from a global analysis, for each test comparison in a dataset, we record r(x, y− ) −
      ′              ′                                             ′              ′
r(x, y+ ) and r(x, y−  ) − r(x, y+ ) for every perturbed response y+  ∈ Y+ and y−   ∈ Y− , indicating
how much the perturbation causes the RM output to change in the opposite direction. We sort the
15 attributes by their associated reward differences to obtain a local-level ranking. In line with our
global sensitivity interpretation, higher-ranked attributes are considered more relevant to the RM’s
preference. We calculate the ranking similarity (Kendall’s τ correlation coefficient) between the
global and local rankings. The test comparisons with the highest similarity can be considered as the
most representative examples for a dataset. This process is completed separately for Y+ and Y− .
We follow this approach to conduct two case studies focusing on the harmless dataset and v2
model, for which the global sensitivity pattern is distinctive.

4.2.1    R EPRESENTATIVE E XAMPLES FOR O NE M ODEL

To find representative examples capturing global patterns on both sides (Y+ and Y− ) of one dataset,
we calculate the sum of the ranking similarities for both responses in each test comparison. The
comparison with the highest sum of ranking similarity is the most representative example. Figure
4 shows one such example for v2 on harmless dataset, where the model correctly identifies that
betting on dog fights is a harmful activity and assigns a higher reward to the y+ , which avoids an-
swering the question directly. The perturbed responses for y+ associated with attributes answer,


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Representative example for v2 on harmless dataset. The predicted rewards for each
response and perturbation (colour-coded) are shown in the middle.


relevance, harmlessness and sensitivity most push the reward in the opposite direc-
tion, and the former three are CF responses. These attributes largely overlap with the top attributes
in Figure 3a. Similarly, there are five CF responses for y− , and their associated attributes closely
match the ones v2 is most sensitive to as shown in Figure 3d.
The contrastive explanations provide insight into why the RM exhibits its original preference.
Firstly, we validate some desirable behaviours: those perturbations of y+ encouraging more discus-
sions about dog fights (answer, harmlessness) or mentioning completely irrelevant contents
(relevance) receive much lower rewards, and the perturbations of y− arguing against betting
on dog fights receive higher rewards (appropriateness, correctness, harmlessness,
neutrality, relevance). Unexpected local behaviours of the model can also be discovered.
By making y+ less appropriate and less neutral with disrespectful language to the user, or
incorporating incorrect information, the rewards assigned by v2 increase. Interestingly, when
perturbing y− , adding detailed descriptions about identifying winning dogs causes the reward to in-
crease (answer, sensitivity), in one case even becoming preferred to y+ . In a further analysis
with two 8-billion parameter RMs, we found that similar undesirable behaviours, notably preferring
disrespectful perturbations, also exist in these more powerful models (see Appendix G for more de-
tails). These observations provide more fine-grained insights that could be used for improving the
RM’s performance, and may not have been accessible without a contrastive analysis.

4.2.2   R EPRESENTATIVE E XAMPLES FOR C OMPARING T WO M ODELS

We can also find representative examples that maximise the sum of ranking similarities of two RMs
on the same dataset (for either Y+ or Y− ), jointly exemplifying similarities and differences between
the two models. Here, we focus on v1 and v2 because they have the same architecture and only
differ in their training datasets. We consider the harmless dataset and Y+ perturbations.
The found example is shown in Figure 5. The chosen response avoids giving private information
about a phone number, and the rejected response tries to find detailed information about the number
owner, posing privacy risks that any LLM outputs should avoid. In Figure 5, the CF responses are
the perturbations whose predicted rewards are lower than that of the rejected response. Inspecting
their reward values gives more fine-grained insight. The five attributes that most decrease the re-
wards for v1 are appropriateness, sensitivity, relevance, assertiveness and
informativeness. Perturbing along all these attributes caused v1 to flip its preference, show-
ing that the model does not identify privacy concerns and instead prioritises the response’s manner
and helpfulness aspects. The top five attributes for v2 are sensitivity, informativeness,
helpfulness, harmlessness and relevance. Although all cause the rewards to decrease,


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Representative example (anonymised) for v1 and v2 models on the harmless, Y+
dataset. Less relevant perturbations are omitted. The predicted rewards are shown on the right.


only sensitivity and informativeness result in CFs, showing v2’s focus on identifying
harmful, sensitive content. We can therefore conclude that, while both RMs have the same prefer-
ence for the original comparison, v2’s preference has a more trustworthy basis than v1’s. Notice
how this insight can only be obtained from the contrastive analysis of perturbed responses, and not
from the original responses alone, demonstrating the value of our approach.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we formulate contrastive explanations for language reward models and use them for in-
terpretation. We propose a method to generate a diverse set of counterfactuals and semifactuals along
high-level evaluation attributes, allowing us to analyse RM behaviour both locally and globally. We
quantitatively evaluate our generated explanations against two baselines, with strong results. We
further qualitatively demonstrate the usefulness of our method for obtaining global insights of RMs,
showing how representative examples can be found that best match the RM’s global behaviour, and
how our explanations can provide valuable information about RM’s local preferences.
This work comes with limitations. As is the case for CFs in text classification, there is no guarantee
that counterfactual responses can be found for any given test comparison. It would be desirable if the
perturbing mechanism were more closely linked to the model to explain. Also, in our formulations,
SFs do not distinguish between the case where the rewards for perturbed responses sit between those
for the two original responses, and where the rewards for perturbed chosen (rejected) responses
become higher (lower) than the originally chosen (rejected) response’s rewards. More fine-grained
categorisation for perturbed responses could potentially enable more structured analyses.
This work presents a novel method and example workflow to systematically interpret behaviours
of RMs, which open up exciting avenues for future work. Firstly, with a supervisory agent (either
human or LLM) providing ground truth labels for the newly generated comparisons, augmented
datasets with a focus on the list of high-level evaluation attributes can be constructed. This struc-
tured way of constructing datasets is fully automated, and at a lower cost compared with collecting
human responses. It would be interesting to see whether training on the augmented dataset indeed
improves the overall quality of RMs. Our proposed approach also intersects with recent works on
the evaluation of LLM-based RMs, and those on decomposing single reward signals, given sim-
ilar high-level evaluation attributes. Leveraging our explanations for model debugging, and thus
improving the model performance, would be another promising direction.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ISCLAIMER

This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Artificial Intelligence Research group
of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its affiliates (“J.P. Morgan”) and is not a product of the Research
Department of J.P. Morgan. J.P. Morgan makes no representation and warranty whatsoever and dis-
claims all liability, for the completeness, accuracy or reliability of the information contained herein.
This document is not intended as investment research or investment advice, or a recommendation,
offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product
or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction, and
shall not constitute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation under
such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card, 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/
  blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.

Saugat Aryal and Mark T. Keane. Even if explanations: Prior work, desiderata & benchmarks
  for semi-factual XAI. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI, pp. 6526–6535, 2023.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.

Amrita Bhattacharjee, Raha Moraffah, Joshua Garland, and Huan Liu. Zero-shot llm-guided coun-
 terfactual generation for text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04793, 2024.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Lenart Celar and Ruth M. J. Byrne. How people reason with counterfactual and causal explanations
  for AI decisions in familiar and unfamiliar domains. Memory & Cognition, 51(7):1481–1496,
  2023. ISSN 1532-5946.

Alex James Chan, Hao Sun, Samuel Holt, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Dense reward for free in
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML, 2024.

Shreyas Chaudhari, Pranjal Aggarwal, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Ashwin Kalyan,
  Karthik Narasimhan, Ameet Deshpande, and Bruno Castro da Silva. Rlhf deciphered: A
  critical analysis of reinforcement learning from human feedback for llms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.08555, 2024.

Furui Cheng, Vilém Zouhar, Robin Shing Moon Chan, Daniel Fürst, Hendrik Strobelt, and Menna-
  tallah El-Assady. Interactive analysis of llms using meaningful counterfactuals. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.00708, 2024.

Robert Chew, John Bollenbacher, Michael Wenger, Jessica Speer, and Annice Kim. Llm-assisted
  content analysis: Using large language models to support deductive coding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14924, 2023.

Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.01377, 2023.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Samuel Curtis, Ravi Iyer, Cameron Domenico Kirk-Giannini, Victoria Krakovna, David Krueger,
  Nathan Lambert, Bruno Marnette, Colleen McKenzie, Julian Michael, Evan Miyazono, et al.
  Research agenda for sociotechnical approaches to ai safety. online, 2024.

Shih-Chieh Dai, Aiping Xiong, and Lun-Wei Ku. Llm-in-the-loop: Leveraging large language
  model for thematic analysis. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP, pp. 9993–10001, 2023.

Yi Dong, Zhilin Wang, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Xianchao Wu, and Oleksii Kuchaiev. Steerlm:
  Attribute conditioned SFT as an (user-steerable) alternative to RLHF. In Findings of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, pp. 11275–11288, 2023.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  The 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 202 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 10835–10866, 2023.

Yair Ori Gat, Nitay Calderon, Amir Feder, Alexander Chapanin, Amit Sharma, and Roi Reichart.
  Faithful explanations of black-box nlp models using llm-generated counterfactuals. In The 12th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2024.

Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, and Marc Dymetman. Compo-
  sitional preference models for aligning LMs. In The 12th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR, 2024.

Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In The 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR, 2021.

Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. A survey of algorith-
 mic recourse: Contrastive explanations and consequential recommendations. ACM Computint
 Survey, 55(5):95:1–95:29, 2023.

Maurice G Kendall. A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1-2):81–93, 1938.

Eoin M. Kenny and Mark T. Keane. On generating plausible counterfactual and semi-factual ex-
  planations for deep learning. In The 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI, pp.
  11575–11585, 2021.

Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi Rui Tam, Keith Stevens,
  Abdullah Barhoum, Duc Nguyen, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi, Shahul ES, Sameer Suri, David
  Glushkov, Arnav Dantuluri, Andrew Maguire, Christoph Schuhmann, Huu Nguyen, and Alexan-
  der Mattick. Openassistant conversations - democratizing large language model alignment. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, NeurIPS, 2023.

Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward
  models for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.

Chris Yuhao Liu, Liang Zeng, Jiacai Liu, Rui Yan, Jujie He, Chaojie Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Yang
  Liu, and Yahui Zhou. Skywork-reward: Bag of tricks for reward modeling in llms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.18451, 2024.

Rachel McCloy and Ruth MJ Byrne. Semifactual “even if” thinking. Thinking & reasoning, 8(1):
  41–67, 2002.

Tim Miller. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intel-
  ligence, 267:1–38, 2019.

Van Bach Nguyen, Paul Youssef, Jörg Schlötterer, and Christin Seifert. Llms for generating and
  evaluating counterfactuals: A comprehensive study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00722, 2024.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser
  Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, NeurIPS, 2022.

Richard E. Overill. Book review: ”time warps, string edits, and macromolecules: the theory and
  practice of sequence comparison” by david sankoff and joseph kruskal. Journal of Logic and
  Computation, 11(2):356, 2001.

Junsoo Park, Seungyeon Jwa, Meiying Ren, Daeyoung Kim, and Sanghyuk Choi. Offsetbias: Lever-
  aging debiased data for tuning evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06551, 2024.

Ben Pikus, Will LeVine, Tony Chen, and Sean Hendryx. A baseline analysis of reward mod-
  els’ ability to accurately analyze foundation models under distribution shift. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.14743, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Kaivalya Rawal and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Beyond individualized recourse: Interpretable and inter-
  active summaries of actionable recourses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  33, NeurIPS, 2020.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, EMNLP-
  IJCNLP, pp. 3980–3990, 2019.

Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should I trust you?”: Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
 on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.

Indira Sen, Dennis Assenmacher, Mattia Samory, Isabelle Augenstein, Wil M. P. van der Aalst, and
  Claudia Wagner. People make better edits: Measuring the efficacy of llm-generated counterfac-
  tually augmented data for harmful language detection. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, pp. 10480–10504, 2023.

Prasann Singhal, Tanya Goyal, Jiacheng Xu, and Greg Durrett. A long way to go: Investigating
  length correlations in rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03716, 2023.

Sandra Wachter, Brent D. Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without open-
  ing the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology,
  31:841, 2017.

Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
  via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12845,
  2024a.

Zhilin Wang, Yi Dong, Jiaqi Zeng, Virginia Adams, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Daniel Egert,
  Olivier Delalleau, Jane Polak Scowcroft, Neel Kant, Aidan Swope, et al. Helpsteer: Multi-
  attribute helpfulness dataset for steerlm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09528, 2023.

Zhilin Wang, Yi Dong, Olivier Delalleau, Jiaqi Zeng, Gerald Shen, Daniel Egert, Jimmy J Zhang,
  Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, and Oleksii Kuchaiev. Helpsteer2: Open-source dataset for training
  top-performing reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08673, 2024b.

Tongshuang Wu, Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer, and Daniel S. Weld. Polyjuice: Generating
  counterfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and improving models. In Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP, pp. 6707–6723, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziang Xiao, Xingdi Yuan, Q. Vera Liao, Rania Abdelghani, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Supporting
  qualitative analysis with large language models: Combining codebook with GPT-3 for deductive
  coding. In Companion Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User
  Interfaces, IUI, pp. 75–78, 2023.
Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju Wang, Chao Yu,
  and Yi Wu. Is dpo superior to ppo for llm alignment? a comprehensive study. In The 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, 2024.
Linyi Yang, Eoin M. Kenny, Tin Lok James Ng, Yi Yang, Barry Smyth, and Ruihai Dong. Gener-
  ating plausible counterfactual explanations for deep transformers in financial text classification.
  In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING, pp.
  6150–6160, 2020.
Zhiyuan Zeng, Jiatong Yu, Tianyu Gao, Yu Meng, Tanya Goyal, and Danqi Chen. Evaluating large
  language models at evaluating instruction following. In The 12th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    T HE H IGH -L EVEL E VALUATION ATTRIBUTES
We adopted a semi-automated workflow to obtain the list of attributes presented in Section 2.3. Us-
ing the same test sets of the three datasets (described in Section 3), we prompt GPT-4o to identify
relevant attributes which potentially caused one response to be more preferred than the other re-
sponse in each test comparison. Outside the scope of reward modelling, similar techniques have
been used in the thematic analysis of texts (Xiao et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023; Chew et al., 2023).
We list out such LLM-generated attributes, group similar ones, compare and complement the list
with existing attributes in the literature.
We used the following prompt:
In the task of response quality scoring, a trained deep learning
model assigns real-valued scores for responses to questions. The
higher the score, the better the response quality. The question
is ’{question}’. The model assigned a score {chosen reward} for
response A: ’{chosen response}’. The model assigned a score
{rejected reward} for response B: ’{rejected response}’. List
out some high-level attributes which might have caused the model
to assign a better score for response A than response B. Some
example attributes are: appropriateness, clarity, harmlessness,
verbosity, etc. Only output the attributes in a comma-separated
list.
From the test sets, we obtain the following attributes, sorted by the number of occurrences in the
LLM responses in descending order:
clarity, relevance, harmlessness, informativeness, detail,
conciseness, specificity, completeness, structure,
helpfulness, verbosity, engagement, coherence, appropriateness,
comprehensiveness, empathy, accuracy, sensitivity, creativity,
legality, ethicality, readability, factual-accuracy,
persuasiveness, privacy, humour, assertiveness
This list encompasses all attributes in the hs2 dataset Wang et al. (2024b), where attributes were
used as dimensions in the regression labels. It also overlaps with the ones in UltraFeedback dataset
(Cui et al., 2023) apart from instruction-following and honesty. As the former is not
the focus of the datasets we experiment with, we only additionally include honesty, relabelled
to avoid-to-answer for better relevance. The list of attributes deviates from the list in the
OASST2 dataset (Köpf et al., 2023), which focuses on distinguishing various types of harmful con-
tents, e.g. hate speech, violence, etc. We stress that the high-level attributes could be customised to
best match any specific dataset characteristics, and in this work we provide a general list.
We conclude our final list below, sorted in alphabetical order:

       • avoid-to-answer: whether or not the response is avoiding to give direct answers to
         the question,
       • appropriateness: the extent to which the response is appropriate in terms of language
         style, politeness, and whether it contains any sarcasm,
       • assertiveness: the extent to which the response sounds very certain and contains
         judgements,
       • clarity: whether or not the response is clear and easy to read,
       • coherence: whether or not the contents in the response are self-contained and clear,
       • complexity: the intellectual burden required by a person to understand this response,
       • correctness: whether or not the response is factually correct,
       • engagement: the extent to which the language style of the response is trying to engage
         with the person who wrote the question,
       • harmlessness: whether or not the response is relevant to any potentially unsafe, im-
         moral or illegal behaviours,


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • helpfulness: whether or not the response addresses the points raised in the question,
      • informativeness: whether or not the response provides informative knowledge,
      • neutrality: whether or not the response is neutral and is without biases towards certain
        groups,
      • relevance: whether or not the response is in a relevant context as in the question,
      • sensitivity: whether or not the response is relevant to any personal, sensitive, or
        private information,
      • verbosity: how many relevant details are included in the response, and whether or not
        the response is too long.

B    P ROMPTS U SED IN O UR M ETHODS
We present the prompts we use for the two steps described in Section 2.3. Specifically, for each
binary comparison, we run the prompts twice to generate perturbed responses separately for the
chosen and rejected responses. In the prompts, we parameterise the two responses, and the other
variables in the prompts can be determined depending on whether the chosen or rejected response
is input as response 1. To avoid LLM input and output being too long thus potentially hurting
performance in each query, Step 2 prompt is repeated for each evaluation attribute.
Step 1 prompt:
In the task of response quality scoring, a trained deep learning
model assigns real-valued scores for responses to questions, the
higher the score the better the response quality.
The question is ’{question}’. The model assigned a score {score 1}
for response A: ’{response 1}’. The model assigned a score
{score 2} for response B: ’{response 2}’.
The high-level attributes that potentially caused the model to
assign a {better/worse} score for response A than response B are
{attribute list}.
Your task: for each attribute in this list, identify the words in
response A that are relevant to it.
Only output the attributes and their associated words like this:
’attribute: word1, word2, word3’. Each line should contain a
comma-separated word list for one attribute.
It is fine to have repeated words in the words identified for each
attribute, but you need to keep them in their original order of
occurrence in the response A.
Step 2 prompt:
In the task of response quality scoring, a trained deep learning
model assigns real-valued scores for responses to questions, the
higher the score the better the response quality.
The question is ’{question}’. The model assigned a score {score 1}
for response A: ’{response 1}’. The model assigned a score
{score 2} for response B: ’{response 2}’.
The potential high-level attributes that caused the model to
assign a {better/worse} score for response A than response B is:
{attribute}. This attribute concerns {attribute description}.
Your task is to modify response A. Here is a list of requirements
for the modification:
- The modified response A becomes a {better/worse} response to the
question than response B.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


- {Positively/Negatively} change the semantic meaning of response
A by making it {better/worse} in terms of {attribute}.
- The changes made to response A should be centered around the
following words: {relevant words for this attribute identified in
Step 1}
- Only output the modified response A.


C    P ROMPTS U SED IN THE R ANDOM P ERTURBATION BASELINE

Generate a random perturbation of this piece of text:                              {response}.
Only output the perturbed text.
Do not output any characters other than English texts and common
punctuation.


D    A BLATION A NALYSIS

Different prompts can have large impacts on the perturbations generated. In our prompt, we specify
that
The changes made to response A should be centered around the
following words: {relevant words for this attribute identified
in Step 1}.
In this ablation analysis, we highlight the importance and effectiveness of this additional require-
ment in keeping the perturbations close to the original responses while balancing the CF and SF
coverages.
Following the same experimental setup described in Section 3), we quantitatively compare CFs and
SFs resulting from perturbations obtained with three different prompts. Our final prompt is referred
to as the center-prompt. One of the different prompt (only) replaces the above sentence by:
Response A can only be modified by deleting, replacing, or
inserting words, at the locations of all or a subset of the
following words: {relevant words},
posing a stronger restriction on the changes made in the perturbations. The other different prompt
(pass) has no constraint on the extent of changes by removing this sentence. Table 4 reports the
comparison results.

         DatasetPrompt          cov. CF      cov. SF    syn. dist.   sem. dist    sem. div.
                  only          0.49±.123   0.86±.071   0.48±.026    0.30±.028    0.21±.022
        harmless pass           0.64±.121   0.55±.161   0.81±.011    0.48±.028    0.29±.019
                 center         0.68±.111   0.90±.061   0.65±.015    0.36±.028    0.31±.023
                  only          0.72±.008   0.79±.054   0.47±.019    0.24±.019    0.13±.015
        helpful   pass          0.80±.057   0.13±.083   0.75±.017    0.37±.023    0.19±.013
                 center         0.80±.047   0.74±.067   0.61±.018    0.28±.018    0.20±.012
                  only          0.28±.088   0.76±.178   0.29±.098    0.07±.034    0.04±.013
        hs2       pass          0.39±.094   0.71±.140   0.50±.068    0.11±.030    0.06±.012
                 center         0.33±.144   0.84±.149   0.31±.023    0.07±.017    0.07±.010

 Table 4: Comparison of CF and SF coverage, distances and diversity for three different prompts.

Overall, the most restrictive only-prompt, though resulting in perturbations which are closer to the
original response, has the lowest CF coverage, and is not as semantically diverse as the center-
prompt. The pass-prompt, on the other hand, has much higher distances than the other two prompts.
Additionally, this downside does not result in improvements in explanation coverages and diversity.
We can conclude that for the purpose of generating contrastive explanations, the center-prompt
can achieve the most balanced performance among these prompts, therefore was used in our final
configuration.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E       E XPLANATION E VALUATION R ESULTS FOR C ORRECT AND W RONG
        P REFERENCES

In this analysis, we look at evaluation metrics for explanations respectively for correct and wrong
preferences made by RMs to further understand the effectiveness of our approach. Following the
same experimental setup described in Section 3, we further divide each test set by whether or not the
model’s preference is correct, i.e. matches the ground truth label. We report in Table 5 the evaluation
results of our method separately for correct and wrong preferences.

           Dataset Preference        cov. CF      cov. SF    syn. dist.   sem. dist    sem. div.
                     correct         0.71±.149   0.88±.123   0.65±.026    0.36±.037    0.30±.029
          harmless
                     wrong           0.67±.173   0.90±.127   0.64±.017    0.37±.039    0.32±.042
                     correct         0.78±.008   0.73±.007   0.63±.018    0.29±.025    0.19±.011
          helpful
                     wrong           0.86±.105   0.79±.134   0.57±.059    0.26±.044    0.21±.049
                     correct         0.29±.161   0.84±.158   0.33±.033    0.08±.021    0.07±.016
          hs2
                     wrong           0.38±.170   0.82±.156   0.27±.029    0.05±.017    0.06±.012

Table 5: Comparison of CF and SF coverage, distances and diversity for explanations of correct and
wrong preferences.

Intuitively, in cases where the ground truth chosen response is obviously more preferred (in human
standards) than the rejected response but the RM made the wrong comparison, our method will
generate perturbations which make the ground truth chosen (rejected) response better (worse). In
this case, it might be expected that all perturbations tend to become counterfactuals, but because
the RM’s local behaviour is unclear, it can still result in a balanced mix of counterfactuals and
semifactuals. Indeed, in Table 5, we observe no clear distinctions in the results, validating that our
method is effective in finding explanations for both correct and wrong preferences made by RMs.

F       S EPARATELY C ONSIDER P ERTURBING C HOSEN AND R EJECTED R ESPONSE
        FOR G LOBAL S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

In Section 4, we have separately considered global sensitivity for Y+ and Y− because perturbing y+
to become worse than y− is an independent process from perturbing y− to become better than y+ .
We validate this intuition by calculating the ranking similarities (Kendall’s τ correlation coefficient)
between each dataset’s Y+ and Y− branches. The results for each model are presented in Table 6.
We observe that only v2 and pythia have weak correlations in some cases, and the rest of the
results are generally uncorrelated.

                                          harmless      helpful       hs2
                                v1           0.18         0.03        0.12
                                v2           0.49         0.30        0.28
                              pythia         0.28         0.31        0.07

Table 6: Ranking similarity of global sensitivity between the perturbed responses for chosen and
rejected responses.


G        F URTHER Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

In this section, we present a further qualitative analysis, using our contrastive explanation method to
discover failure cases in state-of-the-art RMs.
Following the findings on the undesirable behaviours of model v2 in Section 4.2.1, we additionally
include two better-performing RMs and investigate whether they improve over the weaknesses in
v2. We use Llama-3-OffsetBias-RM-8B5 (LlamaOB) trained by Park et al. (2024), and Skywork-
    5
        https://huggingface.co/NCSOFT/Llama-3-OffsetBias-RM-8B


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.26 (LlamaSW) trained by Liu et al. (2024), both have 8 billion parameters
and rank among the top-performing models in the RewardBench benchmark7 (Lambert et al., 2024).


                                     (a) Perturbed rejected responses.


                                      (b) Perturbed chosen responses.

        Figure 6: Example for investigating improvements of LlamaOB and LlamaSW over v2.

   6
       https://huggingface.co/Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2
   7
       https://huggingface.co/spaces/allenai/reward-bench


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We begin by observing the two RMs’ behaviours on the text perturbations in the same example
shown in Figure 4.
We present the results in Figure 6. The two RMs make the same preference over the two original re-
sponses as v2 for this example. Figure 6a shows RMs’ predicted rewards for the perturbed rejected
responses. We observe that for they retain the desirable behaviours observed in v2, i.e. in pertur-
bations associated with attributes appropriateness, correctness, harmlessness,
neutrality, relevance, by mentioning betting on dog-fights is an illegal activity, the two
RMs assign higher rewards compared with that of the rejected response. On the other hand, in
the perturbed responses associated with answer and sensitivity, providing more detailed an-
swers about how to identify winning dogs resulted in model v2 assigning higher rewards. The same
undesirable behaviours are also observed in the more powerful LlamaOB and LlamaSW.
More interesting observations can be seen in Figure 6b, which shows the RMs’ predicted rewards
for the perturbed chosen responses. As the original chosen response avoided answering the harmful
question, incorporating more detailed harmful content in it caused the rewards (from the two larger
models) to decrease (correctness, harmlessness, sensitivity). They also correctly
identified that calling the user an “irresponsible gambler” (neutrality) is problematic by lower-
ing the rewards. However, we see some clearly undesirable behaviours in the two larger models:

      • LlamaSW assigned a higher reward for an LLM answer asserting that it can help with
        harmful activities (answer).
      • By incorporating disrespectful language “the hell” in the response (appropriateness),
        v2 and LlamaOB increased the their rewards.

Therefore, we highlight that our explanations help reveal more fine-grained local behaviours of RMs,
allowing us to efficiently find deficiencies even in the best-performing RMs.
Next, we investigate the case where the RMs fail to identify disrespectful language “the hell”
at a larger scope.
We observe that in the harmless dataset, it is common that one LLM response avoids an-
swering harmful or sensitive user questions by saying something like “What do you mean?” As
was the case in the example shown in Figures 4 and 6, when perturbing such responses along
appropriateness, our method frequently inserts the disrespectful phrase “the hell” to them.
We collect questions with such responses together with their disrespectful perturbations from our
experiments on harmless dataset, and obtain 110 test comparisons. We test how frequently the
RMs prefer the responses with “the hell” in them over the original responses, i.e. disrespectful
perturbation win rate, and report the results in Table 7.

                              pythia       v1     v2     LlamaOB       LlamaSW
                  win rate      0.75      0.51   0.56      0.30          0.15

               Table 7: Disrespectful perturbation win rate, lower values are better.

As shown by the results, all tested models sometimes prefer the disrespectful perturbation, with the
two 8-billion-parameter RMs showing better performances than the smaller ones. Note that by the
time of writing, LlamaOB and LlamaSW rank 22nd and 7th in the RewardBench benchmark, and
LlamaSW is the best-performing RM which has less than 10 billion parameters. Our findings vali-
date that there is scope for improvements over the current state-of-the-art RMs. The investigations
in this section also exemplify how our contrastive explanation method can be useful for discovering
new failure cases in RMs, shedding light on directions for future improvements.


                                                 20
