Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M INIMAX O PTIMAL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
WITH Q UASI -O PTIMISM

 Harin Lee                                                   Min-hwan Oh
 Seoul National University                                   Seoul National University
 harinboy@snu.ac.kr                                          minoh@snu.ac.kr



                                                 A BSTRACT

          In our quest for a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm that is both practical and
          provably optimal, we introduce EQO (Exploration via Quasi-Optimism). Unlike
          existing minimax optimal approaches, EQO avoids reliance on empirical variances
          and employs a simple bonus term proportional to the inverse of the state-action
          visit count. Central to EQO is the concept of quasi-optimism, where estimated val-
          ues need not be fully optimistic, allowing for a simpler yet effective exploration
          strategy. The algorithm achieves the sharpest known regret bound for tabular RL
          under the mildest assumptions, proving that fast convergence can be attained with
          a practical and computationally efficient approach. Empirical evaluations demon-
          strate that EQO consistently outperforms existing algorithms in both regret perfor-
          mance and computational efficiency, providing the best of both theoretical sound-
          ness and practical effectiveness.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen substantial progress in its theoretical foundations, with nu-
merous algorithms achieving minimax optimality (Azar et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019;
Dann et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021a; 2024). These algorithms
are often lauded for providing strong regret bounds, theoretically ensuring their provable optimality
in worst-case scenarios. However, despite these guarantees, an important question remains: Can we
truly claim that we can solve tabular reinforcement learning problems practically well? By “solving
reinforcement learning practically well,” we expect these theoretically sound and optimal algorithms
to deliver both favorable theoretical and empirical performance.1
Although provably efficient RL algorithms offer regret bounds that are nearly optimal (up to log-
arithmic or constant factors), they are often designed to handle worst-case scenarios. This focus
on worst-case outcomes leads to overly conservative behavior, as these algorithms must construct
bonus terms to guarantee optimism under uncertainty. Consequently, they may suffer from practical
inefficiencies in more typical scenarios where worst-case conditions may rarely arise.
Empirical evaluations of these minimax optimal algorithms frequently reveal their shortcomings in
practice (see Section 5). In fact, many minimax optimal algorithms often underperform compared
to algorithms with sub-optimal theoretical guarantees, such as UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010). This
suggests that the pursuit of provable optimality may come at the expense of practical performance.
This prompts the question: Is this seeming tradeoff between provable optimality and practicality in-
herent? Or, can we design an algorithm that attains both provable optimality and superior practical
performance simultaneously?
To address this, we argue that a fundamental shift is needed in the design of provable RL algorithms.
The prevailing reliance on empirical variances to construct worst-case confidence bounds—a tech-
   1
     If one questions the practical relevance of tabular RL methods given the advancements in function approx-
imation (Jin et al., 2020; He et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2023), it is important to recognize that many real-world
environments remain inherently tabular, lacking feature representations for generalization. In such cases, effi-
cient and practical tabular RL algorithms are not only relevant but essential. Furthermore, even when function
approximation is feasible, tabular methods can still play a crucial role. For instance, state-space dependence
may persist even under linear function approximation (Lee & Oh, 2024; Hwang & Oh, 2023).


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


nique employed by all minimax optimal algorithms (Azar et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019;
Dann et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021a) (see Table 1)—may no longer be the only viable or practical
approach. Instead, we propose new methodologies that, while practical, can still be proven efficient
to overcome this significant limitation.
In this work, we introduce a tabular reinforcement learning algorithm, EQO, which stands for Ex-
ploration via Quasi-Optimism. Unlike existing minimax-optimal algorithms, EQO does not rely on
empirical variances. While it employs a bonus term for exploration, EQO stands out for its simplic-
ity and practicality. The bonus term is proportional to the inverse of the state-action visit count,
avoiding the dependence on empirical variances that previous approaches rely on.
On the theoretical side, we demonstrate that our proposed algorithm EQO, despite its algorithmic
simplicity, achieves the sharpest known regret bound for tabular reinforcement learning. More im-
portantly, this crucial milestone is attained under the mildest assumptions (see Section 4.1). Thus,
our results establish that the fastest convergence to optimality (the sharpest regret) can be achieved
by a simple and practical algorithm in the broadest (the weakest assumptions) problem settings.
To complement—not as a tradeoff—the theoretical merit, we show that EQO empirically outperforms
existing provably efficient algorithms, including previous minimax optimal algorithms. The prac-
tical superiority is demonstrated both in terms of regret performance in numerical experiments and
computational efficiency. Overall, EQO achieves both minimax optimal regret bounds and superior
empirical performance, offering a promising new approach that balances theoretical soundness with
practical efficiency.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We propose a reinforcement learning algorithm, EQO (Algorithm 1), which introduces a dis-
         tinct exploration strategy. While previous minimax optimal algorithms rely on empirical-
         variance-based bonus terms, EQO employs a simpler bonus term of the form c/N (s, a),
         where c is a constant and N (s, a) is the visit count of the state-action pair (s, a). This
         straightforward yet effective approach reduces computational complexity while maintain-
         ing robust exploration, making EQO both practical and theoretically sound. Additionally,
         this simplicity allows for convenient control of the algorithm through a single parameter,
         making it particularly advantageous in practice where parameter tuning is essential.

       • Our algorithm achieves the tightest regret bound in the literature for tabular reinforcement
         learning. Even compared to the state-of-the-art bounds by Zhang et al. (2021a), EQO pro-
         vides sharper logarithmic factors, establishing it as the algorithm with the most efficient
         regret bound to date. Our novel analysis introduces the concept of quasi-optimism (see
         Section 4.4.2), where estimated values need not be fully optimistic.2 This relaxation simpli-
         fies the bonus term and simultaneously controls the amount of underestimation, ultimately
         leading to a sharper regret bound.

       • A key strength of our approach is that it operates under weaker assumptions than the pre-
         vious assumptions in the existing literature, making it applicable to a broader range of
         problems (see Section 4.1). While prior work assumes bounded returns for every episode,
         we relax this condition to require only the value function (i.e., the expected return) to be
         bounded. This relaxation broadens the applicability of our algorithm.

       • We show that EQO enjoys tight sample complexity bounds in terms of mistake-style PAC
         guarantees and best-policy identification tasks (see Section 2.1 for detailed definitions).
         This further highlights our proposed algorithm’s robust performance.

       • We perform numerical experiments that demonstrate that EQO empirically outperforms ex-
         isting provably efficient algorithms, including prior minimax-optimal approaches. The su-
         periority of EQO is evident both in its regret performance and computational efficiency,
         showcasing its ability to attain theoretical guarantees with practical performance.


   2
     By fully optimistic, we refer to the conventional UCB-type estimates that lie above the optimal value with
high probability. See the distinction with our new quasi-optimism in Section 4.4.2.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of minimax optimal algorithms for tabular reinforcement learning under the
time-homogeneous setting. Constant and logarithmic factors are omitted. The Empirical Variance
column indicates whether the algorithm requires empirical variance. The Boundedness column
shows the quantity on which the boundedness assumptions are imposed, where bound on “Reward”
is 1 and bounds on “Return” and “Value” are H.


                                                                           Empirical
  Paper                           Regret Bound                                              Boundedness†
                                                                           Variance
                                    √                  √
  Azar et al. (2017)              H √SAK + H 2 S 2 A + √ H 3 K
                                                             √             Required         Reward
  Zanette & Brunskill (2019)      H √SAK + H 2 S 3/2A( H + S)              Required         Return
  Dann et al. (2019)              H √SAK + H 2 S 2 A                       Required         Reward
  Zhang et al. (2021a)            H √SAK + HS 2 A                          Required         Return
  This work                       H SAK + HS 2 A *                         Not required     Value
* Our regret bound is the sharpest with more improved logarithmic factors than that of Zhang et al. (2021a).
† Bounded reward is the strongest assumption; bounded return is weaker than bounded reward; our bounded
  value assumption is the weakest among the three conditions (see the discussion in Section 4.1).


1.1    R ELATED W ORK

There has been substantial progress in RL theory over the past decade, with numerous algorithms
advancing our understanding of regret minimization and sample complexity (Jaksch et al., 2010;
Osband & Roy, 2014; Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2017; Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Ouyang et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2018; Osband et al., 2019; Russo, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; 2021b) , and some recent
lines of work focusing on gap-dependent bounds (Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019; Dann et al., 2021;
Wagenmaker et al., 2022; Tirinzoni et al., 2022; Wagenmaker & Jamieson, 2022). In the remainder
of this section, we focus on comparisons with more closely related methods and techniques.

Regret-Minimizing Algorithms for Tabular   √ RL. In episodic finite-horizon reinforcement learn-
ing, the known regret lower bound is Ω(H SAK) (Jaksch et al., 2010; Domingues et al., 2021).
The first result to achieve a matching upper bound is by Azar et al. (2017). Their algorithm,
UCBVI-BF, adopts the optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) principle by adding an optimistic
bonus during the estimation. For the sharper regret bound, they use a Bernstein-Freedman type
concentration inequality and design a bonus term that utilizes the empirical variance of the esti-
mated values at the next time step. Zanette & Brunskill (2019) show that by estimating both upper
and lower bounds of the value function, their algorithm automatically adapts to the hardness of the
problem without requiring prior knowledge. Zhang et al. (2021a) improve the previous analysis and
                                       2
reduce the non-leading term to O(HS
                                 e       A), achieving the regret bound that is independent of the
lengths of the episodes when the maximum return per episode is rescaled to 1.

Time-Inhomogeneous Setting. There has also been an increasing number of works that focus on
time-inhomogeneous MDPs, which have different transition probabilities and rewards at each time
step.3 One active area of study is to design an efficient model-free algorithm, which has a space
complexity of o(HS 2 A) (Strehl et al., 2006). Jin et al. (2018) propose a variant of√Q-learning with a
bonus similar to UCBVI-BF and show that this model-free algorithm achieves
                                                                         √       O( K) regret. How-
ever, their regret bound is worse than the lower bound by a factor of H. This additional factor is
removed by Zhang et al. (2020), achieving the minimax regret bound for the time-inhomogeneous
setting with a model-free algorithm for the first
                                             √ time. Li 6et al. (2021) further improve the non-leading
                                         3/2
term and achieve a regret bound of O(H
                                    e          SAK +H SA). For model-based algorithms, the non-
leading terms are further optimized. Ménard et al. (2021b) combine the Q-learning approach with
momentum, achieving a non-leading term of O(H   e 4 SA). Recent work by Zhang et al. (2024) further
                   2                                            3/2
                                                                    √
reduce it to O(H SA), resulting in the bound of O(min{H
              e                                     e                 SAK, HK}) on the whole range
                                                                        √
   3
    The regret lower bound for the time-inhomogeneous case is√Ω(H 3/2 SAK) (Domingues et al., 2021),
being worse than the time-homogeneous case by a factor of H. Due to this sub-optimality, the time-
inhomogeneous setting is often viewed as a special case of the time-homogeneous setting with HS states.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of K. Deviating from the algorithmic framework shared by these works, Tiapkin et al. (2022) pro-
pose a posterior-sampling algorithm and achieve the minimax bound without computing empirical
variances.

PAC Bounds. Dann & Brunskill (2015) present a PAC upper bound of O(          e H 2 S22 A ) and a lower
                                                                                  ε
                2
bound of Ω( H εSA 2 ), where their focus is on what is later named as the mistake-style PAC bound.
Dann et al. (2017) generalize the concept to uniform-PAC, which also implies a high-probability
cumulative regret bound as well. Dann et al. (2019) propose a further generalized framework named
Mistake-IPOC, which encompasses uniform-PAC, best-policy identification, and an anytime cumu-
lative regret bound. Notably, their algorithm achieves the minimax PAC bounds for the first time.
Other PAC tasks include best-policy identification (BPI) (Fiechter, 1994; Domingues et al., 2021;
Kaufmann et al., 2021), where the goal is to return a policy whose sub-optimality is small with high
probability, and reward-free exploration (Kaufmann et al., 2021; Ménard et al., 2021a), where the
goal is similar to BPI, but the agent does not receive reward feedback while exploring.

O(1/N )-bonus Exploration. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the first to use an
exploration bonus of the form c/N for the reinforcement learning setting and attain regret guaran-
tees. In the multi-armed bandit setting, Simchi-Levi et al. (2023; 2024) utilize a similar bonus term,
but the underlying motivations and derivations differ significantly. Their focus is on controlling the
tail probability of regret—that is, minimizing the probability of observing large regret. Their bonus
term arises from Hoeffding’s inequality with a specific failure probability. In contrast, our work is
aimed at developing a practical algorithm for tabular reinforcement learning. Our bonus term stems
from a distinct context—decoupling the variance factors and visit counts that naturally arise in re-
inforcement learning settings when applying Freedman’s inequality (see Section 4.4). Importantly,
Simchi-Levi et al. (2023; 2024) do not appear to leverage Freedman’s inequality, either directly or
indirectly, in their derivations. The distinction becomes evident when comparing the failure proba-
bilities of the inequalities.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

We consider a finite-horizon time-homogeneous Markov decision process (MDP) M =
(S, A, P, r, H), where S is the state space, A is the action space, P : S × A → ∆S is the state
transition distribution, r : S × A → R is the reward function, and H ∈ N is the time horizon of an
episode. We focus on tabular MDPs, where the cardinalities of the state and action spaces are finite
and denoted by S := |S| and A := |A|. The agent and the environment interact for a sequence of
episodes. The interaction of the k-th episode begins with the environment providing an initial state,
sk1 ∈ S. For time steps h = 1, . . . , H, the agent chooses an action akh ∈ A, then receives a random
reward Rhk ∈ R and the next state skh+1 ∈ S from the environment. The mean of the random re-
ward is r(skh , akh ) and the next state is independently sampled from P (· | skh , akh ). These probability
distributions are unknown to the agent. The goal of the agent is to maximize the total rewards.
A policy is a sequence of H functions π = {πh }H           h=1 with πh : S → A for all h. An agent
following a policy π chooses action a = πh (s) at time step h when the current state is s. We define
                                                                                   PH
the value function of policy π at time step h as Vhπ (s) := Eπ(·|sh =s)             j=h r(sj , aj ) , where
Eπ(·|sh =s) denotes the expectation over (sh = s, ah , . . . , sH , aH , sH+1 ) with aj = πj (sj ) and
sj+1 ∼ P (·|sj , aj ) for j = h, . . . , H. Similarly, we define the action-value function as Qh (s, a) :=
                    PH                             π                                      ∗
Eπ(·|sh =s,ah =a)     j=h r(sj , aj ) . We set VH+1 (s) = 0 for all π and s ∈ S. π is the optimal
policy, which chooses the action that maximizes the expected return at every time step, and it holds
         ∗
that Vhπ (s) = supπ Vhπ (s) for all h = 1, . . . , H and s ∈ S. We denote Vhπ∗ by Vh∗ , and call it the
optimal value function. The regret of a policy π is defined as V1∗ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ). The agent’s goal
is to find policies that minimize cumulative regret for a given MDP. The cumulative regret over K
episodes is defined as:
                                                  K
                                                 X                    k
                                Regret(K) :=         (V1∗ (sk1 ) − V1π (sk1 )) .
                                               k=1



                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: EQO (Exploration via Quasi-Optimism)
   Input: {ck }∞ k=1
 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 2     foreach (s, a, s′ ) ∈ S × A × S do
                           Pk−1 PH
 3         N k (s, a) ← i=1 h=1 1{(sih , aih ) = (s, a)};
                             1
                                   Pk−1 PH
 4         r̂k (s, a) ← N k (s,a)      i=1
                                                    i     i    i
                                               h=1 Rh 1{(sh , ah ) = (s, a)};
                                           k−1    H
           P̂ k (s′ |s, a) ← N k (s,a)
                                 1                        i    i    i               ′
                                        P       P
 5                                         i=1    h=1 1{(sh , ah , sh+1 ) = (s, a, s )};
              k
 6         VH+1    (s) ← 0;
 7     for h = H, H − 1, . . . , 1 do
 8         foreach (s, a) ∈ S × A do
 9             bk (s, a) ← ck /N k (s,
                                    n a);                                          o
                            (
                                         k           k             k k
                               min    r̂   (s, a) + b  (s, a) + P̂  Vh+1 (s, a), H         if N k (s, a) > 0
10             Qkh (s, a) ←                                                                                    ;
                               H                                                           if N k (s, a) = 0
11          Vhk (s) ← maxa∈A Qkh (s, a) for all s ∈ S;
12          πhk (s) ← argmaxa∈A Qkh (s, a) for all s ∈ S;
13     Execute π k and obtain τ k = (sk1 , ak1 , Rhk , . . . , skH , akH , RH
                                                                            k
                                                                              , skH+1 );



In addition to regret, another important measure of performance is the PAC (probably approximately
correct) bound (Kakade, 2003), also referred to as sample complexity. This measure focuses on
obtaining a policy (after sufficient exploration) whose regret is no more than ε with probability at
least 1 − δ, for given values of ε > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1]. A policy π is said to be ε-optimal if its regret
satisfies V1∗ (s1 ) − V1π (s1 ) ≤ ε. We evaluate two different tasks using PAC bounds: (i) the mistake-
style PAC, which aims to minimize the number of episodes in which the agent executes a policy that
is not ε-optimal, and (ii) best-policy identification, whose objective is to return an ε-optimal policy
within the fewest possible episodes.

2.2   N OTATIONS

N = {1, 2, . . .} is the set of natural numbers. For N ∈ N, we define [N ] := {1, . . . , N }. 1{E}
is the indicator function that takes the value 1 when E is true and 0 otherwise. For any function
V : S → R and a state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A, we denote the mean of V under the probability
                                                                  ′           ′
                                                    P
distribution P (·|s, a) by P V (s, a) :=                s′ ∈S P (s |s, a)V (s ). For any other function P̂ : S ×
                                                               ′
A → RS , we define P̂ V (s, a) :=                                   a)V (s′ ) in the same manner. We denote the
                                                P
                                                    s′ ∈S P̂ (s |s,
variance of V under P (·|s, a) by Var(V )(s, a) := s′ ∈S P (s′ |s, a)(V (s′ ) − P V (s, a))2 . A tuple
                                                                  P
τ = (s1 , a1 , R1 , . . . , sH , aH , RH , sH+1 ) generated by a single episode of interaction is called a
trajectory. Let τ k be the trajectory of the k-th episode. For h ∈ [H], we also define the partial
trajectory as τhk := (sk1 , ak1 , R1k , . . . , skh , akh ). For all h ∈ [H] and k ∈ N, let Fhk = σ({τ i }k−1
                                                                                                           i=1 ∪
{τhk }) be the σ-algebra generated by the agent-environment interactions up to the action akh taken at
                                                                                     k
the h-th time step of the k-th episode. For convenience, we define FH+1                 as σ({τ i }ki=1 ).

3     A LGORITHM : EQO
We introduce our algorithm, Exploration via Quasi-Optimism (EQO), which presents a distinct ap-
proach to bonus construction compared to prior optimism-based methods. While the framework of
our algorithm shares some structural similarities with UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017), which has been
widely adopted by several subsequent works (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Dann et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2021a), EQO diverges significantly in its exploration strategy. The key novelty lies in its bonus
term, which does not rely on empirical variances, unlike the previous methods. Instead, EQO takes
a sequence of real numbers {ck }∞  k=1 as input, and the bonus for a state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A
in episode k is simply ck /N k (s, a), where N k (s, a) is the visit count of (s, a) up to the previous
episode. This simplicity stands in contrast to the empirical-variance-based bonuses used in prior al-


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


gorithms, demonstrating that empirical variance (and UCB approaches based on estimated variance)
is not necessary for achieving efficient exploration in our approach.
A notable advantage of our algorithm is its simplicity in practice. While many existing RL algo-
rithms often involve multiple parameters with complex dependencies, our approach consolidates
these into a single parameter, ck , making tuning much more straightforward.4

4     T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES
4.1   A SSUMPTIONS

Before presenting our theoretical guarantees, we provide the regularity assumptions necessary for
the analysis. We emphasize that our assumptions are weaker than those in the previous RL literature.
Assumption 1 (Boundedness). 0 ≤ Vh∗ (s) ≤ H holds for all s ∈ S and h ∈ [H], and 0 ≤ Rhk ≤ H
holds for all h ∈ [H] and k ∈ N.
Assumption 2 (Adaptive random reward). E[Rhk |Fhk ] = r(skh , akh ) holds for all h ∈ [H] and k ∈ N.

Assumption 1 regularizes the scaling of the problem instances. The most widely used regularity
assumption is that the random rewards lie within the interval [0, 1] for all time steps (Jaksch et al.,
2010; Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2019). A slightly generalized version assumes that the return,
                                                             PH
defined as the total reward of an episode, is bounded as 0 ≤ h=1 Rh ≤ H, and that each random
reward is non-negative (Jiang & Agarwal, 2018; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021a).
Such an assumption allows non-uniform reward schemes. For instance, the agent may receive a
reward of H at exactly one time step and no rewards at the other time steps. We further relax this
boundedness assumption by constraining only the optimal values Vh∗ (s) to be within the interval
[0, H], along with the conventional boundedness on the random rewards within [0, H]. Since the
value function is the expected return, our bounded value condition is weaker than the bounded
return assumption (and hence, also weaker than the widely used uniform boundedness of rewards)
used in the previous literature.
Assumption 2 allows martingale-style random rewards. Standard MDPs assume a fixed reward
distribution for each state-action pair, where rewards are sampled independently of history and the
next state. Some recent studies introduce a joint probability distribution on the next state and the
                                                                     i.i.d.
reward, defined as p : S × A → ∆(S × R), so that (sh+1 , Rh ) ∼ p(sh , ah ) (Krishnamurthy
et al., 2016; Sutton, 2018). We further weaken this assumption by requiring only that the mean of
the random reward equals r(s, a), allowing specific distributions to adapt to the history. Note that in
Assumption 2, skh+1 is not part of Fhk . This fact allows dependence between skh+1 and Rhk , making
our assumption more general.

4.2   R EGRET B OUND

We now present the regret upper bounds enjoyed by our algorithm EQO (Algorithm 1).
Theorem 1 (Regret bound of EQO). Fix δ ∈ (0, 1].p   Suppose the number of episodes, denoted by K,
is known to the agent. Let c := max{7Hℓ1 , 1.4H Kℓ1 /(SAℓ2,K )}, where ℓ1 = log 24HSA    δ    and
ℓ2,K = log(1 + KH/(SA)). If Algorithm 1 is run with ck = c for all k ∈ [K], then with probability
at least 1 − δ, the cumulative regret of K episodes is bounded as follows:
                   Regret(K) ≤ 38H SAKℓ1 ℓ2,K + 256HS 2 Aℓ′1,K (1 + ℓ2,K ) ,
                                      p

where ℓ′1,K = log(50HSA(log(eKH))2 /δ).

When the number of episodes K is specified, Theorem 1 states that the input of Algorithm 1,
{ck }K
     k=1 , can be set as a constant independent of k, making the algorithm even simpler. In case
where K is unknown, it is possible to attain a regret bound that holds for all K ∈ N by updating
ck in a doubling-trick styled fashion. Theorem 2 states the anytime regret bound result enjoyed by
Algorithm 1. Note that resetting the algorithm is not necessary, unlike the actual doubling trick.
   4
     The theoretical results in Theorems 1, 3, and 4 justify setting ck as a k-independent constant, offering both
theoretical and practical convenience.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 2 (Anytime regret bound of EQO). Fix δ ∈ (0, 1]. For any episode k ∈ N, take ck =
                                                                                              2
max{7Hℓ1,k , 1.4H k2 ℓ1,k /(SAℓ2,k2 )}, where k2 = 2⌊log2 k⌋ , ℓ1,k = log 24HSA(1+⌊log  2 k⌋)
                     p
                                                                                    δ           , and
ℓ2,k2 = log(1 + k2 H/(SA)). If Algorithm 1 is run with ck as defined above, then with probability
at least 1 − δ, the cumulative regret of K episodes for any K ∈ N is bounded as follows:
                  Regret(K) ≤ 75H SAKℓ1,K ℓ2,K + 256HS 2 Aℓ′1,K (1 + ℓ2,K ) ,
                                    p

where ℓ′1,K = log(50HSA(log(eKH))2 /δ).

Discussions of Theorems 1 and 2. We discuss √    the regret bounds of both Theorems 1 and 2. The
first terms of the regret bounds are in O(H
                                        e     SAK), which matches the lower
                                                                       q bound up to logarith-

mic factors. In fact, the logarithmic factors of Theorems 1 and 2 are O      log HSA
                                                                                   δ log(KH) and
   q
O      log HSA(logδ
                      K)
                         log(KH) respectively, which are even tighter than the state-of-the-art guar-
                                                                                  2
antee in Zhang et al. (2021a). The second terms of the regret bounds are O(HS
                                                                            e       A), which implies
that our algorithm matches the lower bound for K ≥ S 3 A. This bound matches the previously best
non-leading term in the time-homogeneous setting by Zhang et al. (2021a) even in the logarithmic
factors. Therefore, our regret bounds are the tightest compared to all the previous results in the
time-homogeneous setting up to constant factors. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, our re-
sult is the first to prove that the minimax regret bound is achievable under the weakest boundedness
assumption on the value function.

4.3   PAC B OUNDS

We demonstrate that by setting the parameters ck appropriately, Algorithm 1 achieves PAC bounds.
Theorem 3 (Mistake-style PAC bound). Let ε ∈ (0, H] and δ ∈ (0, 1]. Suppose Algorithm 1 is run
              2
with ck = 56Hε ℓ1 for all k ∈ N, where ℓ1 = log 24HSA
                                                   δ   . Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the
number of episodes in which the algorithm executes policies that are not ε-optimal is at most K0 ,
             e H 2 SA
where K0 = O((
                             2
                        + HSε A ) log 1δ ).
                   ε2

In Appendix D, we present (ε, δ)-EQO (Algorithm 2), which runs Algorithm 1 with parameters spec-
ified as in Theorem 3, then performs an additional procedure to certify ε-optimal policies. With this
extension, our algorithm is capable of solving the BPI task with the same bound as in the mistake-
style PAC bounds.
Theorem 4 (Best-policy identification). Let ε ∈ (0, H] and δ ∈ (0, 1]. Algorithm 2 provides an
ε-optimal policy within K0 + 1 episodes, where K0 takes the same value as in Theorem 3.

For ε < H/S, the bound K0 is O(H  e 2 SA(log 1 )/ε2 ), which matches the lower bounds for both
                                                 δ
tasks (Domingues et al., 2021). For both tasks, our results exhibit the tightest non-leading term
compared to the previous results. For detailed discussions and proofs of Theorems 3 and 4, refer to
Appendix D.

4.4   S KETCH OF R EGRET A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we provide a sketch of proofs of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. For simplicity, we
denote all logarithmic factors by ℓ in this subsection. The full statements of the proposition and
lemmas with specific logarithmic terms and their detailed proofs are presented in Appendix C.
We propose Proposition 1 that demonstrates the effect of the bonus terms on the cumulative regret.
In this proposition, we introduce an auxiliary sequence of positive real numbers {λk }∞
                                                                                      k=1 and set
ck = 7Hℓ/λk .
Proposition 1. Let {λk }∞ k=1 be a sequence of non-increasing positive real numbers with λ1 ≤ 1.
Suppose Algorithm 1 is run with ck = 7Hℓ/λk for all k ∈ N. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ,
the cumulative regret of K episodes for any K ∈ N is bounded as follows:
                   K                      K
                   X                      X            88
                         Regret(K) ≤ 4H         λk +      HSAℓ2 + 168HS 2 Aℓ2 .
                                                       λK
                   k=1                    k=1


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 1 demonstrates that the exploration-exploitation trade-off can be balanced by the param-
                   PK
eter λk . The term k=1 λk represents the regret incurred due to the estimation error, while the term
proportional to 1/λK represents the regret incurred from exploration. For example, if the values of
{λk }Kk=1 are large, the algorithm runs with smaller bonuses. This reduces the regret caused by ex-
cessive exploration, but the algorithm may exploit sub-optimal policies due to a lack of information,
                         PK
contributing to a larger k=1 λk term. Both Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 followp        from Proposition 1
by setting appropriate values for λk . For Theoremp   1, we set λ k =   min{1, 5    SAℓ2 /K} for all
                                                         2                     ⌊log2 k⌋
k ∈ [K]. For Theorem 2, we set λk = min{1, 5 SAℓ /k2 }, where k2 = 2                    . The proof of
Proposition 1 is sketched throughout the following subsections.

4.4.1    H IGH - PROBABILITY E VENT
We denote the high-probability event under which Proposition 1 holds by E. E is defined as an inter-
section of six high-probability events, including concentration events of transition model estimation
and reward model estimation. Refer to Appendix B for the specific events that constitute E and the
proofs that the events happen with high probability.
Although our algorithm does not use empirical variances, all the concentration results in the analy-
sis are based on Freedman’s inequality (Freedman, 1975). The following lemma is a variant of the
inequality that we use frequently throughout the analysis. While the current presentation focuses on
i.i.d. sequences, it is also applicable to martingales, as shown in Lemma 36 of Appendix F.
Lemma 1. Let C > 0 be a constant and {Xt }∞         t=1 be i.i.d. copies of a random variable X with
X ≤ C. Then, for any λ ∈ (0, 1] and δ ∈ (0, 1], the following inequality holds for all n ∈ N with
probability at least 1 − δ:
                                     n
                                  1X           3λ              C      1
                                        Xt ≤      Var(X) +        log .
                                  n t=1        4C              λn     δ

One advantage of this form is that the variance term andpthe 1/n term are isolated, whereas the
previous Bernstein-type bound includes a term of the form Var /n. While the sum of the variances
achieves a tight bound within the expectation, the 1/n terms must be summed according to actual
visit counts. This discrepancy necessitates the use of multiple concentration
                                                                           p inequalities, alternating
between the expected and sampled trajectories when bounding the sum of Var /n terms. However,
Lemma 1 allows us to address the two factors independently. Refer to Appendix F for more details
about Freedman’s inequality and its derivatives we utilize.

4.4.2    Q UASI - OPTIMISM
Optimism-based analysis begins by showing Vhk (s) ≥ Vh∗ (s) for all s, h, where the use of empirical
variances plays a crucial role (Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Dann
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021a; 2024). However, our bonus term does not contain any empirical
variances. In fact, our bonus term does not guarantee optimism or even probabilistic optimism.
Instead, it guarantees what we name quasi-optimism, meaning that the estimated values are almost
optimistic. Specifically, the estimated values need to be increased by a constant amount to ensure
they exceed the optimal values. In other words, the estimation may be less than the optimal value,
but only by a bounded amount. We formally present our result in Lemma 2.
Lemma 2 (Quasi-optimism). Under E, it holds that for all s ∈ S, h ∈ [H + 1], k ∈ N,
                                               3
                                     Vhk (s) + λk H ≥ Vh∗ (s) .
                                               2
We outline the main ideas behind quasi-optimism. Fix h ∈ [H], s ∈ S, and k ∈ N. For ease of
presentation, we assume that the reward function is known and that Vhk (s) < H. For a∗ := πh∗ (s),
we have Vh∗ (s) = r(s, a∗ ) + P Vh+1
                                   ∗
                                      (s, a∗ ) by the Bellman equation and Vhk (s) ≥ Qkh (s, a∗ ) =
      ∗           ∗               ∗
r(s, a ) + b (s, a ) + P̂ Vh (s, a ) by the definitions of Vhk and Qkh . Therefore, we obtain that
            k            k k

        Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ P Vh+1
                               ∗
                                   (s, a∗ ) − bk (s, a∗ ) − P̂ k Vhk (s, a∗ )
                          = −bk (s, a∗ ) + (P − P̂ k )Vh+1
                                                        ∗
                                                           (s, a∗ ) + P̂ k (Vh+1
                                                                             ∗       k
                                                                                 − Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) .   (1)
                                           |          {z         } |              {z           }
                                                           I1                     I2



                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the previous method of guaranteeing full optimism, one assumes I2 ≤ 0 using mathematical
induction and then faces the challenging task of fully bounding I1 by bk (s, a∗ ). In the proof of
Lemma 2, we set a slightly relaxed induction hypothesis. As a result, I2 may be greater than zero,
while bk (s, a∗ ) no longer needs to fully bound I1 . The key to quasi-optimism is to allow underesti-
mation of I1 , while controlling the resulting increase in I2 . We explain each concept in detail.
                          ∗
Applying Lemma 1 to Vh+1     (s′ ) with s′ ∼ P (·|s, a∗ ), we obtain the following inequality (Lemma 5):
                              ∗                 λk                          3Hℓ
                  (P̂ k − P )Vh+1 (s, a∗ ) ≤            ∗
                                                   Var(Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) +                 .
                                                4H                      λk N k (s, a∗ )
We set bk (s, a∗ ) = λk N3Hℓ
                          k (s,a∗ ) to compensate for the 1/N term, but leave the variance term. Then,

we obtain a recurrence relation of
                                       λk
               Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤               ∗
                                          Var(Vh+1  )(s, a∗ ) + P̂ k (Vh+1
                                                                        ∗        k
                                                                             − Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) .            (2)
                                      4H
We use backward induction on h to obtain a closed-form bound for Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s), specifically,
Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ Wh (s) for some functions {Wh }H       h=1 . To infer what W should look like, we
consider the case where the recurrence term is based on P instead of P̂ k .
                                 λk
If we had Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ 4H           ∗
                                      Var(Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) + P (Vh+1
                                                                 ∗         k
                                                                       − Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ), where P̂ k in Eq. (2)
                                                         ∗          k
is replaced with P , by iteratively expanding the Vh+1 − Vh+1 part, we observe that the expected
sum of the variance terms along a trajectory serves as an upper bound for Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s), that is,
                      λk                PH
Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ 4H   Eπ∗ (·|sh =s) [ j=h Var(Vj+1∗
                                                         )(sj , aj )]. This sum has a non-trivial bound of
   2
H , and this fact has been frequently exploited to achieve better H-dependency in the regret bound
since Azar et al. (2017). However, it has not been used for showing optimism, and furthermore, this
observation relies on the boundedness of returns (see, for example, Eq. (26) of Azar et al. (2017)).
We derive a novel way of bounding the sum of variances without requiring such a condition, which
is applicable to showing quasi-optimism. We first present the following difference-type bound for
the variance (Lemma 27):
                ∗
           Var(Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) ≤ 2HVh∗ (s) − (Vh∗ )2 (s) − P (2HVh+1
                                                                ∗       ∗
                                                                    − (Vh+1 )2 )(s, a∗ ) .
Using this inequality and mathematical induction, one can show that the expected sum of variances
is bounded by 2HVh∗ (s) − (Vh∗ )2 (s), which is at most H 2 . Then, the recurrence relation with P
                                            λk
instead of P̂ k implies Vh∗ (s) − VHk (s) ≤ 4H (2HVh∗ (s) − (Vh∗ )2 (s)).
Now, we deal with the original recurrence relation Eq. (2), where a technical approach is required to
                                                                                              ∗
handle the dependence on P̂ k . Recall that we aim to find functions {Wh }Hh=1 that satisfy Vh (s) −
  k                                                                     ∗        k            k
Vh (s) ≤ Wh (s) under Eq. (2). Assuming an induction hypothesis Vh+1 (s) − Vh+1 (s) ≤ Wh+1        (s)
                             k   ∗        k      ∗
for all s ∈ S, we bound P̂ (Vh+1 − Vh+1 )(s, a ) as follows:
            ∗
     P̂ k (Vh+1    k
                − Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) ≤ P̂ k Wh+1 (s, a∗ ) = (P̂ k − P )Wh+1 (s, a∗ ) + P Wh+1 (s, a∗ ) .
We see that Wh (s) must bound not only the sum of the variance terms but also an addi-
tional error term (P̂ k − P )Wh+1 (s, a∗ ). The demonstration above suggests setting Wh+1 (s) =
λk         ∗              ∗  2
 H (c1 HVh+1 (s) − c2 (Vh+1 ) (s)) for some constants c1 and c2 . Then, since Wh+1 is a function of
   ∗                                                                         ∗
Vh+1 , applying Freedman’s inequality to the error term results in a Var(Vh+1  )(s, a∗ )-related term
and a 1/N (s, a ) term. The 1/N term is compensated by increasing b (s, a∗ ) and the variance
            k    ∗                                                         k

term is merged into the variance term that is already present in the recurrence relation. Then, only
P Wh+1 (s, a∗ ) remains, and we apply the method of bounding the sum of variances explained ear-
lier. Through some technical calculations, we show that the induction argument becomes valid with
c1 = 2 and c2 = 1/2. Then, we have Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ Wh (s) ≤ 32 λk H for all s, h, leading to
Lemma 2. The full demonstration of the induction step is presented in Appendix C.1.

4.4.3    B OUNDING THE C UMULATIVE R EGRET
                           k
We bound V1k (sk1 ) − V1π (sk1 ), the amount of overestimation with respect to the true value function.
Similarly to the previous section, we use Freedman’s inequality and bound the amount of overesti-
mation at a single time step by the sum of a variance term and a term proportional to 1/N k (s, a).
                                          1
We denote the latter by β k (s, a) := N k (s,a) ( 11Hℓ
                                                   λk + 21HSℓ). As in the previous section, the ex-
pected sum of the variance terms is bounded by λk H. Therefore, the amount of overestimation is


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


bounded by the sum of λk H and the expected sum of β k . We define Uhk (s) as the sum of β k along a
trajectory that follows π k starting from state s at time step h with appropriate clipping. Specifically,
      k
let UH+1  (s) := 0 for all s ∈ S, then define Uhk (s) for h = H, H − 1, . . . , 1 iteratively as follows:

                                              Uhk (s) := min{β k (s, πhk (s)) + P Uh+1
                                                                                   k
                                                                                       (s, πhk (s)), H} .
The next lemma states that the amount of overestimation is bounded by the sum of λk H and Uhk .
                                                             k
Lemma 3. Under E, Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ 25 λk H + 2Uhk (s) holds for all s ∈ S, h ∈ [H + 1], and
k ∈ N.
    PN
By n=1 1/n ≤ 1 + log N , the sum of 1/N k (s, a) is well-controlled when the sum is taken over
the sampled trajectories. Using concentration results between the expected and sampled trajectories,
we derive the following bound for the sum of U1k :
                                  PK
Lemma 4. Under E, it holds that k=1 U1k (sk1 ) ≤ λ44K HSAℓ2 + 84HS 2 Aℓ2 for all K ∈ N.

The detailed proofs of Lemma 3 and Lemma 4 can be found in Appendix C.2 and Appendix C.3,
respectively. Proposition 1 is proved by combining Lemmas 2 to 4.

5                    E XPERIMENTS

                                      UCRL2            UCBVI-BF         EULER                              ORLC          MVP            EQO (Ours)
                           ×105      Riverswim S=30, H=120                                                  ×105   Riverswim S=40, H=160
                    12.0                                                                            15.0
                    10.0                                                                            12.5
Cumulative Regret


                                                                                Cumulative Regret


                     8.0                                                                            10.0
                     6.0                                                                             7.5
                     4.0                                                                             5.0
                     2.0                                                                             2.5
                     0.0                                                                             0.0
                           0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6       0.8   1.0                                  0.0    0.2         0.4      0.6    0.8   1.0
                                                Episodes               1e5                                                       Episodes            1e5

                                  Figure 1: Cumulative regret under RiverSwim MDP with varying S and H.

We perform numerical experiments to compare the empirical performance of algorithms for tabu-
lar reinforcement learning. We consider the standard MDP named RiverSwim (Strehl & Littman,
2008; Osband et al., 2013), which is known to be a challenging environment that requires strategic
exploration. We compare our algorithm EQO with previous algorithms, UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010),
UCBVI-BF (Azar et al., 2017), EULER (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019), ORLC (Dann et al., 2019), and
MVP (Zhang et al., 2021a). We run the algorithms on the RiverSwim MDP with various configura-
tions of S and H. The results for S = 30 and S = 40 are presented in Figure 1, where we observe
the superior performance of EQO. Additionally, Table 4 in Appendix G shows that our algorithm also
takes less execution time. We provide experiment details in Appendix G.

6                    C ONCLUSION
Our algorithm EQO simultaneously achieves the minimax regret bound and demonstrates practical
applicability. Our work introduces the concept of quasi-optimism, which relaxes the conventional
optimism principle and plays a pivotal role in achieving both theoretical advancements and practical
improvements. This fresh perspective offers new insights into obtaining minimax regret bounds, and
we anticipate that the underlying idea will be transferable to a wide range of problem settings beyond
tabular reinforcement learning, such as model-free estimation or general function approximation.


                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the complete proofs of the theoretical results presented in Section 4 throughout the
appendix, and the whole set of employed assumptions is clearly stated in Section 4.1. We also
guarantee the reproducibility of the numerical experiments in Section 5 and Appendices G and H.2
by providing the source code with specific seeds as supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by
the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-NR071853 and RS-2023-00222663) and by AI-Bio
Research Grant through Seoul National University.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 1638–1646. PMLR, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal, Yujia Jin, and Tong Zhang. Voql: Towards optimal regret in model-free rl with
  nonlinear function approximation. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
  pp. 987–1063. PMLR, 2023.
Shipra Agrawal and Randy Jia. Posterior sampling for reinforcement learning: worst-case regret
  bounds. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1184–1194, 2017.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
 jun 2013.
Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandit
  algorithms with supervised learning guarantees. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 19–26. JMLR Workshop and Conference
  Proceedings, 2011.
Liyu Chen, Mehdi Jafarnia-Jahromi, Rahul Jain, and Haipeng Luo. Implicit finite-horizon approx-
  imation and efficient optimal algorithms for stochastic shortest path. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 34:10849–10861, 2021.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems,
 Salem Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld:
 Modular & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR,
 abs/2306.13831, 2023.
Christoph Dann and Emma Brunskill. Sample complexity of episodic fixed-horizon reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 30, pp. 5713–5723, 2017.
Christoph Dann, Lihong Li, Wei Wei, and Emma Brunskill. Policy certificates: Towards account-
  able reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1507–1516.
  PMLR, 2019.
Christoph Dann, Teodor Vanislavov Marinov, Mehryar Mohri, and Julian Zimmert. Beyond value-
  function gaps: Improved instance-dependent regret bounds for episodic reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1–12, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Ménard, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko. Episodic rein-
 forcement learning in finite mdps: Minimax lower bounds revisited. In Algorithmic Learning
 Theory, pp. 578–598. PMLR, 2021.

Claude-Nicolas Fiechter. Efficient reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the seventh annual
  conference on Computational learning theory, pp. 88–97, 1994.

Dylan J Foster and Alexander Rakhlin. Foundations of reinforcement learning and interactive deci-
  sion making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16730, 2023.

David A Freedman. On tail probabilities for martingales. the Annals of Probability, pp. 100–118,
  1975.

Jiafan He, Heyang Zhao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement
   learning for linear markov decision processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pp. 12790–12822. PMLR, 2023.

Taehyun Hwang and Min-hwan Oh. Model-based reinforcement learning with multinomial logistic
  function approximation. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol-
  ume 37, pp. 7971–7979, 2023.

Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(4), 2010.

Nan Jiang and Alekh Agarwal. Open problem: The dependence of sample complexity lower bounds
  on planning horizon. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 3395–3398. PMLR, 2018.

Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably ef-
  ficient? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 4868–4878,
  2018.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Sham Machandranath Kakade. On the sample complexity of reinforcement learning. University of
  London, University College London (United Kingdom), 2003.

Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 865–
  891. PMLR, 2021.

Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Pac reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29:1840–1848, 2016.

Cassidy Laidlaw, Stuart Russell, and Anca Dragan. Bridging rl theory and practice with the effective
  horizon. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Joongkyu Lee and Min-hwan Oh. Demystifying linear MDPs and novel dynamics aggregation
  framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Gen Li, Laixi Shi, Yuxin Chen, Yuantao Gu, and Yuejie Chi. Breaking the sample complexity barrier
  to regret-optimal model-free reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17762–17776, 2021.

Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew J. Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.

Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7608. PMLR, 2021a.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Xuedong Shang, and Michal Valko. Ucb momen-
  tum q-learning: Correcting the bias without forgetting. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7609–7618. PMLR, 2021b.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Model-based reinforcement learning and the eluder dimension.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1466–1474, 2014.
Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, and Zheng Wen. Generalization and exploration via randomized
  value functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2377–2386. PMLR, 2016.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, Daniel J Russo, Zheng Wen, et al. Deep exploration via randomized
  value functions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(124):1–62, 2019.
Yi Ouyang, Mukul Gagrani, Ashutosh Nayyar, and Rahul Jain. Learning unknown markov deci-
  sion processes: A thompson sampling approach. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 1333–1342, 2017.
Daniel Russo. Worst-case regret bounds for exploration via randomized value functions. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
David Simchi-Levi, Zeyu Zheng, and Feng Zhu. Stochastic multi-armed bandits: optimal trade-off
  among optimality, consistency, and tail risk. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36:35619–35630, 2023.
David Simchi-Levi, Zeyu Zheng, and Feng Zhu. A simple and optimal policy design with safety
  against heavy-tailed risk for stochastic bandits. Management Science, 2024.
Max Simchowitz and Kevin G Jamieson. Non-asymptotic gap-dependent regret bounds for tabular
 mdps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Alexander L Strehl and Michael L Littman. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for
  markov decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(8):1309–1331, 2008.
Alexander L Strehl, Lihong Li, Eric Wiewiora, John Langford, and Michael L Littman. Pac model-
  free reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 881–888, 2006.
Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. A Bradford Book, 2018.
Daniil Tiapkin, Denis Belomestny, Eric Moulines, Alexey Naumov, Sergey Samsonov, Yunhao
  Tang, Michal Valko, and Pierre Ménard. From dirichlet to rubin: Optimistic exploration in rl
  without bonuses. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21380–21431. PMLR,
  2022.
Andrea Tirinzoni, Aymen Al Marjani, and Emilie Kaufmann. Near instance-optimal pac reinforce-
  ment learning for deterministic mdps. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  8785–8798, 2022.
Andrew Wagenmaker and Kevin G Jamieson. Instance-dependent near-optimal policy identification
  in linear mdps via online experiment design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:5968–5981, 2022.
Andrew J Wagenmaker, Max Simchowitz, and Kevin Jamieson. Beyond no regret: Instance-
  dependent pac reinforcement learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 358–418. PMLR,
  2022.
Yunbei Xu and Assaf Zeevi. Upper counterfactual confidence bounds: a new optimism principle for
  contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07876, 2020.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7304–7312. PMLR, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrea Zanette, David Brandfonbrener, Emma Brunskill, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric.
  Frequentist regret bounds for randomized least-squares value iteration. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1954–1964. PMLR, 2020.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Almost optimal model-free reinforcement learningvia
  reference-advantage decomposition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 33, pp. 15198–15207, 2020.
Zihan Zhang, Xiangyang Ji, and Simon Du. Is reinforcement learning more difficult than bandits?
  a near-optimal algorithm escaping the curse of horizon. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  4528–4531. PMLR, 2021a.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Model-free reinforcement learning: from clipped
  pseudo-regret to sample complexity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12653–12662. PMLR, 2021b.
Zihan Zhang, Yuxin Chen, Jason D Lee, and Simon S Du. Settling the sample complexity of online
  reinforcement learning. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5213–
  5219. PMLR, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Table 2: Table of notations

 Notations for analysis
 K                Number of episodes
 τk               Trajectory of k-th episode, (sk1 , ak1 , R1k , . . . , skH , akH , RH
                                                                                      k
                                                                                        , skH+1 )
 τhk              Partial trajectory of k-th episode up to h-th action selection, (sk1 , ak1 , R1k , . . . , skh , akh )
 Fhk              σ-algebra σ({τ i }k−1          k
                                         i=1 ∪ τh )
 N k (s, a)       Visit count of (s, a) ∈ S × A up to k − 1-th episode
 nkh (s, a)       Visit count of (s, a) ∈ S × A up to h-th time step of k-th episode
 ηk               min{h ∈ [H] : nkh (skh , akh ) > 2N k (skh , akh ), H + 1}
 ∆h (V )(s, a)    Vh (s) − P Vh+1 (s, a)
 ιk               1 when {λk }∞                                                       ∞
                                    k=1 is constant, 1 + ⌊log2 k⌋ when {λk }k=1 changes at powers of two
                       24HSA
 ℓ1               log δ
                       24HSAι2k
 ℓ1,k             log       δ
                                        kH)2
 ℓ′1,k            log 50HSA(1+log δ
 ℓ2,k             log(1 + kH  SA )
 ℓ3,k             log 12SA(1+logδ
                                      kH)

                                      N k (s,a))
 ℓ3,k (s, a)      log 12SA(1+log
                              δ
                      1        11Hℓ1,k
 β k (s, a)         k
                  N (s,a)         λk      +  21HSℓ  3,k (s, a)

                      1        3Hℓ1,k
 β1k (s, a)       N k (s,a)       λk    +   21HSℓ  3,k (s, a)
 Uhk (s)          min{β k (s, πhk (s)) + P Uh+1  k
                                                     (s, πhk (s)), H} if h ∈ [H], 0 if h = H + 1
 Notations exclusive for analysis of PAC bounds
                                    3       H 2 S(2ℓ +ℓ     )
 ℓ4,ε             log(1 + 270( Hε2ℓ1 +         ε
                                                1   5,ε
                                                        ))
 ℓ5,ε             1 + log log(He/ε)

                      1       88H 2 ℓ1
 β̂ k (s, a)      N k (s,a)     ε      + 30HSℓ3,k (s, a)

                      1       88H 2 ℓ1
 β k (s, a)         k
                  N (s,a)       ε      + 73HSℓ3,k (s, a)
 Ûhk (s)                                         k
                  min{β̂ k (s, πhk (s)) + P̂ k Ûh+1 (s, πhk (s)), H} if h ∈ [H], 0 if h = H + 1
 U kh (s)         min{β (s, πh (s)) + P U h+1 (s, πhk (s)), H} if h ∈ [H], 0 if h = H + 1
                         k       k              k

 T̂K              Set of k ∈ [K] that satisfies Û1k (sk1 ) > ε/8
 T̂K              Size of T̂K
 TK               Set of k ∈ [K] that satisfies U k1 (sk1 ) > ε/16
 TK               Size of T K
 N k (s, a)       Visit count of (s, a) ∈ S × A for episodes in T k−1
 nkh (s, a)       Visit count of (s, a) ∈ S × A for episodes in T k , up to h-th time step of k-th episode
 ηk               min{h ∈ [H] : nkh (skh , akh ) > 2N k (skh , akh ), H + 1}


Appendix
A     D EFINITIONS AND N OTATIONS

In this section, we define additional concepts and notations for the analysis. We also provide Ta-
ble 2 for notations defined in this paper. Conventional notations such as S, A, H, Vhπ , or N are
omitted. Notations that are used exclusively for the analysis of the PAC bounds are introduced in
Appendix D.2.
For the well-definedness of some statements in the analysis, we define 1/N k (s, a), P̂ k (s′ |s, a), and
r̂k (s, a) to be +∞ when N k (s, a) = 0 throughout this paper.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For any sequence of H + 1 functions V = {Vh }H+1  h=1 with Vh : S → R, we define ∆h (V )(s, a) :=
Vh (s)−P Vh+1 (s, a). It is similar to the Bellman error, but lacks the reward term. Therefore, for any
policy π, we have ∆h (Vhπ )(s, πh (s)) = Vhπ (s) − P Vh+1 π
                                                             (s, πh (s)) = r(s, πh (s)) for all h ∈ [H]
and s ∈ S.
We define nkh (s, a) to be the number of times the state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A is visited up to the
h-th time step of the k-th episode, inclusively. To handle some exceptional cases more conveniently,
we define η k to be the first time step h such that nkh (skh , akh ) > 2N k (skh , akh ) occurs in the k-th
episode for k ∈ N. In other words, η k is the first time step where the number of times a state-
action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A is visited during the k-th episode exceeds N k (s, a). We define η k to be
H + 1 if there is no such time step. η k is a stopping time with respect to {Fhk }H+1h=1 , that is, we have
{η k = h} ∈ Fhk for all h ∈ [H + 1].
The input {ck }∞k=1 of Algorithm 1 depends on a sequence of non-increasing positive numbers,
{λk }∞
     k=1 . We mainly consider two cases where λk is fixed for all k ∈ N and λk changes only
at powers of 2, i.e., λk ̸= λk−1 only when k = 2m for some positive integer m. We let ιk denote
the (maximum possible) number of distinct values in λ1 , . . . , λk . Specifically, in the first case where
λk is fixed, we set ιk := 1 for all k ∈ N. In the second case where λk rarely changes, we set
ιk := 1 + ⌊log2 k⌋.
Several different logarithmic terms appear in the analysis.              For simplicity, we define
            24HSAι2k                   kH                     12SA(1+log kH)
ℓ1,k := log    δ     , ℓ2,k := log(1 + SA ), and ℓ 3,k := log       δ        . We overload the defini-
                                                                                k
tion of ℓ3,k to be a function on S × A with ℓ3,k (s, a) := log 12SA(1+log
                                                                       δ
                                                                          N (s,a))
                                                                                   . Additionally, we
                                          2
define ℓ′1,K := log 50HSA(1+log
                           δ
                                KH)
                                    , which serves as an upper bound for max{ℓ1,K , ℓ3,K }.
We rigorously define β k and Uhk introduced in Section 4.4.3.

                       k              1       11Hℓ1,k
                     β (s, a) := k                      + 21HSℓ3,k (s, a) .
                                   N (s, a)      λk
Uhk (s) is the clipped expectation of the sum of β k under π k , defined as follows:
                 k
                UH+1 (s) := 0
                Uhk (s) := min β k (s, πhk (s)) + P Uh+1
                                                     k
                                                         (s, πhk (s)), H

                                                                            for h ∈ [H] .

B    H IGH - PROBABILITY E VENTS
In this section, we define the events required for the analysis and show that they hold with high
probability. Throughout this section, we assume δ ∈ (0, 1] and set δ ′ := δ/6, and let {λk }∞
                                                                                            k=1 be a
fixed sequence of positive real numbers with λk ≤ 1 for all k.
Lemma 5. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ ,
                                  ∗              λk      ∗               3Hℓ1,k
                      (P̂ k − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤      Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +
                                                 4H                    λk N k (s, a)
holds for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N.

Proof. Fix (s, a) ∈ S ×A, h ∈ [H], and λ′ ∈ (0, 1]. Suppose {st }∞  t=1 is a sequence of i.i.d. samples
                                     ∗             ∗
drawn from P (·|s, a). Let Xt = Vh+1    (st ) − P Vh+1 (s, a). Then, |Xt | ≤ H holds almost surely,
                                   ∗
E[Xt ] = 0, and E[Xt2 ] = Var(Vh+1    )(s, a). Applying Lemma 36 on {Xt }∞                      ′
                                                                               t=1 with λ = λ /3, the
                                                                         ′
following inequality holds for all n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ :
                             n
                             X            λ′ n      ∗            3H     1
                                   Xt ≤        Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + ′ log ′ .
                             t=1
                                          4H                      λ    δ
Dividing both sides by n yields
                  n
              1X                    ∗             λ′      ∗            3H     1
                    Xt = (P̂n − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤     Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + ′ log ′ ,
              n t=1                              4H                    λn    δ


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                       Pn
where P̂n (s′ |s, a) := t=1 1{st = s′ }/n is the empirical mean of P (s′ |s, a) based on n samples.
Repeating the same process for −Xt , then taking the union bound over the two results, as well as
over all (s, a) ∈ S × A and h ∈ [H] yields that

                              ∗                  λ′      ∗            3H     2HSA
                   (P̂n − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤          Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + ′ log
                                                4H                    λn       δ′
holds for all n ∈ N, (s, a) ∈ S × A, and h ∈ [H] with probability at least 1 − δ ′ . Now, let λ′1 , λ′2 , . . .
be the subsequence of {λk }∞                                                                     ′
                               k=1 obtained by removing repetitions. In other words, we have λιk = λk
P∞all k′ ∈ N.
for               We take the union bound over {λ′i }i by assigning probability δ ′ /(2i2 ) for λ′i . By
   i=1 δ /(2i 2
                ) ≤ δ ′ , we have that with probability at least 1 − δ ′ ,

                             ∗                 λ′i      ∗            3H     4HSAi2
                  (P̂n − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤          Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + ′ log                                (3)
                                               4H                    λi n     δ′
holds for all n ∈ N, (s, a) ∈ S × A, h ∈ [H], and i ∈ N. For any k ∈ N, by taking n = N k (s, a)
and i = ιk , inequality (3) implies

                         ∗                 λk      ∗                 3H            4HSAι2k
             (P̂ k − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤         Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +               log         .
                                           4H                    λk N k (s, a)       δ′
Replacing δ ′ with δ/6, the logarithmic term becomes log(24HSAι2k /δ) = ℓ1,k , completing the
proof.
Lemma 6. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ ,

                                   ∗                 1      ∗            6H 2 ℓ1,k
                      (P − P̂ k )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤     Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + k
                                                     2                   N (s, a)
holds for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N.

Proof. Fix (s, a) ∈ S × A and h ∈ [H]. Let {st }∞    t=1 be a sequence of i.i.d. samples from P (·|s, a)
                      ∗                 ∗
and define Xt = P (Vh+1   )2 (s, a) − (Vh+1 )2 (st ), similarly to the proof of Lemma 5. Then, |Xt | ≤
H 2 holds almost surely, E[Xt ] = 0, and
                                         ∗                          ∗
                         E[Xt2 ] = Var((Vh+1 )2 )(s, a) ≤ 4H 2 Var(Vh+1 )(s, a)
holds for all t ∈ N, where we use Lemma 35 for the inequality. Applying Lemma 36 with λ = 1/6,
the following inequality holds for all n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ :
                              n
                              X            n      ∗                      1
                                    Xt ≤     Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + 6H 2 log ′ .
                              t=1
                                           2                            δ
                     ∗                 ∗
Plugging in Xt = P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) − (Vh+1 )2 (st ) and dividing both sides by n yields

                                ∗                  1      ∗             6H 2     1
                    (P − P̂n )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤      Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +      log ′ ,
                                                   2                     n      δ
                        Pn
where P̂n (s′ |s, a) :=              ′
                         t=1 1{st = s }/n. Taking the union bound over (s, a) ∈ S × A and
h ∈ [H], we obtain that

                               ∗                  1      ∗             6H 2     HSA
                   (P − P̂n )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤      Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +      log
                                                  2                     n        δ′
holds for all n ∈ N, (s, a) ∈ S × A, and h ∈ [H] with probability at least 1 − δ ′ . Replacing δ ′ with
δ/6, the logarithmic term becomes log(6HSA/δ), which is less than ℓ1,k = log(24HSAι2k /δ) for
any k ∈ N. The proof is completed by taking n = N k (s, a) for each k ∈ N.
Lemma 7. The following inequality holds with probability at least 1 − δ ′ for any (s, a) ∈ S × A,
s′ ∈ S, and k ∈ N:
                                              s
                k ′               ′             2P (s′ | s, a)ℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
              P̂ (s | s, a) − P (s | s, a) ≤ 2                           +
                                                       N k (s, a)          3N k (s, a)

                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Fix (s, a) ∈ S × A and s′ ∈ S. We write p := P (s′ |s, a) for simplicity. Suppose {st }∞       t=1 is
a sequence of i.i.d. samples drawn from P (·|s, a). Let Xt = 1{st = s′ } − p. Note that E[Xt ] = 0
and E[Xt2 ] = p(1 − p). Applying Lemma 37 with c = p(1 − p), the following inequality holds for
all n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ :
                    n
                              r
                  X                             2(1 + log n)2         1      2(1 + log n)2
                      Xt ≤ 2 p(1 − p)n log                        +      log                .
                  t=1
                                                        δ′            3            δ′
                               Pn
We apply the same bound on t=1 −Xt , then take the union bound. Further, we bound p(1−p) ≤ p
and obtain that
                       n
                                   r
                      X                       4(1 + log n)2        1       4(1 + log n)2
                           Xt ≤ 2 pn log              ′
                                                               + log                                      (4)
                      t=1
                                                    δ              3            δ′
                                                                              Pn
holds for all n ∈ N with probability at least 1−δ ′ . Let P̂n (s′ |s, a) := t=1 1{s′ = st }/n. Dividing
both sides of inequality (4) by n, we obtain that
                                       r
           ′              ′               P (s′ | s, a)      4(1 + log n)2         1      4(1 + log n)2
     P̂n (s | s, a) − P (s | s, a) ≤ 2                   log           ′
                                                                               +      log               .
                                                n                    δ            3n           δ′
By taking the union bound over (s, a, s′ ) ∈ S × A × S, the logarithmic terms
become log(4S 2 A(1 + log n)2 /δ ′ ), which is bounded by log(4S 2 A2 (1 + log n)2 /δ ′2 ) =
2 log(2SA(1 + log n)/δ ′ ). Therefore, we obtain that
                                    r
        ′              ′               2P (s′ | s, a)       2SA(1 + log n)          2      2SA(1 + log n)
  P̂n (s | s, a) − P (s | s, a) ≤ 2                     log                     +      log
                                              n                      δ′            3n             δ′
                                                                                                          (5)
holds for all n ∈ N, (s, a, s′ ) ∈ S × A × S with probability at least 1 − δ ′ . Finally, by taking
n = N k (s, a) for any k ∈ N, inequality (5) implies
     P̂ k (s′ | s, a) − P (s′ | s, a)
          s
             2P (s′ | s, a)      2SA(1 + log N k (s, a))       2           2SA(1 + log N k (s, a))
     ≤2                      log                         +             log
                N k (s, a)                δ′               3N k (s, a)              δ′
          s
             2P (s′ | s, a)ℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
     =2                               +             ,
                     N k (s, a)         3N k (s, a)
where we use that log(2SA(1 + log N k (s, a))/δ ′ ) = log(12SA(1 + log N k (s, a))/δ) = ℓ3,k (s, a).

Lemma 8. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ , the following inequality holds for all (s, a) ∈ S × A
and k ∈ N:
                                                                Hℓ1,k
                      r̂k (s, a) − r(s, a) ≤ λk r(s, a) +                  ,
                                                             λk N k (s, a)

Proof. Fix (s, a) ∈ S × A and λ′ ∈ (0, 1]. Let {Rt }∞   t=1 be a sequence of rewards obtained by
choosing (s, a). Let Xt = Rt −r(s, a). By Assumptions 1 and 2, {Xt }∞    t=1 is a martingale difference
sequence with |Xt | ≤ H almost surely for all t. For simplicity, let Et be the conditional expectation
conditioned on {Xi }ti=1 . Then, by Lemma 36 with λ = λ′ , it holds with probability 1 − δ ′ that
                               n             n
                               X         λ′ X           H        1
                                    Xt ≤        Et−1 Xt2 + ′ log ′
                                t=1
                                         H  t=1
                                                          λ     δ
for all n ∈ N, where we bound 3/4 with 1 for simplicity. We proceed by using that for a ran-
dom variable with 0 ≤ X ≤ H, it holds that Var(X) ≤ E[X 2 ] ≤ HE[X], which implies that
Et−1 [Xt2 ] = Var(Rt ) ≤ HEt−1 [Rt ] = Hr(s, a). Therefore, we obtain that
                                   n
                                   X                          H       1
                                         Xt ≤ λ′ nr(s, a) +     ′
                                                                  log ′ .
                                   t=1
                                                              λ      δ


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dividing both sides by n, we derive that with probability at least 1 − δ ′ ,
                             n
                     1X                                              H       1
                            Xt = r̂n (s, a) − r(s, a) ≤ λ′ r(s, a) + ′ log ′
                     n t=1                                          λn      δ
                                    Pn
holds for all n ∈ N, where r̂n := t=1 Rt /n is the empirical mean of n random rewards. Repeat
the process for −Xt instead of Xt , then take the union bound over the two events and over all
(s, a) ∈ S × A and λk , as in the final steps of the proof of Lemma 5. Then, we obtain that
                                                                    H           4SAι2k
                        r̂k (s, a) − r(s, a) ≤ λk r(s, a) +                 log
                                                                    k
                                                                λk N (s, a)       δ′
holds for all (s, a) ∈ S × A and k ∈ N. The proof is completed by upper bounding the logarithmic
term log(4SAι2k /δ ′ ) by ℓ1,k = log(24HSAι2k /δ).
Lemma 9. Let η k and Uhk (·) be defined as in Appendix A. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ , the
following inequality holds for all K ∈ N:
          k                                                        k
      −1
   K ηX                                                  K η −1
   X
                   k                                   1 XX                                    6
                       (skh , akh ) − Uh+1
                                       k
                                           (skh+1 ) ≤                k
                                                                         )(skh , akh ) + 3H log .

                P Uh+1                                          Var(Uh+1
                                                      4H                                       δ
   k=1 h=1                                                    k=1 h=1


Proof. Let Xhk = 1{h < η k }(P Uh+1   k
                                          (skh , akh ) − Uh+1
                                                           k
                                                               (skh+1 )). We have 1{h < η k } ∈ Fhk
and (P Uh+1 (sh , ah ) − Uh+1 (sh+1 )) ∈ Fh+1 , and hence Xhk ∈ Fh+1
           k     k  k       k     k             k                          k
                                                                              . Furthermore, we have
E[Xh |Fh ] = 0 since sh+1 ∼ P (·|sh , ah ) is independent of Fh . Therefore, {Xhk }k,h is a mar-
     k   k               k            k   k                            k

tingale difference sequence with respect to {Fhk }k,h . We have |Xhk | ≤ H almost surely and
E[(Xhk )2 |Fhk ] = 1{h < η k } Var(Uh+1
                                    k
                                        )(skh , akh ). Using Lemma 36 with λ = 1/3, we obtain that
                 H
               K X                       K       H
               X                   1 XX                                             1
                         Xhk ≤          1{h < η k } Var(Uh+1
                                                         k
                                                             )(skh , akh ) + 3H log ′
                                  4H                                               δ
               k=1 h=1                k=1 h=1

holds for all K ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ , which is equivalent to the desired result.
Lemma 10. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ , the following inequality holds for all K ∈ N:
      k
    −1
 K ηX                                                            K η k −1
 X
                  k                                           1X X                                   6
                      )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                          k
                                              )2 (skh+1 )               k
                                                                            )(skh , akh ) + 6H 2 log

              P (Uh+1                                       ≤      Var(Uh+1
                                                              2                                      δ
 k=1 h=1                                                        k=1 h=1


Proof. Let Xhk = 1{h < η k }(P (Uh+1
                                  k
                                      )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                                          k
                                                              )2 (skh+1 )). For the same reason as in the
proof of Lemma 9, {Xhk }k,h is a martingale difference sequence with respect to {Fhk }k,h . We have
|Xhk | ≤ H 2 almost surely and
    E[(Xhk )2 |Fhk ] = 1{h < η k } Var((Uh+1
                                         k
                                             )2 )(skh , akh ) ≤ 1{h < η k }4H 2 Var(Uh+1
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         )(skh , akh ) ,
where we use Lemma 35 for the inequality. Using Lemma 36 with λ = 1/6, we obtain that
                K X
                  H                  K       H
                X                 1 XX                                               1
                          Xhk ≤        1{h < η k } Var(Uh+1
                                                        k
                                                            )(skh , akh ) + 6H 2 log ′
                                  2                                                 δ
                k=1 h=1             k=1 h=1

holds for all K ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ , which is equivalent to the desired result.

Now, we define the event E, under which Theorems 1 and 2 hold.
Lemma 11. Let E be the intersection of the events of Lemmas 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Then, E occurs
with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. By each of the lemmas and the union bound, E happens with probability at least 1 − 6δ ′ =
1 − δ.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS 1 AND 2

In this section, we provide the full proofs of Theorems 1 and 2. We begin by restating Proposition 1
with specific logarithmic terms. The proof of the proposition is identical to the one presented in
Section 4.4. Lemmas used to prove this proposition are also proved in this section.
Proposition 2 (Restatement of Proposition 1). Let {λk }∞ k=1 be a sequence of non-increasing posi-
tive real numbers with λ1 ≤ 1. Suppose Algorithm 1 is run with ck = 7Hℓ1,k /λk . Then, under the
event of E, the cumulative regret of K episodes is bounded as follows for any K ∈ N:
                         K
                         X            88H
       Regret(K) ≤ 4H          λk +       SAℓ1,K ℓ2,K + 168HS 2 Aℓ2,K ℓ3,K + 6HSAℓ1,K .
                                       λK
                         k=1


Proof. The inequality holds by Lemmas 2, 3, and 14, where the last lemma is a restatement of
Lemma 4 with specific logarithmic factors.

Theorems 1 and 2 are proved by assigning appropriate values for λk in Proposition 2.

                                         p
Proof of Theorem 1. Take λk = min{1, 5 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K /K} for all k ∈ [K]. We apply Proposition 2.
First, we bound the sum of λk for k ∈ [K] as follows:
                                    K                 r
                                   X                    SAℓ1 ℓ2,K
                               4H      λk ≤ 4HK · 5
                                                          K
                                   k=1
                                                  p
                                          = 20H SAKℓ1 ℓ2,K .
We also have that
                                                    (     s         )
                    88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K                        1     K
                                 = 88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K max 1,
                        λK                              5 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K
                                                       s         !
                                                     1      K
                                 ≤ 88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K 1 +
                                                     5 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K
                                                      p
                                 = 88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K + 18H SAKℓ1 ℓ2,K .                               (6)
By Proposition 2, the cumulative regret of K episodes is bounded as follows:

     Regret(K) ≤ 38H SAKℓ1 ℓ2,K + 168HS 2 Aℓ2,K ℓ3,K + 88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K + 6HSAℓ1 .
                        p

                                                                                                  2
We further bound the last three terms into a simpler form. Recall that ℓ′1,K = log 50HSA(1+log
                                                                                          δ
                                                                                               KH)

and that both ℓ1 ≤ ℓ′1,K and ℓ3,K ≤ ℓ′1,K hold. Therefore, we bound the terms as follows:

                    168HS 2 Aℓ2,K ℓ3,K + 88HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K + 6HSAℓ1
                     ≤ 168HS 2 Aℓ′1,K ℓ2,K + 88HSAℓ′1,K ℓ2,K + 6HSAℓ′1,K
                     ≤ 168HS 2 Aℓ′1,K ℓ2,K + 88HSAℓ′1,K (1 + ℓ2,K )
                     ≤ 256HS 2 Aℓ′1,K (1 + ℓ2,K ) .                                              (7)



Proof of Theorem 2. Fix k ∈ N momentarily. Let m be the greatest integer such that 2m ≤ k.
                       ∞
         p that {λk }k=1 is non-increasing, so that Proposition 2 is applicable. We take λk =
We first show
min{1, 5 SAℓ1,2m ℓ2,2m /2m }. Taking C = log(24HSA/δ) and defining f (m) as in Lemma 33,
              p
we have λk = f (m) and the conclusion of the lemma implies that {λk }∞ k=1 is non-increasing.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                               m
                    pk for k ∈ [K]. Note that ℓ1,2 ≤ ℓ1,k , ℓ2,2 ≤ ℓ2,k , and 2 ≥ k/2 hold,
We bound the sum of λ                             m             m

hence we have λk ≤ 5 2SAℓ1,k ℓ2,k /k. Therefore, we derive that

                                   K               K     r
                                   X               X          2SAℓ1,k ℓ2,k
                              4H         λk ≤ 4H         5
                                                                  k
                                   k=1             k=1
                                                                          K      r
                                                   p                      X          1
                                           ≤ 20H        2SAℓ1,K ℓ2,K
                                                                                     k
                                                                          k=1
                                                   p
                                           ≤ 40H        2SAKℓ1,K ℓ2,K
                                                   p
                                           ≤ 57H        SAKℓ1,K ℓ2,K ,
                     PK               √
where we use that k=1 k −1/2 ≤ 2 K for the penultimate inequality. By the same steps as in
inequality (6) of the proof of Theorem 1, we have that

                  88HSAℓ1,K ℓ2,K                       p
                                 ≤ 88HSAℓ1,K ℓ2,K + 18H SAKℓ1,K ℓ2,K .
                      λK
By Proposition 2, the cumulative regret of K episodes is bounded as follows for all K ∈ N:

  Regret(K) ≤ 75H SAKℓ1,K ℓ2,K + 168HS 2 ℓ2,K ℓ3,K + 88HSAℓ1,K ℓ2,K + 6HSAℓ1,K .
                      p

Using inequality (7) in the proof of Theorem 1, the sum of the last three terms is upper bounded by
256HS 2 Aℓ′1,K (1 + ℓ2,K ), completing the proof.

C.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

In this subsection, we prove Lemma 2, which states that our algorithm exhibits quasi-optimism.


                                                                                               1 2
Proof of Lemma 2. Elementary calculus implies that for x ∈ [0, H], the bound 0 ≤ 2x − 2H         x ≤
3
2 H holds. Therefore, it is sufficient to prove the following stronger   inequality, which we prove by
backward induction on h:

                                                              1
                        Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ λk 2Vh∗ (s) −        (Vh∗ )2 (s) .
                                                             2H

The inequality trivially holds for h = H + 1 as both sides are 0 in this case. We suppose the
inequality holds for h + 1 and show that it holds for h. Since the right-hand side is greater than
or equal to 0, the inequality trivially holds when Vhk (s) = H. Suppose Vhk (s) < H. Denoting
a := πhk (s) and a∗ := πh∗ (s), we have that

            Vhk (s) = Qkh (s, a) ≥ Qkh (s, a∗ ) = r̂k (s, a∗ ) + bk (s, a∗ ) + P̂ k Vh+1
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         (s, a∗ ) ,

where the first inequality holds by the choice of a = argmaxa′ ∈A Qkh (s, a′ ) of the algorithm, and
the last equality holds since Qkh (s, a∗ ) ≤ Vhk (s) < H. We bound Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) as follows:

    Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ r(s, a∗ ) + P Vh+1 ∗
                                             (s, a∗ ) − r̂k (s, a∗ ) + bk (s, a∗ ) + P̂ k Vh+1
                                                                                           k
                                                                                               (s, a∗ )
                     = −bk (s, a∗ ) + r(s, a∗ ) − r̂k (s, a∗ ) + P Vh+1
                                                                    ∗
                                                                        (s, a∗ ) − P̂ k Vh+1
                                                                                         k
                                                                                             (s, a∗ ) .   (8)
                                      |         {z          } |                  {z                }
                                                   I1                                    I2

I1 is bounded by Lemma 8 as follows:

                                                                Hℓ1,k
                                    I1 ≤ λk r(s, a∗ ) +                      .                            (9)
                                                             λk N k (s, a∗ )


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We bound I2 as follows:
                               ∗
             I2 = (P − P̂ k )Vh+1 (s, a∗ ) + P̂ k (Vh+1
                                                     ∗         k
                                                          − Vh+1  )(s, a∗ )

                               ∗                                    1
                ≤ (P − P̂ k )Vh+1 (s, a∗ ) + λk P̂ k 2Vh+1  ∗
                                                                −         ∗
                                                                       (Vh+1   )2 (s, a∗ )
                                                                  2H

                               ∗                                            1
                = (P − P̂ k )Vh+1 (s, a∗ ) + λk (P̂ k − P ) 2Vh+1  ∗
                                                                       −           ∗
                                                                                (Vh+1  )2 (s, a∗ )
                                                                           2H

                                 ∗         1
                    + λk P 2Vh+1      −      (V ∗ )2 (s, a∗ )
                                         2H h+1
                                          ∗                λk
                = (1 − 2λk )(P − P̂ k )Vh+1   (s, a∗ ) +                      ∗
                                                               (P − P̂ k )(Vh+1   )2 (s, a∗ )
                                                           2H
                                 ∗         1      ∗
                    + λk P 2Vh+1 −           (V      ) (s, a∗ ) ,
                                                       2
                                                                                                         (10)
                                         2H h+1
                                                  ∗
where the first equality adds and subtracts P̂ k Vh+1 (s, a∗ ), the next inequality is due to the induction
                                                                      ∗         ∗
hypothesis, and the following equality adds and subtracts P (2Vh+1         − (Vh+1   )2 /(2H)). We bound
the first two terms using the concentration events. Since 0 ≤ λk ≤ 1, we have |1 − 2λk | ≤ 1. Using
                                   ∗               λk                            3Hℓ1,k
Lemma 5, we have |(P − P̂ k )Vh+1     (s, a∗ )| ≤ 4H   Var(Vh+1 ∗
                                                                   )(s, a∗ ) + λk N k (s,a∗ ) . By Lemma 6,

                     ∗                                              6H 2 ℓ
we have (P − P̂ k )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a∗ ) ≤ Var(Vh+1
                                            ∗
                                                )(s, a∗ )/2 + N k (s,a1,k∗ ) . Plugging in these bounds into
inequality (10), we obtain that
          λk       ∗                  3Hℓ1,k            λk                       3Hλk ℓ1,k
      I2 ≤   Var(Vh+1  )(s, a∗ ) +                  +             ∗
                                                           Var(Vh+1  )(s, a∗ ) + k
          4H                       λk N k (s, a∗ ) 4H                            N (s, a∗ )

                       ∗         1    ∗
           + λk P 2Vh+1 −          (V    ) (s, a∗ )
                                           2
                               2H h+1

          λk       ∗         ∗        6Hℓ1,k                    ∗       1      ∗
        ≤    Var(Vh+1 )(s, a ) +                    + λk P 2Vh+1 −         (V     ) (s, a∗ )
                                                                                   2
          2H                       λk N k (s, a∗ )                     2H h+1
          λk         ∗                                                               6Hℓ1,k
                        )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                                         ∗
                                              )2 (s, a∗ ) + 2λk P Vh+1
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       (s, a∗ ) +

        =     Var(Vh+1                                                                            ,
          2H                                                                      λk N k (s, a∗ )
where the second inequality applies λk ≤ 1/λk from λk ≤ 1. By Lemma 27, we have
      ∗
Var(Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                         ∗
                             )2 (s, a∗ ) ≤ −(Vh∗ )2 (s) + 2H max{∆h (V ∗ )(s, a∗ ), 0}, where in this
case we have ∆h (V )(s, a ) = r(s, a∗ ). Therefore, we obtain that
                    ∗     ∗


                        λk                                                       6Hℓ1,k
               I2 ≤ −      (V ∗ )2 (s) + λk r(s, a∗ ) + 2λk P Vh+1
                                                               ∗
                                                                   (s, a∗ ) +                 .          (11)
                        2H h                                                  λk N k (s, a∗ )
Combining inequalities (8), (9), and (11) together, we complete the induction step as follows:
                                                        Hℓ1,k
 Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ −bk (s, a∗ ) + λk r(s, a∗ ) +
                                                     λk N k (s, a∗ )
                           λk                                                         6Hℓ1,k
                         −     (V ∗ )2 (s) + λk r(s, a∗ ) + 2λk P Vh+1
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       (s, a∗ ) +
                           2H h                                                   λk N k (s, a∗ )
                                         7Hℓ1,k                                             λk
                    = −bk (s, a∗ ) +                 + 2λk (r(s, a∗ ) + P Vh+1
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                (s, a∗ )) −     (V ∗ )2 (s)
                                           k
                                     λk N (s, a )∗                                          2H h

                                         1
                    = λk 2Vh∗ (s) −        (Vh∗ )2 (s) ,
                                        2H
where the last inequality uses                that    bk (s, a∗ )      =     7Hℓ1,k /(λk N k (s, a∗ ))   and
r(s, a∗ ) + P Vh+1
               ∗
                   (s, a∗ ) = Vh∗ (s).

C.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

To prove this lemma, we need the following two technical lemmas.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 12. For any s ∈ S, h ∈ [H + 1], and k ∈ N, define Vehk (s) := Vhk (s) − Vh∗ (s). Under the
event E, the following inequality holds for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N:
                                      λk      ∗              1
        (P̂ k − P )Vh+1
                    k
                        (s, a) ≤         Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +           k
                                                                Var(Veh+1 )(s, a) + β1k (s, a) ,
                                      4H                    10H
                        1
where β1k (s, a) := N k (s,a) (3Hℓ1,k /λk + 21HSℓ3,k (s, a)).

                                       ∗
Proof. We add and subtract (P̂ k − P )Vh+1 (s, a) and then use the triangle inequality to obtain
                                                     ∗                           ∗
       (P̂ k − P )Vh+1
                   k
                       (s, a) ≤ (P̂ k − P ) Vh+1
                                             k
                                                           (s, a) + (P̂ k − P )Vh+1

                                                  − Vh+1                            (s, a) .
                               |               {z                } |          {z          }
                                                     I1                                I2

                              λk      ∗
By Lemma 5, I2 is bounded by 4H  Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) + 3Hℓ1,k /(λk N k (s, a)). To bound I1 , we
apply Lemma 29 with ρ = 10 and obtain
                                     1        k             21HSℓ3,k (s, a)
                             I1 ≤       Var(Veh+1 )(s, a) +                 .
                                    10H                       N k (s, a)
Putting these bounds together, we conclude that

    (P̂ k − P )Vh+1
                k
                    (s, a)

     λk      ∗              1        k                  1                    3Hℓ1,k
   ≤    Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +     Var(Veh+1 )(s, a) + k                                + 21HSℓ3,k (s, a)
     4H                    10H                     N (s, a)                   λk
     λk      ∗              1        k
   =    Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +     Var(Veh+1 )(s, a) + β1k (s, a) .
     4H                    10H


Lemma 13. Under the event E, the following inequality holds for all s ∈ S, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N:
                        k
         ∆h (V k − V π )(s, a)
                                                          2 !
                         ∗      1   ∗ 2    1     k 3
         ≤ ∆h λk 3V −             (V ) −       Ve + λk H      (s, a) + 2β k (s, a) ,                  (12)
                               2H         5H       2
                                         1
where a := πhk (s) and β k (s, a) := N k (s,a) (11Hℓ1,k /λk + 21HSℓ3,k (s, a)).

Proof. We begin as follows:
                      k                                       k                πk

         ∆h (V k − V π )(s, a) = Vhk (s) − P Vh+1
                                                k
                                                    (s, a) − Vhπ (s) − P Vh+1     (s, a)

                               ≤ r̂k (s, a) + bk (s, a) + (P̂ k − P )Vh+1
                                                                      k
                                                                          (s, a) − r(s, a)
                                    = bk (s, a) + (r̂k (s, a) − r(s, a)) + (P̂ k − P )Vh+1
                                                                                       k
                                                                                           (s, a) .
                                                                              Hℓ
By Lemma 8, we have that r̂k (s, a) − r(s, a) ≤ λk r(s, a) + λk N k1,k
                                                                    (s,a)
                                                                          . By Lemma 12, it
              k       k          λk        ∗            1        k
holds that (P̂ − P )V   (s, a) ≤
                       h+1          Var(V4H   )(s, a) +
                                                    h+1    Var(V
                                                               e
                                                                   10H )(s, a) + β k (s, a). De-
                                                                               h+1             1
                                    πk
fine I1 := max{∆h (V − V )(s, a), 0}. Combining the bounds and using that β k (s, a) =
                         k

bk (s, a) + β1k (s, a) + Hℓ1,k /(λk N k (s, a)) holds by definition, we obtain
                                λk      ∗              1        k
           I1 ≤ λk r(s, a) +       Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) +     Var(Veh+1 )(s, a) + β k (s, a) .            (13)
                                4H                    10H
                             ∗                             ∗
Applying Lemma 27 to Var(Vh+1   )(s, a), we have that Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) ≤ −∆h ((V ∗ )2 )(s, a) +
             ∗                                             ∗
2H max{∆h (V )(s, a), 0}. Since Lemma 28 states that ∆h (V )(s, a) ≥ 0, we infer that
                         ∗
                    Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) ≤ −∆h ((V ∗ )2 )(s, a) + 2H∆h (V ∗ )(s, a) .                     (14)


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Lemma 2, we have Vehk + 32 λk H ≥ 0 for all h ∈ [H + 1]. Applying Lemma 27 to
      k
Var(Veh+1                 k
          )(s, a) = Var(Veh+1 + 32 λk H)(s, a), we obtain that
                                                            2 !
            k      3                            k   3
   Var Vh+1 + λk H (s, a) ≤ −∆h
          e                                   V + λk H
                                              e                 (s, a)
                   2                                2

                                                                       k 3
                                      + (2H + 3λk H) max ∆h V + λk H (s, a), 0 .
                                                                     e
                                                                         2
We bound ∆h (Ve k + 32 λk H)(s, a) as follows:

                              3
                 ∆h V + λk H (s, a) = ∆h (Ve k )(s, a)
                        e k
                              2
                                                = ∆h (V k )(s, a) − ∆h (V ∗ )(s, a)
                                                ≤ ∆h (V k )(s, a) − r(s, a)
                                                                              k
                                                = ∆h (V k )(s, a) − ∆h (V π )(s, a)
                                                                 k
                                                = ∆h (V k − V π )(s, a) ,
where the inequality is due to Lemma 28. Therefore, by the definition of I1 , we obtain that
max{∆h (Ve k + 32 λk H)(s, a), 0} ≤ I1 and conclude that
                                                           2 !
              k      3                             k  3
      Var Vh+1 + λk H (s, a) ≤ −∆h
            e                                   V + λk H
                                                 e             (s, a) + (2H + 3λk H)I1
                     2                                2
                                                           2 !
                                                   k  3
                                    ≤ −∆h       Ve + λk H      (s, a) + 5HI1 ,          (15)
                                                      2

where we use λk ≤ 1 for the last inequality. Plugging inequalities (14) and (15) into inequality (13),
then applying r(s, a) ≤ ∆h (V ∗ )(s, a∗ ) by Lemma 28, we obtain that
                                                                 2 !
                      3 ∗     1                 1          3                               1
     I1 ≤ ∆h λk         V −       (V ∗ )2 −          Ve k + λk        (s, a) + β k (s, a) + I1 .
                      2      4H               10H          2                               2
Solving the inequality with respect to I1 implies inequality (12).

Now, we are ready to prove Lemma 3.

Proof of Lemma 3. For notational simplicity, we define the following quantity:
                                                                 2                2 !
                     ∗        1     ∗ 2          1       3               k     3
    Dh (s) := λk 3Vh (s) −       (V ) (s) +                λk H − Vh (s) + λk H
                                                                       e              .
                             2H h               5H       2                     2

For x ∈ [0, H], the bound 0 ≤ 3x − x2 /(2H) ≤ 25 H holds. Similarly, for c ∈ [0, 32 H] and
y ∈ [−H, H], we have c2 − (y + c)2 = −y 2 − 2cy and −4H 2 ≤ −y 2 − 2cy ≤ 0. Therefore, by
setting x = Vh∗ (s), y = Vehk (s), and c = 23 λk H, we obtain that − 45 H ≤ Dh (s) ≤ 52 λk H for all
h ∈ [H] and s ∈ S.
To prove the lemma, we prove the following stronger inequality by backward induction on h :
                                            k
                               Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ Dh (s) + 2Uhk (s) .
Since DH+1 (s) = 0 for all s ∈ S, the inequality trivially holds for h = H + 1 as 0 ≤ 0. Suppose
                                                                                            k
that the inequality holds for h + 1. By Lemma 13, which can be rewritten as ∆h (V k − V π ) ≤
∆h (D)(s, a) + 2β k (s, a), we have that
                          k                      k                            k
             Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) = ∆h (V k − V π )(s, a) + P (Vh+1
                                                             k      π
                                                                 − Vh+1 )(s, a)
                                                                                  k
                               ≤ ∆h (D)(s, a) + 2β k (s, a) + P (Vh+1
                                                                  k      π
                                                                      − Vh+1 )(s, a) .           (16)


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By the induction hypothesis, we have that
                                                       k
                                     k      π                         k
                                 P (Vh+1 − Vh+1 )(s, a) ≤ P (Dh+1 + 2Uh+1 )(s, a) .                              (17)
Combining inequalities (16) and (17) yields
                                              k
                            Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ Dh (s) + 2(β k (s, a) + P Uh+1
                                                                           k
                                                                               (s, a)) .                         (18)
                                                                          k
Finally, by that −4H/5 ≤ Dh (s) and Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ H always hold, the following inequality
always holds:
                                                             k
                                         Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ H ≤ Dh (s) + 2H .                                   (19)
By inequalities (18) and (19), we conclude that
                                         k
                         Vhk (s) − Vhπ (s) ≤ Dh (s) + 2 min{β k (s, a) + P Uh+1
                                                                            k
                                                                                (s, a), H}
                                                  = Dh (s) + 2Uhk (s) ,
completing the induction argument.

C.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

We restate Lemma 4 with specific logarithmic factors.
Lemma 14 (Restatement of Lemma 4). Under E, it holds that
                         K
                         X                    44HSAℓ1,K
                               U1k (sk1 ) ≤             + 84HS 2 Aℓ2,K ℓ3,K + 3HSAℓ1,K
                                                 λK
                         k=1

for all K ∈ N.
                                                                                      P k
We prove this lemma in two steps: using the concentration results to bound               kU    by
P      k k    k
                                                                           P N
 k,h β  (s ,
          h ha  ) and using the logarithmic bound for the harmonic series,   n=1 1/n ≤ 1 + log N .
Lemma 15. Let η k be defined as in Appendix A. Under the event E, it holds that
                                                                 k
                                 K
                                 X                         X  −1
                                                           K ηX
                                       U1k (sk1 ) ≤ 2                 β k (skh , akh ) + 3HSAℓ1,K .
                                 k=1                       k=1 h=1

for all K ∈ N.

Proof. Decompose U1k (sk1 ) as follows:
       U1k (sk1 ) ≤ β k (sk1 , ak1 ) + P U2k (sk1 , ak1 )
                     = β k (sk1 , ak1 ) + P U2k (sk1 , ak1 ) − U2k (sk2 ) + U2k (sk2 )
                ..
                 .
                          k
                         ηX −1
                                 β k (skh , akh ) + P Uh+1
                                                       k
                                                           (skh , akh ) − Uh+1
                                                                           k
                                                                               (skh+1 ) + Uηkk (skηk )

                     ≤
                          h=1
                          k
                         ηX −1
                                 β k (skh , akh ) + P Uh+1
                                                       k
                                                           (skh , akh ) − Uh+1
                                                                           k
                                                                               (skh+1 ) + H1{η k ̸= H + 1} ,

                     ≤
                          h=1
                                          k
where the last inequality uses that UH+1      (s) = 0 and Uhk (s) ≤ H for all s ∈ S and h ∈ [H]. We take
                                                         PK Pηk −1
the sum of U1k (sk1 ) for k = 1, 2, . . . , K. Let I1 := k=1 h=1 (P Uh+1     k
                                                                                 (skh , akh ) − Uh+1
                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                     (skh+1 )),
so that
                                                   k
                      K
                      X                      X  −1
                                             K ηX                                 K
                                                                                  X
                            U1k (sk1 ) ≤                   β k (skh , akh ) + H         1{η k ̸= H + 1} + I1 .   (20)
                      k=1                    k=1 h=1                              k=1



                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Lemma 9, we obtain that
                                             K η k −1
                                  1 XX      k                          6
                            I1 ≤       Var(Uh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 3H log
                                 4H                                    δ
                                           k=1 h=1
                           1            6
                       =:    I2 + 3H log ,                                                                                    (21)
                          4H            δ
                     PK Pηk −1
where we define I2 := k=1 h=1 Var(Uh+1 )(skh , akh ). By Lemma 27, we have that
                                      k

                  k
             Var(Uh+1 )(skh , akh ) ≤ −∆h ((U k )2 )(skh , akh ) + 2H max{∆h (U k )(skh , akh ), 0}
                                     ≤ −∆h ((U k )2 )(skh , akh ) + 2Hβ k (skh , akh )
                              = −(Uhk )2 (skh ) + P (Uh+1
                                                      k
                                                          )2 (skh , akh ) + 2Hβ k (skh , akh ) ,
where the second inequality uses that
∆h (U k )(s, a) = Uhk (s) − P Uh+1
                               k
                                   (s, a) ≤ (β k (s, a) + P Uh+1
                                                             k                k
                                                                 (s, a)) − P Uh+1 (s, a) = β k (s, a) .
                                        k
Therefore, the sum of the variances of Uh+1 (skh , akh ) for the k-th episode is bounded as follows:
   k                                      k                         k                                   k
  ηX −1                                  ηX −1                     ηX −1                               ηX −1
               k
          Var(Uh+1 )(skh , akh ) ≤ −           (Uhk )2 (skh ) +                k
                                                                           P (Uh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) +           2Hβ k (skh , akh )
  h=1                                    h=1                        h=1                                h=1
                                     k
                                    ηX −1
                                =            2Hβ k (skh , akh ) − (U1k )2 (sk1 ) + (Uηkk )2 (skηk )
                                    h=1
                                              k
                                             ηX −1
                                                          k
                                                              )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                                                                  k
                                                                                      )2 (skh+1 )

                                         +            P (Uh+1
                                             h=1
                                     k
                                    ηX −1
                                ≤            2Hβ k (skh , akh ) + H 2 1{η k ̸= H + 1}
                                    h=1
                                              k
                                             ηX −1
                                                          k
                                         +           (P (Uh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                                                                  k
                                                                                      )2 (skh+1 )) ,
                                             h=1

where we again use that Uηkk (skηk ) ≤ H1{η k ̸= H + 1} for the last inequality. Therefore, by taking
the sum over k ∈ [K], I2 is bounded as follows:
                                    k
                              X  −1
                              K ηX                                         K
                                                                           X
                       I2 ≤                  2Hβ k (skh , akh ) + H 2            1{η k ̸= H + 1}
                              k=1 h=1                                      k=1
                                       k
                                    K ηX
                                    X    −1
                                                        k
                                +                  (P (Uh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                                                                k
                                                                                    )2 (skh+1 )) .
                                    k=1 h=1
The last double sum is bounded by Lemma 10 as follows:
                                     k
                                 −1
                              K ηX
                              X
                                        k
                                   (P (Uh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) − (Uh+1
                                                                k
                                                                    )2 (skh+1 ))
                              k=1 h=1
                                         K η k −1
                                 1X X      k                            6
                               ≤      Var(Uh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 6H 2 log
                                 2                                      δ
                                     k=1 h=1
                                1             6
                               = I2 + 6H 2 log .
                                2             δ
Therefore, we deduce that
                        k
                       −1
                    K ηX                                     K
                    X                                        X                      1             6
             I2 ≤             2Hβ k (skh , akh ) + H 2             1{η k ̸= H + 1} + I2 + 6H 2 log .
                                                                                    2             δ
                    k=1 h=1                                  k=1



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Solving the inequality with respect to I2 , we obtain that
                           k
                       −1
                    K ηX                                                 K
                    X                                                    X                                     6
             I2 ≤                4Hβ k (skh , akh ) + 2H 2                       1{η k ̸= H + 1} + 12H 2 log     .       (22)
                                                                                                               δ
                    k=1 h=1                                              k=1
Plugging the bound of inequality (22) into inequality (21), we obtain that
                                 k
                             −1
                          K ηX                                          K
                          X                                     HX                         6
                  I1 ≤                     β k (skh , akh ) +      1{η k ̸= H + 1} + 6H log .                            (23)
                                                                2                          δ
                          k=1 h=1                                       k=1
By combining inequalities (20) and (23), we conclude that
                                            k
          K                         −1
                                 K ηX                                            K
          X                      X                                      3H       X                                 6
                U1k (sk1 ) ≤ 2                   β   k
                                                         (skh , akh ) +                1{η k ̸= H + 1} + 6H log      .
                                                                             2                                     δ
          k=1                    k=1 h=1                                         k=1
Finally, we bound the last two terms using Lemma 30 as follows:
                     K
                3H X                         6  3H                     6
                     1{η k ̸= H + 1} + 6H log ≤    SA log2 2H + 6H log
                 2                           δ   2                     δ
                    k=1
                                                                                                               6
                                                                             ≤ 3HSA log 2H + 3HSA log
                                                                                                               δ
                                                                  12H
                                                                             = 3HSA log
                                                                    δ
                                                     ≤ 3HSAℓ1,K ,
where the first inequality is due to Lemma 30 and the second inequality applies log2 2H ≤ 2 log 2H
on the first term and A ≥ 2 on the second term. The proof is complete.

Proof of Lemma 14. By Lemma 15, we have
                                                                k
                           K
                           X                              X  −1
                                                          K ηX
                                 U1k (sk1 ) ≤ 2                         β k (skh , akh ) + 3HSAℓ1,K .
                           k=1                            k=1 h=1
Let γk = 11Hℓ1,k /λk +21HSℓ3,k . Then, it holds that β(s, a) ≤ γk /N k (s, a). We apply Lemma 31
and obtain that
                          k                                         k
                      −1
                   K ηX                                       −1
                                                           K ηX
                   X
                                     k              γk     X
                                 β       (skh , akh ) ≤
                                                 N k (s, a)
                k=1 h=1                k=1 h=1

                                                           KH
                                    ≤ 2γK SA log 1 +
                                                            SA
                                       22HSAℓ1,K ℓ2,K
                                    =                       + 42HS 2 Aℓ2,K ℓ3,K .
                                               λK
Combining the two inequalities completes the proof.

D     PAC B OUNDS
In this section, we provide the analysis of PAC bounds. We summarize previous achievements and
our results on PAC bounds for episodic finite-horizon MDPs in Table 3. We note that although Jin
et al. (2018) propose a conversion that enables a regret-minimizing algorithm to solve BPI tasks, the
conversion is sub-optimal in terms of 1/δ-dependence; it results in 1/δ 2 -dependence when log 1δ is
possible. Refer to Appendix E in Ménard et al. (2021a) for a detailed discussion.

D.1   A LGORITHM

We introduce (ε, δ)-EQO, an algorithm for the PAC tasks, and describe it in Algorithm 2. The interac-
tion between the agent and the environment is the same as EQO, where the parameters are set based
on ε and δ. Then, it executes additional procedures to verify whether the policy π k is ε-optimal,
which is necessary for BPI tasks.


                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Comparison of PAC bounds of different algorithms for tabular reinforcement learning. ‘-’
denotes that the bound is not available.

                                      Best-Policy
      Paper                                                                       Mistake-style PAC
                                      Identification
                                                                                  H 2 S2 A
      Dann & Brunskill (2015)            -                                           ε2    log 1δ
                                                                                      4          4 3 2
      Dann et al. (2017)                 -                                        ( H εSA
                                                                                        2  + H Sε A ) log 1δ
                                          2           3   2                           2          3 2
      Dann et al. (2019)              ( H εSA2  + H Sε A ) log 1δ                 ( H εSA
                                                                                        2  + H Sε A ) log 1δ
                                         2                2
                                      H SA
      Ménard et al. (2021a)             ε2    log 1δ + H εSA (S + log 1δ )          -
                                           2
                                                   HS 2 A
      Zhang et al. (2021a)            ( Hδ2SAε2 +
                                                               1
                                                      δε ) log δ                     -
                                           2           2                              2            2
      This work                       ( H εSA2  + HSε A ) log 1δ                  ( H εSA
                                                                                       2  + HSε A ) log 1δ


Algorithm 2: (ε, δ)-EQO
   Input : ε ∈ (0, H], δ ∈ (0, 1]
   Output: Π, Set of ε-optimal policies
            1  88H 2     24HSA              12SA log(en)
 1 β̂(n) := n    ε   log   δ    + 30HS  log      δ         ;
 2 Π ← ∅;
 3 for k = 1, 2, . . . do
                                                              2
 4     Compute π k using Algorithm 1 with ck = 56H         ε log
                                                                    24HSA
                                                                       δ  ;
         k
 5     ÛH+1 (s) ← 0 for all s ∈ S;
 6     for h = H, H − 1, . . . , 1 do
 7         foreach s ∈ S do
 8             a ← πhk (s);
 9             β̂ k (s, a) ← β̂(Nnk
                                    (s, a));                           o
                           (
                  k          min    β̂ k (s, a) + P̂ k Ûh+1
                                                         k
                                                             (s, a), H    if N k (s, a) > 0
10             Ûh (s) ←                                                                    ;
                             H                                            if N k (s, a) = 0

11     if Û1k (s1 ) ≤ 8ε then
12          Add π k to Π;
13          // If current task is BPI, return π k ;
14     Execute policy π k and observe trajectory (sk1 , ak1 , sk2 , . . . , skH , akH , skH+1 );


D.2    A DDITIONAL D EFINITIONS FOR PAC B OUNDS

In this section, we define additional concepts that are required to analyze the PAC bounds.
                                                                             3       H 2 S(2ℓ +ℓ       )
We define two more logarithmic terms, ℓ4,ε = log(1 + 270( Hε2ℓ1 +          ε
                                                                            1 5,ε
                                                                                   )) and ℓ5,ε =
1 + log log(He/ε). We also define analogous concepts for β , Uh , N , nh , and η k . We define β̂
                                                          k   k    k   k

and β, which are functions that map N to R as follows:


                                            1 88H 2 ℓ1

                                   β̂(n) :=            + 30HSℓ3,n
                                            n   ε
                                            1 88H 2 ℓ1

                                   β(n) :=             + 73HSℓ3,n .
                                            n   ε


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For k ∈ N, β̂ k and β k are functions from S × A to R defined using β̂ and β:

                         β̂ k (s, a) := β̂(N k (s, a))
                                                     88H 2 ℓ1

                                           1
                                     = k                      + 30HSℓ3,k (s, a)
                                       N (s, a)        ε
                         β k (s, a) := β(N k (s, a))
                                                   88H 2 ℓ1

                                         1
                                    = k                     + 73HSℓ3,k (s, a) .
                                      N (s, a)       ε

Ûhk (s) and U kh are defined in a similar manner to Uhk , but using β̂ k and β k instead of β k , respec-
tively. Additionally, the definition of Ûhk (s) uses P̂ k instead of P . They are formally defined by the
following iterative relationships:
                   k
                 ÛH+1 (s) := U kH+1 (s) := 0
                 Ûhk (s) := min{β̂ k (s, πhk (s)) + P̂ k Ûh+1
                                                            k
                                                                (s, πhk (s)), H} for h ∈ [H]
                 U kh (s) := min{β k (s, πhk (s)) + P U kh+1 (s, πhk (s)), H} for h ∈ [H] .

Algorithm 2 adds π k to Π if Û1k (sk1 ) ≤ ε/8. We denote the set of episodes that do not meet this
condition among the first K by T̂K , and its size by T̂K . In the analysis, we are also interested in the
episodes with U kh (sk1 ) > ε/16. For K ∈ N, we define T K := {k ∈ [K] : U kh (sk1 ) > ε/16} to be
the set of episodes that satisfy U kh (sk1 ) > ε/16 among the first K episodes. Analogously, T K is the
size of T K .
We define nkh and N k (s, a), which are the counterparts of nkh and N k (s, a), but only count the
episodes in T K . Specifically, we define them as follows:
                                       H
                                      XX
                      nkh (s, a) :=               1{(sij , aij ) = (s, a), (i < k or j ≤ h)}
                                      i∈T k j=1

                     N (s, a) := nk−1
                        k
                                  H (s, a)
                                         H
                                       X X
                                 =                 1{(sih , aih ) = (s, a)} .
                                     i∈T k−1 h=1

Finally, we define η k , which is the counterpart of η k defined by using nkh and N k instead. Specif-
ically, η k := min{h ∈ [H] : nkh (skh , akh ) > 2N k (skh , akh )}, where η k = H + 1 if there is no such
h ∈ [H].

D.3    H IGH - PROBABILITY E VENTS FOR PAC B OUNDS

To prove Theorems 3 and 4, the events of Lemmas 9 and 10 have to be replaced by the following
events. To summarize, Uhk is replaced with Ūhk , η k is replaced with η k , and only the episodes in T̄K
contribute to the sum instead of all k ∈ [K]. Recall that δ ′ = δ/6.
Lemma 16. Fix ε ∈ (0, H]. With probability at least 1 − δ ′ , the following inequality holds for all
K ∈ N:
        k                                                                k
    −1
 X ηX                                                              η −1
                                                               1 X X                                     6
              P U kh+1 (skh , akh ) − U kh+1 (skh+1 )                   Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 3H log .

                                                            ≤
                                                              4H                                         δ
k∈T K h=1                                                         k∈T K h=1


Proof. Let Ihk := 1{U k1 (sk1 ) > ε/16, h < η k } and Xhk = Ihk (P U kh+1 (skh , akh ) − U kh+1 (skh+1 )).
Since Ihk ∈ Fhk , {Xhk }k,h is a martingale difference sequence with respect to {Fhk }k,h as in the
proof of Lemma 9. We have |Xhk | ≤ H almost surely and E[(Xhk )2 |Fhk ] = Ihk Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ).


                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using Lemma 36 with λ = 1/3, we obtain that
                    K X
                      H                        K       H
                    X                   1 XX k                                   1
                              Xhk ≤         Ih Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 3H log ′
                                       4H                                       δ
                    k=1 h=1                 k=1 h=1

holds for all K ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ , which is equivalent to the desired result.

Lemma 17. Fix ε ∈ (0, H]. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following inequality holds for
all K ∈ N:
        k                                                                  k
    −1
 X ηX                                                                 η −1
                                                                  1 X X                                        6
              P (U kh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) − (U kh+1 )2 (skh+1 )              Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 6H 2 log

                                                                ≤
                                                                  2                                            δ
k∈T K h=1                                                           k∈T K h=1


Proof. Let Ihk = 1{U k1 (sk1 ) > ε/16, h < η k } and Xhk = Ihk (P (U kh+1 )2 (skh , akh ) − (U kh+1 )2 (skh+1 )).
As in the proof of Lemma 16, {Xhk }k,h is a martingale difference sequence with respect to {Fhk }k,h .
We have |Xhk | ≤ H 2 almost surely and

              E[(Xhk )2 |Fhk ] = Ihk Var((U kh+1 )2 )(skh , akh ) ≤ 4H 2 Ihk Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ) ,
where we use Lemma 35 for the last inequality. Applying Lemma 36 with λ = 1/6, we obtain that
                     K X
                       H                   K       H
                     X                  1 XX k                                     1
                               Xhk ≤        Ih Var(U kh+1 )(skh , akh ) + 6H 2 log ′
                                        2                                         δ
                     k=1 h=1              k=1 h=1

holds for all K ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ ′ , which is equivalent to the desired result.

Now, we define the event under which the bound of Theorems 3 and 4 holds.
Lemma 18. Let E be the intersection of the events of Lemmas 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, and 17. Then, E happens
with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. This lemma is proved by taking the union bound over the listed lemmas.

D.4    P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS 3 AND 4

In this section, we prove Theorems 3 and 4. The following proposition presents the theoretical
guarantees enjoyed by Algorithm 2, and it directly implies both theorems.
Proposition 3. Fix ε ∈ (0, H] and δ ∈ (0, 1]. Let Π be the output of Algorithm 2. Under E, the
following two propositions hold:

      1. All policies in Π are ε-optimal.
      2. The number of episodes whose policies are not included in Π is at most K0 ,

where K0 is defined as follows:
                           12000H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε   5000HS 2 A(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )ℓ4,ε

                  K0 :=                       +                               .
                                 ε2                        ε

Assuming that Proposition 3 is true, Theorems 3 and 4 are proved as follows:

Proof of Theorem 3. Proposition 3 states that under E, all policies of Π are ε-optimal, hence all the
policies that are not ε-optimal are not in Π. Proposition 3 also states that the number of episodes
whose policies are not included in Π is at most K0 , therefore the number of episodes whose policies
are not ε-optimal is at most K0 . By Lemma 18, the probability of E is at least 1 − δ, completing the
proof.


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem 4. Since the number of episodes whose policies are not included in Π is at most
K0 under Ē by Proposition 3, there exists at least one episode among the first K0 + 1 whose policy
is added to Π. As all policies in Π are ε-optimal, the algorithm may return the first such policy. The
probability of this event is guaranteed by Lemma 18.

Now, we prove Proposition 3.
The following two lemmas show the relationships between Uhk , Ûhk , and U kh .
Lemma 19. Under E, it holds that for all s ∈ S, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N,
                                                 Uhk (s) ≤ 2Ûhk (s) .

Lemma 20. Under E, it holds that for all s ∈ S, h ∈ [H], and k ∈ N,
                                                 Ûhk (s) ≤ 2U kh (s) .

The proofs of these lemmas are deferred to Appendices D.5 and D.6 respectively.
                                                                                        ε
We first show that under E, the policies in Π are ε-optimal. Note that by setting λk = 8H  , Algo-
rithm 2 runs Algorithm 1 with ck = 7ℓ1 /λk . Also, the proofs of Lemmas 2 and 3 do not rely on
                                                                                   ε
Lemmas 9 and 10. Therefore, the conclusions of Lemmas 2 and 3 hold with λk = 8H      under E. This
fact leads to the following lemma:
Lemma 21. Suppose that Algorithm 2 is run and the event E holds. If Û1k (sk1 ) ≤ ε/8, then policy
π k is ε-optimal. Consequently, all the policies in Π are ε-optimal.

Proof. By Lemmas 2 and 3, the instantaneous regret in episode k is at most 4λk + 2U1k (sk1 ) =
ε/2 + 2U1k (sk1 ). By Lemma 19, this quantity is less than or equal to ε/2 + 4Û1k (sk1 ). Therefore, if
Û1k (sk1 ) ≤ ε/8, then the instantaneous regret in episode k is at most ε/2 + ε/2 = ε.

Now, we prove the second part of the proposition that states that the number of episodes whose
policies are not added to Π is finite. Restating our goal using the notations defined in Appendix D.2,
we want to show that T̂K ≤ K0 for all K ∈ N. To do so,P       we show T̂K ≤ T K and T K ≤ K0 . To
show T K ≤ K0 , we provide upper and lower bounds of k∈T K U k1 (sk1 ). While the lower bound
is straightforward to obtain, the upper bound is more technical. We state the upper-bound result in
Lemma 22 and defer its proof to Appendix D.7. We note that Lemma 22 and its proof are analogous
to those of Lemma 14.
Lemma 22. Under E, it holds that
              X                      352H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,T K
                     U k1 (sk1 ) ≤                         + 292HS 2 Aℓ2,T K ℓ3,T K + 3HSAℓ1
                                             ε
             k∈T K

for all K ∈ N.

We require one more technical lemma, which is necessary to derive an upper bound of T K from an
inequality it satisfies.
Lemma 23. One has
                 5632H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K0   4672HS 2 Aℓ2,K0 ℓ3,K0 + 48HSAℓ1
                           2
                                    +                                 < K0 .
                         ε                            ε

The proof of this lemma is deferred to Appendix D.8
Now, we are ready to prove Proposition 3.

Proof of Proposition 3. By Lemma 21, we have that for all policies in Π are ε-optimal, which proves
the first part of the proposition.
Now, we prove the second part of the proposition, that there are at most K0 episodes whose policies
are not included in Π. By Lemma 20, Û1k (sk1 ) > ε/8 implies that U k1 (sk1 ) > ε/16. Hence, the


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


number of episodes where Û1k (sk1 ) > ε/8 holds during the first K episodes is at most T K . Therefore,
it is sufficient to show that T K ≤ K0 holds for all K ∈ N.
Using Lemma 22, we obtain the following condition on T K :
                  εT K   X
                       ≤   U k1 (sk1 )
                   16
                            k∈T K

                            352H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,T K
                        ≤                            + 292HS 2 Aℓ2,T K ℓ3,T K + 3HSAℓ1 ,
                                         ε
where the first inequality holds since U k1 (sk1 ) is greater than ε/16 when k ∈ T K by definition, and
the second inequality is from Lemma 22. Rearranging the terms, we deduce that T K satisfies the
following inequality for any K ∈ N:
                        5632H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,T K            4672HS 2 Aℓ2,T K ℓ3,T K + 48HSAℓ1
                TK ≤                               +                                       .
                                    ε2                                 ε
This inequality, combined with Lemma 23, shows that one can not have T K = K0 for any K ∈ N.
Since T K starts at T 0 = 0 and increases by at most 1 as K increases, we conclude that T K < K0
must hold for all K ∈ N.

D.5    P ROOF OF L EMMA 19

Proof of Lemma 19. We prove that the following stronger inequality holds by backward induction
on h:
                                                        1
                                 Uhk (s) ≤ 2Ûhk (s) −    (U k )2 (s) .
                                                       2H h
The inequality is trivial when h = H + 1. Suppose the inequality holds for h + 1. The inequality
is trivial when Ûhk (s) = H. Assume that Ûhk (s) < H, so that Ûhk (s) = β̂ k (s, a) + P̂ k Ûh+1
                                                                                                k
                                                                                                    (s, a),
              k
where a := πh (s). We have that
                     Uhk (s) ≤ β k (s, a) + P Uh+1
                                               k
                                                   (s, a)
                             = β k (s, a) + (P − P̂ k )Uh+1
                                                        k
                                                            (s, a) + P̂ k Uh+1
                                                                           k
                                                                               (s, a) .               (24)
We bound the second term in inequality (24) by applying Lemma 29 with ρ = 4.
                                                   1                    9HSℓ3,k (s, a)
                  (P − P̂ k )Uh+1
                              k
                                  (s, a) ≤                k
                                                     Var(Uh+1 )(s, a) +                .              (25)
                                                  4H                      N k (s, a)
We bound the last term of inequality (24) using the induction hypothesis as follows:

    k k               k      k        1    k   2
  P̂ Uh+1 (s, a) ≤ P̂     2Ûh+1 −      (U    ) (s, a)
                                     2H h+1
                                         1                               1
                 = 2P̂ k Ûh+1
                           k
                               (s, a) +    (P − P̂ k )(Uh+1
                                                        k
                                                            )2 (s, a) −          k
                                                                           P (Uh+1 )2 (s, a) .        (26)
                                        2H                              2H
For (P − P̂ k )(Uh+1
                 k
                     )2 (s, a), we apply Lemma 29 with ρ = 8 and obtain the following bound:
                                                 1                          17H 2 Sℓ3,k (s, a)
             (P − P̂ k )(Uh+1
                          k
                              )2 (s, a) ≤           Var((U k
                                                           h+1 )2
                                                                  )(s, a) +
                                               8H 2                              N k (s, a)
                                               1       k             17H 2 Sℓ3,k (s, a)
                                              ≤ Var(Uh+1  )(s, a) +                      ,            (27)
                                               2                          N k (s, a)
where we use Lemma 35 for the last inequality. Plugging inequality (27) into inequality (26), we
obtain that
                                              1                    9HSℓ3,k (s, a)    1
P̂ k Uh+1
      k
          (s, a) ≤ 2P̂ k Ûh+1
                           k
                               (s, a) +              k
                                                Var(Uh+1 )(s, a) +                −        k
                                                                                       P (Uh+1 )2 (s, a) .
                                             4H                      N k (s, a)     2H
                                                                                                   (28)


                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Plugging inequalities (25) and (28) into inequality (24), we obtain that
                       18HSℓ3,k (s, a)     1
Uhk (s) ≤ β k (s, a) +                                k                  k
                                                                            )2 (s, a) + 2P̂ k Ûh+1
                                                                                                k

                                       +       Var(Uh+1   )(s, a) − P (Uh+1                         (s, a) .
                         N k (s, a)       2H
By Lemma 27, we have that
               k                 k
          Var(Uh+1 )(s, a) − P (Uh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤ −(Uhk )2 (s) + 2H max{∆h (U k )(s, a), 0}
                                                   ≤ −(Uhk )2 (s) + 2Hβ k (s, a) ,
where the last inequality uses that
∆h (U k )(s, a) = Uhk (s) − P Uh+1k
                                      (s, a) ≤ (β k (s, a) + P Uh+1
                                                                 k
                                                                      (s, a)) − P Uh+1k
                                                                                         (s, a) = β k (s, a) .
Therefore, we conclude that
                                       18HSℓ3,k (s, a)       1
             Uhk (s) ≤ 2β k (s, a) +                     −      (U k )2 (s) + 2P̂ k Ûh+1
                                                                                      k
                                                                                          (s, a)
                                           N k (s, a)       2H h
                                                            1
                     = 2β̂ k (s, a) + 2P̂ k Ûh+1
                                              k
                                                  (s, a) −     (U k )2 (s)
                                                           2H h
                                     1
                     = 2Ûhk (s) −      (U k )2 (s) ,
                                    2H h
                                                                      9HSℓ3,k (s,a)
where the first equality comes from that β̂ k (s, a) = β k (s, a) +     N k (s,a)
                                                                                    by their definitions and
the second by Ûhk (s) = β̂ k (s, a) + P̂ k Ûh+1
                                              k
                                                  (s, a).

D.6    P ROOF OF L EMMA 20

Proof of Lemma 20. We prove the following stronger inequality by backward induction on h:
                                                       1
                                 Ûhk (s) ≤ 2U kh (s) − (U kh )2 (s) .
                                                       2
The inequality trivially holds when h = H + 1 or U kh (s) = H. Suppose the inequality holds for
h + 1 and U kh (s) < H. Using the induction hypothesis, we derive that
Ûhk (s) ≤ β̂ k (s, a) + P̂ k Ûh+1
                                k
                                    (s, a)

                                              1
         ≤ β̂ k (s, a) + P̂ k 2U kh+1 −          (U kh+1 )2 (s, a)
                                             2H

                                                      1                                    1
         = β̂ k (s, a) + (P̂ k − P ) 2U kh+1 −           (U kh+1 )2 (s, a) + P 2U kh+1 −     (U kh+1 )2 (s, a)
                                                     2H                                   2H
                                                          1
         = β̂ k (s, a) + 2(P̂ k − P )U kh+1 (s, a) +         (P − P̂ k )(U kh+1 )2 (s, a)
                                                        2H
                                    1
               + P 2U kh+1 −            (U kh+1 )2 (s, a) ,                                            (29)
                                  2H
where a := πhk (s). Using Lemma 29 with ρ = 8, we obtain that
                                                1                      17HSℓ3,k (s, a)
                  (P̂ k − P )U kh+1 (s, a) ≤      Var(U kh+1 )(s, a) +
                                               8H                        N k (s, a)
and
                                              1                              17H 2 Sℓ3,k (s, a)
              (P − P̂ k )(U kh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤     Var((U   k
                                                          h+1 ) 2
                                                                  )(s, a) +
                                            8H 2                                 N k (s, a)
                                                                           2
                                            1                        17H Sℓ3,k (s, a)
                                        ≤ Var(U kh+1 )(s, a) +                           ,
                                            2                             N k (s, a)
where we use Lemma 35 for the last inequality. Plugging these bounds into inequality (29), we
obtain that

                          1                      43HSℓ3,k (s, a)                          1
Ûhk (s) ≤ β̂ k (s, a) +    Var(U kh+1 )(s, a) +                     +  P    2U k
                                                                                h+1  −      (U  k
                                                                                                  )2
                                                                                                       (s, a)
                         2H                          N k (s, a)                         2H h+1
                          1
         = β k (s, a) +      Var(U kh+1 )(s, a) − P (U kh+1 )2 (s, a) + 2P U kh+1 (s, a) ,

                         2H

                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           43HSℓ      (s,a)
where the last equality comes from that β k (s, a) = β̂ k (s, a) +         3,k
                                                                       N k (s,a)
                                                                                 by their definitions.
Using Lemma 27, we have
        Var(U kh+1 )(s, a) − P (U kh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤ −(U kh )2 (s) + 2H max{∆h (U k )(s, a), 0}
                                                                 ≤ −(U kh )2 (s) + 2Hβ k (s, a) ,
where the last inequality uses that
∆h (U k )(s, a) = U kh (s) − P U kh+1 (s, a) ≤ (β k (s, a) + P U kh+1 (s, a)) − P U kh+1 (s, a) = β k (s, a) .
Therefore, we conclude that
                                                                       1
                         Ûhk (s) ≤ 2β k (s, a) + 2P U kh+1 (s, a) −      (U k )2 (s)
                                                                     2H h
                                                 1
                                  = 2U kh (s) −     (U k )2 (s) ,
                                                2H h
completing the induction.

D.7    P ROOF OF L EMMA 22

Analogously to Lemma 14, Lemma 22 is proved in two steps: first, using the concentration results
                                                                  PN
to bound k U k with k,h β k (skh , akh ), and second, using that n=1 1/n ≤ 1 + log N to bound
          P             P
        k k     k
P
   k,h β (sh , ah ). However, more meticulous care is required for the second step, as the bound must
depend only on T K and be independent of K.
Lemma 24. Under E, it holds that
                                                                     k
                            X                                 −1
                                                           X ηX
                                  U k1 (sk1 ) ≤ 2                           β k (skh , akh ) + 3HSAℓ1,K
                        k∈T K                             k∈T K h=1
for all K ∈ N.

Proof. The proof is identical to the proof of Lemma 14, except that the use of Lemmas 9 and 10 is
replaced with Lemmas 16 and 17.
Lemma 25. Under E, it holds that
                             k
                       −1
                    X ηX                                                   88H 2 ℓ1

                                      k
                                  β       (skh , akh ) ≤ 2SA                        + 73HSℓ3,T K          ℓ2,T K
                                                                             ε
                   k∈T K h=1
for all K ∈ N.

Proof. Recall that N k (s, a) represents the number of times the state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A is
visited in episodes that satisfy U i1 (si1 ) > ε/16 up to the (k − 1)-th episode. Clearly, N k (s, a) ≥
N k (s, a). By Lemma 34 with C1 = 88H 2 ℓ1 /ε + 73HS log(12SA/δ) and C2 = 73HS, we have
that β(n) := (C1 + C2 log(1 + log n))/n is non-increasing. Therefore, we know that β k (s, a) =
β(N k (s, a)) ≤ β(N k (s, a)). Thus, we have that
                                      k                                         k
                               −1
                            X ηX                                            −1
                                                                         X ηX
                                                  k
                                              β       (skh , akh ) ≤                β(N k (skh , akh )) .
                            k∈T K h=1                                  k∈T K h=1
         K+1
Since N      (s, a) ≤ T K H, we have β(N (s, a)) ≤ γ/N k (s, a), where γ = 88H 2 ℓ1 /ε +
                                                                 k

73HSℓ3,T K . By Lemma 31, we conclude that
                        k                                                   k
                    −1
                 X ηX                                              −1
                                                                X ηX
                                       k                                             γ
                                 β(N       (skh , akh )) ≤
                                                                         N k (skh , akh )
                 k∈T K h=1                                     k∈T K h=1

                                                                          T KH
                                                           ≤ 2γSA log 1 +
                                                                           SA
                                                                       2

                                                                   88H ℓ1
                                                           = 2SA          + 73HSℓ3,T K ℓ2,T K .
                                                                     ε


                                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To be more specific, we apply Lemma 31 to the episodes in T K , meaning that τ k in Lemma 31
should be the trajectory of the k-th episode that satisfies U i1 (si1 ) > ε/16, and the sum is taken over
T K episodes.

Proof of Lemma 22. Combine the results of Lemmas 24 and 25.

D.8    P ROOF OF L EMMA 23

Before proving Lemma 23, a technical lemma regarding the logarithmic terms is required.
Lemma 26. The following inequalities are true:
                                          ℓ2,K0 ≤ 2ℓ4,ε                                             (30)
                                          ℓ3,K0 ≤ 2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε .                                      (31)

                                                                    2      HS(2ℓ +ℓ    )
Proof. We first provide a crude bound for log K0 H. Let B := Hε2ℓ1 + 1
                                                                     ε
                                                                       5,ε
                                                                           . By definition,
we have K0 ≤ 12000BSAℓ4,ε and ℓ4,ε = log(1 + 270BH)). First, applying Lemma 32 on
log(1 + 270BH) with C2 = 270, we obtain that
                                       log(1 + 270)
                              ℓ4,ε ≤                · (270BH) ≤ 6BH .
                                           270
Therefore, we have
                           K0 H ≤ 12000BHSAℓ4,ε ≤ 72000B 2 H 2 SA .                                 (32)
To prove inequality (30), we use inequality (32) and proceed as follows:

                                                    K0 H
                                 ℓ2,K0 = log 1 +
                                                     SA
                                       = log 1 + 72000B 2 H 2

                                                     √
                                       ≤ 2 log 1 + 72000BH
                                         ≤ 2 log(1 + 270BH)
                                         = 2ℓ4,ε ,
where the first inequality holds since 1 + x2 ≤ (1 + x)2 for all x ≥ 0.
To prove inequality (31), we need to further bound B. Since 24HSA
                                                                δ   ≥ 48, applying Lemma 32 with
C1 = 48 yields
                                      log 48 24HSA           2HSA
                                  ℓ1 ≤       ·            ≤        .                    (33)
                                        48        δ            δ
Applying log x ≤ x/e, we obtain that ℓ5,ε ≤ 1 + log(H/ε) ≤ 1 + H/(eε) ≤ 2H/ε. Then, it holds
that
                                            4HSA 2H
                             2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε ≤           +
                                               δ          ε
                                            4HSA H           HSA H
                                         ≤          ·      +     ·
                                               δ        ε      δ     ε
                                            5H 2 SA
                                         =            ,                                 (34)
                                               δε
where the second inequality uses that H/ε ≥ 1 and HSA/δ ≥ 2. Then, we bound B as follows:
                                         H 2 ℓ1   HS(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )
                                    B=          +
                                          ε2           ε
                                         4H 3 SA 5H 3 S 2 A
                                       ≤          +
                                           δε2       δε2
                                             3 2
                                         9H S A
                                       ≤           ,                                                (35)
                                            δε2


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the first inequality applies inequalities (33) and (34) simultaneously. Utilizing these bounds,
we derive an upper bound of log K0 H as follows:

                          log K0 H ≤ log 72000B 2 H 2 SA
                                            5832000H 8 S 5 A3
                                      ≤ log
                                                 δ 2 ε4
                                            106817H 4 S 5 A3      e4 H 4
                                      ≤ log         2
                                                             + log 4 ,
                                                  δ                 ε

where the first inequality applies inequality (32), the second inequality comes from inequality (35),
and the last inequality uses that 5832000/e4 ≤ 106871. The first term can be further bounded as
follows:

                                  106817H 4 S 5 A3        26705H 5 S 5 A5
                            log                    ≤ log
                                        δ2                      δ5
                                                           8HSA
                                                   ≤ 5 log
                                                              δ
                                                     7HSA
                                                   ≤         ,
                                                         δ

where the first inequality uses that H ≥ 1, δ ≤ 1, and A ≥ 2, the second inequality holds since
26705 ≤ 85 = 32768, and the last inequality is due to Lemma 32 with C1 = 16 and 5 × 8 ×
(log 16)/16 ≤ 7. Using these results, we further bound log K0 H as follows:

                                        7HSA         eH
                          log K0 H ≤         + 4 log
                                          δ            ε
                                        7HSA     eH      2HSA     eH
                                      ≤      log     +        log
                                          δ       ε        δ       ε
                                        9HSA     eH
                                      =      log     ,                                            (36)
                                          δ       ε

where the second inequality uses log(eH/ε) ≥ 1 and HSA/δ ≥ 2. We conclude that inequal-
ity (31), the bound of ℓ3,K0 , is true by the following steps:

                                        2SA log K0 H
                          ℓ3,K0 = log
                                                δ
                                        18HS 2 A2 log eH ε
                                  ≤ log
                                                  δ2
                                        16H 2 S 2 A2         9        eH
                                  ≤ log        2
                                                      + log + log log
                                            δ                8         ε
                                          4HSA                    eH
                                  ≤ 2 log           + 1 + log log
                                            δ                      ε
                                  ≤ 2ℓ1 + ℓ5 ,

where the first inequality holds by inequality (36), and the last inequality uses log(9/8) ≤ 1.



Proof of Lemma 23. Note that K0 ≥ 12000SA, hence ℓ2,K0 ≥ 1 holds. Then, we have
48HSAℓ1 /ε ≤ 48HSAℓ1 ℓ2,K0 /ε ≤ 48H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K0 /ε2 , therefore it is sufficient to prove that

                       5680H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K0   4672HS 2 Aℓ2,K0 ℓ3,K0
                                 2
                                          +                       ≤ K0 .
                               ε                     ε


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying Lemma 26, we conclude that
                    5680H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ2,K0    4672HS 2 Aℓ2,K0 ℓ3,K0
                             2
                                       +
                            ε                      ε
                       11360H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε   4672HS 2 A(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )ℓ4,ε
                    ≤                     +
                               ε2                       ε
                               2
                       11362H SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε     4672HS 2 A(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )ℓ4,ε
                    ≤                     +                             −2
                               ε2                       ε
                       12000H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε   5000HS 2 A(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )ℓ4,ε
                    ≤            2
                                          +                             −2
                               ε                        ε
                        12000H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε   5000HS 2 A(2ℓ1 + ℓ5,ε )ℓ4,ε

                    ≤                      +                               −1
                                 ε2                       ε
                    = K0 − 1 < K0 ,
where the first inequality applies the results of Lemma 26 simultaneously, and the second inequality
uses that H 2 SAℓ1 ℓ4,ε /ε2 ≥ 1.

E    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma 27. Let C ≥ 0 be a constant. Let {Vh }H+1   h=1 be a sequence of H + 1 functions such that
Vh : S → [0, C] for all h ∈ [H + 1]. For any (s, a) ∈ S × A, the variance of Vh+1 under P (·|s, a)
is bounded as follows:
                 Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) ≤ −∆h (V 2 )(s, a) + 2C max{∆h (V )(s, a), 0} .
Equivalently, the following inequality holds:
          Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) − P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤ −(Vh (s))2 + 2C max{∆h (V )(s, a), 0} .

Proof. We add and subtract (Vh (s))2 to Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) and obtain the following:
          Var(Vh+1 )(s, a) = P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) − (P Vh+1 (s, a))2
                            = P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) − (Vh (s))2 + (Vh (s))2 − (P Vh+1 (s, a))2 .
                              |             {z            } |              {z            }
                                            I1                              I2
                        2
We have I1 = −∆h (V )(s, a) by definition. We bound I2 as follows:
                        I2 = (Vh (s) + P Vh+1 (s, a)) (Vh (s) − P Vh+1 (s, a))
                           ≤ 2C max{∆h (V )(s, a), 0} ,
where the inequality uses that 0 ≤ Vh (s) + P Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ 2C and the definition of ∆h (V )(s, a).
Plugging in these bounds for I1 and I2 proves the first inequality of the lemma.
The second inequality is obtained by subtracting P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) from both sides of the first inequal-
ity and using that −∆h (V 2 )(s, a) − P (Vh+1 )2 (s, a) = −(Vh )2 (s, a) by definition.
Lemma 28. For any (s, a) ∈ S × A and h ∈ [H], it holds that ∆h (V ∗ )(s, a) ≥ r(s, a) ≥ 0.

Proof. This inequality is due to the Bellman optimality equation:
                  ∆h (V ∗ )(s, a) = Vh∗ (s) − P Vh+1
                                                 ∗
                                                     (s, a)
                                 = max
                                    ′
                                       (r(s, a′ ) + P Vh+1
                                                       ∗
                                                           (s, a′ )) − P Vh+1
                                                                          ∗
                                                                              (s, a)
                                    a ∈A
                                                 ∗                ∗
                                 ≥ (r(s, a) + P Vh+1 (s, a)) − P Vh+1 (s, a)
                                 = r(s, a) ≥ 0 .


Lemma 29. Let C > 0 be a constant. Under the event of Lemma 7, the following inequality holds
for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, k ∈ N, ρ > 0, and V : S → [−C, C]:
                                          1                 C(2ρ + 1)Sℓ3,k (s, a)
                 (P̂ k − P )V (s, a) ≤      Var(V )(s, a) +                       .
                                         Cρ                      N k (s, a)

                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that P V (s, a) = 0 and C = 1 since the inequality is
invariant under constant translations and scalings of V . By Lemma 7, for any (s, a, s′ ) ∈ S × A × S,
it holds that
                                                  s
                                                    2P (s′ | s, a)ℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
              P̂ k (s′ | s, a) − P (s′ | s, a) ≤ 2                           +             .
                                                           N k (s, a)          3N k (s, a)
Multiplying both sides by |V (s′ )| and using that |V (s′ )| ≤ C = 1, we obtain that
                                                       s

          k ′              ′

                                        ′            ′     2P (s′ | s, a)ℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
        P̂ (s |s, a) − P (s |s, a) V (s ) ≤ 2|V (s )|                               +             .
                                                                  N k (s, a)          3N k (s, a)
We apply the AM-GM inequality,
                         p         2ab ≤ a2 /ρ + ρb2p     for any a, b, ρ > 0, on the first term of the
right-hand side with a = P (s′ |s, a)|V (s′ )| and b = 2ℓ3,k (s, a)/N k (s, a):
                               s
                            ′    2P (s′ | s, a)ℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
                      2|V (s )|                            +
                                        N k (s, a)            3N k (s, a)
                          1                           2ρℓ3,k (s, a) 2ℓ3,k (s, a)
                         ≤  P (s′ | s, a)(V (s′ ))2 +              +
                          ρ                            N k (s, a)      3N k (s, a)
                          1                           (2ρ + 1)ℓ3,k (s, a)
                         ≤ P (s′ | s, a)(V (s′ ))2 +                      ,
                          ρ                               N k (s, a)
which implies that
                                                   1                            (2ρ + 1)ℓ3,k (s, a)
        P̂ k (s′ |s, a) − P (s′ |s, a) V (s′ ) ≤ P (s′ | s, a)(V (s′ ))2 +                          .      (37)
                                                   ρ                                N k (s, a)
Taking the sum over s′ ∈ S, we obtain that
                                        X
               (P̂ k − P )V (s, a) =           P̂ k (s′ | s, a) − P (s′ | s, a) V (s′ )
                                         s′ ∈S
                                         X
                                    ≤            P̂ k (s′ | s, a) − P (s′ | s, a) V (s′ )
                                         s′ ∈S
                                         X  1                                    (2ρ + 1)ℓ3,k (s, a)

                                    ≤                P (s′ | s, a)(V (s′ ))2 +
                                                 ρ                                   N k (s, a)
                                         s′ ∈S
                                       1                   (2ρ + 1)Sℓ3,k (s, a)
                                    =    Var(V )(s, a) +                        ,
                                       ρ                        N k (s, a)
where the first inequality is the triangle inequality, the second is inequality (37), and the last equality
is by P V (s, a) = 0, which implies Var(V )(s, a) = P (V 2 )(s, a).
Lemma 30. For any sequence of K trajectories, we have
                                   K
                                   X
                                          1{η k ̸= H + 1} ≤ SA log2 2H
                                   k=1
and
                                   K
                                   X
                                         1{η k ̸= H + 1} ≤ SA log2 2H .
                                   k=1


Proof. We only prove the first inequality, as the proof for the second inequality is identical. We
focus on the state-action pair that triggers the stopping of η k :
             K
             X                           K
                                         X        X
                   1{η k ̸= H + 1} =                        1{η k ̸= H + 1, (skηk , akηk ) = (s, a)}
             k=1                         k=1 (s,a)∈S×A

                                             X         K
                                                       X
                                     =                      1{η k ̸= H + 1, (skηk , akηk ) = (s, a)} .
                                         (s,a)∈S×A k=1



                                                          38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If η k ̸= H + 1, then by definition, it implies that nkηk (skηk , akηk ) = 2N k (skηk , akηk ) + 1, which in
turn implies that N k+1 (skηk , ahηk ) ≥ 2N k (skηk , akηk ) + 1. For any (s, a) ∈ S × A and K ∈ N, let
MK (s, a) be the number of k ∈ [K] such that N k+1 (s, a) ≥ 2N k (s, a) + 1. Then, we infer that
                         K
                         X
                               1{η k ̸= H + 1, (skηk , akηk ) = (s, a)} ≤ MK (s, a) .
                         k=1
Now, it is sufficient to prove that MK (s, a) ≤ log2 2H for all (s, a) ∈ S × A. Since N k+1 (s, a) ≤
N k (s, a) + H, we infer that N k+1 (s, a) ≥ 2N k (s, a) + 1 occurs only if N k (s, a) < H. On
the other hand, using induction on k, one can prove that N k+1 (s, a) ≥ 2Mk (s,a) − 1 holds for all
k ∈ N. Hence, once Mk (s, a) attains the value ⌊log2 H⌋ + 1 for some k, we have N k+1 (s, a) ≥ H.
Therefore, Mk (s, a) does not increase after it reaches ⌊log2 H⌋ + 1, implying that MK (s, a) ≤
⌊log2 H⌋ + 1 ≤ log2 2H for all K ∈ N.
Lemma 31. Let {τ k }∞                                                  k       k k       k      k
                     k=1 be any sequence of trajectories with τ = (s1 , a1 , R1 , . . . , sH+1 ). Let
{γk }∞
     k=1 be a sequence of increasing  positive     real numbers.  Then, it holds  that for any K  ∈ N,
                             k
                        K ηX   −1
                       X               γk                               KH
                                                   ≤  2γ k SA log   1 +          .
                           k=1 h=1
                                  N k (skh , akh )                       SA

Proof. By the stopping rule of η k , we have N k (skh , akh ) ≥ 12 nkh (skh , akh ) when h < η k . It also implies
that when h < η k , nk (skh , akh ) ≥ 2 must hold. Hence, we have that
                  k                           k
               −1
            K ηX                  K ηX−1
            X          γk         X          2γk
                                ≤
            k=1 h=1
                    N (sh , ah ) k=1 h=1 nh (skh , akh )
                     k  k    k            k

                                                      N K+1 (s,a)
                                            X            X          2γk
                                      ≤
                                                         n=2
                                                                     n
                                          (s,a)∈S×A
                                                  X
                                      ≤ 2γK                  1{N K+1 (s, a) ≥ 2} log N K+1 (s, a)
                                              (s,a)∈S×A
                                                  X
                                      ≤ 2γK                  log(1 + N K+1 (s, a)) .
                                              (s,a)∈S×A

Since log(1 + x) is concave, applying Jensen’s inequality implies that
                                                       P                    K+1
                                                                                        !
              X                                           (s,a)∈S×A  (1 + N     (s, a))
                     log(1 + N K+1 (s, a)) ≤ SA log
                                                                      SA
          (s,a)∈S×A

                                                            KH
                                           = SA log 1 +            .
                                                             SA


Lemma 32. For any constant C1 ≥ e, if x ≥ C1 , then log x ≤ logC1C1 x. Also, for any constant
C2 > 0, we have log(1+x) ≤ log(1+C
                               C2
                                  2)
                                     x for x ≥ C2 , and log(1+x) ≥ log(1+C
                                                                       C2
                                                                           2)
                                                                              x for 0 < x ≤ C2 .

Proof. By elementary calculus, one can check that (log x)/x decreases on [e, ∞). Then, x ≥ C1 ≥
e implies (log x)/x ≤ (log C1 )/C1 , which proves the first inequality. For the second inequality,
note that log(1 + x) is concave, hence g(x) := log(1+C
                                                     C2
                                                         2)
                                                            x − log(1 + x) is convex. Note that
g(0) = g(C2 ) = 0, therefore by its convexity, we have that g(x) ≥ 0 whenever x ≥ C2 and
g(x) ≤ 0 when 0 < x ≤ C2 .
Lemma 33. For m ∈ N ∪ {0} and a constant C ≥ 3, we define the following function:
                                                                   m
                          (                                            )
                              25SA(C + 2 log(1 + m)) log 1 + 2SAH
              f (m) := min 1,                                              .
                                                 2m
Then, f is non-increasing.


                                                        39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We directly show f (m) ≥ f (m + 1) for any m. We write z := 2m /(SA), so f (m) =
min{1, 25(C + 2 log(1 + m))(log(1 + Hz))/z}. Let m0 := max{m ∈ N ∪ {0} : 2m ≤ 25SA}.
We deal with two cases, m ≤ m0 and m > m0 , separately.
Case 1 m ≤ m0 : We show that f (m) = 1 for m ≤ m0 , which implies f (m) ≥ f (m + 1).
First, we have that 25(C + 2 log(1 + m)) ≥ 75 by C ≥ 3 and log(1 + m) ≥ 0. Thus, we must
show that (75 log(1 + Hz))/z ≥ 1. Note that H ≥ 1 and z ≤ 25 when m ≤ m0 , therefore it is
sufficient to prove that 75
                          z log(1 + z) ≥ 1 for z ≤ 25. By Lemma 32 with C2 = 25, we have that
                log(1+25)                                            75 log 26
log(1 + x) ≥        25    x for x ≤ 25, hence we have 75
                                                      z log(1 + z) ≥     25    ≥ 1.
Case 2 m > m0 : We prove that f (m) ≥ f (m + 1) by showing that the second argument of the
minimum in the definition of f is decreasing when m > m0 . Specifically, we show that
                                            m                                    m+1
           (C + 2 log(1 + m)) log(1 + 2SAH )   (C + 2 log(2 + m)) log(1 + 2 SA H )
                                             ≥                                     .
                          2m                                 2m+1
Rearranging the terms and plugging in z = 2m /(SA), one can see that it is sufficient to prove
            (C + 2 log(2 + m)) log (1 + 2Hz) ≤ 2(C + 2 log(1 + m)) log (1 + Hz) .                (38)
First, we bound C + 2 log(2 + m) as follows:
                        C + 2 log(2 + m) = C + 2(log(1 + m/2) + log 2)
                                         ≤ C + 2 log(1 + m) + 1.5
                                           3
                                         ≤ C + 3 log(1 + m)
                                           2
                                           3
                                         = (C + 2 log(1 + m)) ,
                                           2
where the second inequality uses that C ≥ 3 and log(1 + m) ≥ 0. We bound log(1 + 2Hz) as
follows:
                                                          1
                               log(1 + 2Hz) ≤ log 2 + log( + Hz)
                                                          2
                                            ≤ 1 + log(1 + Hz)
                                              4
                                            ≤ log(1 + Hz) ,
                                              3
where the last inequality uses that log(1 + Hz) ≥ 3 when z ≥ 25, which holds since m > m0 .
As we have derived C + 2 log(2 + m) ≤ 23 (C + 2 log(1 + m)) and log(1 + 2Hz) ≤ 43 log(1 + Hz),
by multiplying the two inequalities we conclude that inequality (38) holds.

Lemma 34. Let C1 ≥ C2 > 0 be constants. Let f (x) = x1 (C1 + C2 log(1 + log x))) for x > 0.
Then, f is non-increasing on x ≥ 1.

Proof. Taking the derivative of f , we obtain that
                                          C2
                                        1+log x − C1 − C2 log(1 + log x)
                            f ′ (x) =                                    .
                                                      x2
Note that the numerator is decreasing in x, and when plugging in x = 1, the numerator becomes
C2 − C1 ≤ 0. Therefore, we have that f ′ (x) ≤ 0 for all x ≥ 1.

Lemma 35 (Lemma 30 in Chen et al. (2021)). Let C ≥ 0 be a constant and X be a random variable
such that |X| ≤ C almost surely. Then, Var(X 2 ) ≤ 4C 2 Var(X).

F    C ONCENTRATION I NEQUALITIES

All the concentration inequalities used in the analysis are based on the following proposition, which
is derived by following the proof of Theorem (1.6) in Freedman (1975).


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 4. Let {Xt }∞   t=1 be a martingale difference sequence with respect to a filtration
{Ft }∞
     t=0 . Suppose   X t ≤  1 holds almost surely for all t ≥ 1. Let Vt := E[Xt2 |Ft−1 ] for t ≥ 1
and take λ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1] arbitrarily. Then, the following inequality holds for all n ∈ N with
probability at least 1 − δ:
                               n                           n
                               X            eλ − 1 − λ X       1   1
                                     Xt ≤                  Vt + log .                             (39)
                               t=1
                                                λ      t=1
                                                               λ   δ

                      Pn
Proof. Let Mn = exp( t=1 (Xt − ((eλ − 1 − λ)/λ)Vt )) for all n ∈ N, where M0 = 1. Corollary
1.4 (a) in Freedman (1975) states that {Mn }∞                                               ∞
                                              n=0 is a supermartingale with respect to {Fn }n=0 .
By Ville’s maximal inequality, we infer that P(supn≥0 Mn ≥ 1/δ) ≤ δ, which implies that
P(∀n, Mn ≤ 1/δ) ≥ 1 − δ. Taking the logarithm on both sides and rearranging the terms, we
check that Mn ≤ 1/δ is equivalent to inequality (39), completing the proof.

We mainly use the following two corollaries of Proposition 4. The first one has appeared in the
literature several times (Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2014; Xu & Zeevi, 2020; Foster &
Rakhlin, 2023).
Lemma 36. Let C > 0 be a constant and {Xt }∞           t=1 be a martingale difference sequence with
respect to a filtration {Ft }∞
                             t=0 with X t ≤  C  almost  surely for all t ∈ N. Then, for any λ ∈ (0, 1]
and δ ∈ (0, 1], the following inequality holds for all n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ:
                            n                   n
                            X             3λ X                  C   1
                                   Xt ≤          E[Xt2 |Ft−1 ] + log .
                             t=1
                                          4C t=1                λ   δ

                                                                                  λ
Proof. For λ ∈ (0, 1], it holds that eλ ≤ 1 + λ + (e − 2)λ2 , hence, e −1−λ
                                                                        λ   ≤ (e − 2)λ. Let
Xt′ = Xt /C. Applying Proposition 4 on {Xt′ }∞
                                             t=1 , we obtain that
                         n                      n
                         X                      X                           1     1
                               Xt′ ≤ (e − 2)λ         E[(Xt′ )2 |Ft−1 ] +     log
                         t=1                    t=1
                                                                            λ     δ

holds for all n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ. Bounding e − 2 ≤ 3/4 and multiplying both
sides by C completes the proof since CXt′ = Xt and CE[(Xt′ )2 |Ft−1 ] = E[Xt2 |Ft−1 ]/C.

The second corollary is a time-uniform version of Bernstein’s inequality for martingales that incor-
porates a log log n factor instead of log n.
Lemma 37. Let {Xt }∞    t=1 be a martingale difference sequence withPrespect to a filtration {Ft }∞
                                                                                                  t=0 .
                                                                       n
Assume that Xt ≤ 1 holds almost surely for all t ≥ 1. Let Tn = t=1 E[Xt2 | Ft−1 ] be the sum
of conditional variances. Then, for any c > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1], the following inequality holds for all
n ∈ N with probability at least 1 − δ:
                     s
          n
        X                                2(1 + log+ (Tn /c))2  1      2(1 + log+ (Tn /c))2
             Xt ≤ 2 max{Tn , c} log                           + log                          ,
         t=1
                                                  δ            3                δ

where log+ x := log(max{1, x}).

Proof. Let {λj }∞
                j=1 be a sequence that satisfies 0 < λj < 3 for all j ∈ N. We apply Proposition 4
with λ ← λj and δ ← δ/(2j 2 ) for j ∈ N. For fixed j, we have
                               n
                                                                         !
                             X          eλj − 1 − λj         1      2j 2     δ
                P ∃n ∈ N :        Xt >                Tn +     log         ≤ 2.
                              t=1
                                               λj           λj       δ      2j

Using the Taylor series expansion, we verify that the following holds for 0 < λj < 3:
                                          ∞     k−1       ∞
                     eλj − 1 − λj   X λj                  X  λk−1
                                                                j          λj
                                  =                   ≤              =        λ
                                                                                 .
                          λj           k!                   2 · 3k−2   2(1 − j )
                                          k=2             k=2                         3



                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ/(2j 2 ), the following inequality holds for all
n ∈ N:
                              n
                             X               λj           1        2j 2
                                 Xt ≤           λ
                                                    Tn +      log       .                         (40)
                             t=1        2(1 − j )        λj         δ
                                                   3
We take
                                                q
                                                          2
                                                  log 2jδ
                                     λj = √           q         .
                                              j−1             2
                                            ce 2 + 31 log 2jδ
One can check that 0 < λj < 3. We have
                                q
                                  log 2jδ
                                          2                         √ j−1
                      λj                                      1   1    ce 2
                             = √ j−1                   and       = +q           .
                         λ
                                2 ce 2                        λj  3           2
                  2 1 − 3j                                            log 2jδ
Plugging in these values to inequality (40), we obtain the following inequality:
                      n
                                                      !r
                     X               Tn       √ j−1             2j 2   1     2j 2
                         Xt ≤       √ j−1 + ce 2           log       + log        .              (41)
                     t=1          2 ce 2                         δ     3      δ
                                                      P∞
Taking the union bound over j ∈ N and noting that j=1 2jδ2 ≤ δ, we obtain that inequality (41)
holds for all j and for all n simultaneously with probability at least 1 − δ, which can be written in
the following equivalent form:
                     n
                                    (                       !r                           )!
                    X                     Tn       √ j−1              2j 2   1      2j 2
     P ∃n ∈ N :         Xt ≥ min        √ j−1 + ce 2              log      + log            ≤ δ.
                    t=1
                                j∈N    2 ce 2                          δ     3       δ
Now, we choose j = jn for each n ∈ N and provide a bound for the minimum. We define Tn′ :=
                                                                           jn −1      p               jn −1
                                             ′
max{T
p      n , c} and  take jn  =  1 +  ⌊log(T   n /c)⌋.  Then,   we  have   e   2    ≤     Tn′ /c and e− 2 ≤
  ec/Tn′ , implying that
                            (                            !r                            )
                                   Tn          √ j−1              2j 2     1      2j 2
                       min       √ j−1 + ce 2                 log       + log
                       j∈N      2 ce 2                              δ      3        δ
                                                      !r
                                Tn          √ jn −1              2j 2    1       2j 2
                       ≤     √ jn −1 + ce 2                 log n + log n
                            2 ce 2                                δ      3        δ
                                                  r
                                                          2j 2           2j 2
                            r
                            Tn     e                              1
                                                     log n + log n
                                          p
                       ≤            ′
                                       + Tn′
                             2   Tn                        δ      3        δ
                           r
                                      2j 2     1     2j 2
                       ≤ 2 Tn′ log n + log n ,
                                       δ       3       δ
                                                      ′
                                                              pe
where in the last inequality we apply Tn ≤ Tn and                2 + 1 ≤ 2. Finally, noting that jn ≤
1 + log(Tn′ /c) = 1 + log+ (Tn /c), we obtain that the following inequality holds for all n ∈ N, with
probability at least 1 − δ:
                     s
           n
        X                                  2(1 + log+ (Tn /c))2        1       2(1 + log+ (Tn /c))2
              Xt ≤ 2 max{Tn , c} log                               + log                            .
        t=1
                                                     δ                 3                 δ



G    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
In this section, we provide additional details for the experiments described in Section 5. Specific
transitions and reward functions of the RiverSwim environment are depicted in Figure 2. All param-
eters are set according to the algorithms’ theoretical values as described in their respective papers.


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For EQO, the parameters are set as described in Theorem 2, where the algorithm is unaware of the
number of episodes. The algorithm of UCRL2 is modified to adapt to the episodic finite-horizon
setting. We report the average cumulative regret and standard deviation over 10 runs of 100,000
episodes in Figure 3, with the average execution time per run summarized in Table 4.
We observe the superior performance of EQO. When S and H are small, only ORLC shows competi-
tive performance against EQO, but our algorithm outperforms ORLC by increasing margins as S and
H grow. Especially in the case where S = 40 and H = 160, only our algorithm learns the MDP
within the given number of episodes and achieves sub-linear cumulative regret. We also note that
our algorithm takes less execution time.

                        0.4          0.6           0.6
                               0.6         0.35            0.35          0.35
    (1, r = 0.005)      s1            s2            s3             ...          sn    (0.6, r = 1)
                              0.05         0.05            0.05          0.4
                                1            1              1             1

Figure 2: The RiverSwim MDP with n states. The solid arrows and dashed arrows describe the
state transitions of the “right” and “left”actions respectively with their probabilities labeled. r = X
shows the reward of the state-action pair, where r = 0 if not shown.

                   Table 4: Average execution time of each algorithm in seconds.

                                                  S = 10     S = 20       S = 30     S = 40
                     Algorithm
                                                  H = 40     H = 80       H = 120    H = 160
           UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010)            1899.5        7298.9     17541.9   22594.3
          UCBVI-BF (Azar et al., 2017)             699.0        2171.4      4439.3    6785.6
        EULER (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019)          991.0        2847.3      5643.7    8353.7
            ORLC (Dann et al., 2019)              1219.4        3871.1      7408.7   11655.0
            MVP (Zhang et al., 2021a)              523.4        2155.4      4106.5    6687.3
                  EQO (Ours)                       535.2        1904.0      3847.1    6713.1


We report additional experiment results conducted under a MDP described in Figure 2 of Dann
et al. (2021). It is a deterministic MDP where the reward is given only for the last action. If the
agent has followed the optimal policy until the penultimate time step, it faces a state such that
one action has an expected reward of 0.5 and the other has 0. If the agent’s actions deviate from
the optimal policy, then it receives an expected reward of either 0 or ε = 0.02, depending on
the final action. Refer to Appendix C in Dann et al. (2021) for more details about the MDP. We
report the average cumulative regret and standard deviation over 10 runs of 500,000 episodes in
Figure 4. UCRL is excluded due to its high computational cost under large state space. We also add
a tuned version of EQO, highlighting its strength when the parameter is set appropriately. EQO with
theoretical parameters outperforms all other algorithms except ORLC. When appropriately tuned,
EQO incurs the smallest regret by significant margins. While it may be unfair to compare the results
of the algorithms with and without the tuning of the parameters, we draw the reader’s attention to
the complicated structure of the bonus terms of ORLC. As presented in Algorithm 3 in Dann et al.
(2019), the bonus terms of the algorithm utilize at least twenty terms to estimate both upper and
lower bounds of the optimal values, making it almost intractable to effectively tune the algorithm.
For the other algorithms, their bonus terms also consist of multiple terms, being subject to the same
problem. Only EQO offers comprehensive control over the algorithm through a single parameter.
What we highlight here is not only the empirical performance of EQO but also the simplicity of the
algorithm that makes it extremely convenient to tune.
We conduct additional experiments in two more complex environments: Atari ‘free-
way 10 fs30’ (Bellemare et al., 2013) and Minigrid ‘MiniGrid-KeyCorridorS3R1-v0’ (Chevalier-
Boisvert et al., 2023). We have obtained their tabularized versions from the BRIDGE dataset (Laid-
law et al., 2023). Most Atari and MiniGrid environments are either too large in terms of the number


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            UCRL2            UCBVI-BF              EULER                                   ORLC             MVP            EQO (Ours)
                                ×105       Riverswim S=10, H=40                                                             ×105       Riverswim S=20, H=80
                                                                                                                     8.0
                          3.0
      Cumulative Regret


                                                                                                 Cumulative Regret
                                                                                                                     6.0
                          2.0
                                                                                                                     4.0
                          1.0                                                                                        2.0
                          0.0                                                                                        0.0
                                0.0       0.2       0.4      0.6    0.8        1.0                                          0.0       0.2         0.4      0.6    0.8     1.0
                                                      Episodes                 1e5                                                                  Episodes              1e5
                                ×105      Riverswim S=30, H=120                                                            ×105       Riverswim S=40, H=160
                    12.0                                                                                       15.0
                    10.0                                                                                       12.5
Cumulative Regret


                                                                                           Cumulative Regret
                     8.0                                                                                       10.0
                     6.0                                                                                        7.5
                     4.0                                                                                        5.0
                     2.0                                                                                        2.5
                     0.0                                                                                        0.0
                                0.0       0.2       0.4      0.6    0.8        1.0                                          0.0       0.2         0.4      0.6    0.8     1.0
                                                      Episodes                 1e5                                                                  Episodes              1e5

                                       Figure 3: Cumulative regret under RiverSwim MDP with varying S and H.


                                       UCBVI-BF          EULER              ORLC                  MVP                              EQO (Ours)            EQO - Tuned (Ours)
                                ×105            Gap MDP, n = 16                                                            ×105             Gap MDP, n = 32
                          2.0
                                                                                                                     2.0
      Cumulative Regret


                                                                                                 Cumulative Regret


                          1.5
                                                                                                                     1.5
                          1.0
                                                                                                                     1.0
                          0.5                                                                                        0.5
                          0.0                                                                                        0.0
                                 0         1        2       3           4       5                                            0         1          2       3        4       5
                                                     Episodes                  1e5                                                                 Episodes               1e5

Figure 4: Cumulative regret under MDP described in Figure 2 of Dann et al. (2021) with varying n.



of states to perform tabular learning or too simple, where a greedy policy performs best, diminishing
the purpose of comparing the efficiency of exploration strategies. These two specific environments
are selected from each group for their moderate sizes and complexities. Both MDPs have over 150
states and more than two actions, making them much more complex than the RiverSwim MDP. We
note that instead of the conventional 25% chance of sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018), we em-
ploy a 25% chance of random actions to preserve the Markov property.
We include PSRL (Osband et al., 2013), a randomized algorithm for tabular reinforcement learning,
for a more diverse comparison, while UCRL2 is excluded due to its high computational cost in large
state spaces. We report the average cumulative regret and standard deviation over 10 runs of 5,000
episodes in Figure 5. Considering these environments as more real-world-like settings, we tune each
algorithm to achieve their best performance for each instance. For both settings, EQO consistently
demonstrates competitive performance.


                                                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    PSRL      UCBVI-BF       EULER                           ORLC       MVP        EQO (Ours)
                           ×103 Freeway H=10, S=198, A=3                                      ×103 KeyCorridor H=20, S=169, A=6
                                                                                          1.6
                     1.0                                                                  1.4
                     0.8                                                                  1.2
 Cumulative Regret


                                                                      Cumulative Regret
                                                                                          1.0
                     0.6                                                                  0.8
                     0.4                                                                  0.6
                                                                                          0.4
                     0.2
                                                                                          0.2
                     0.0                                                                  0.0
                            0    1000   2000 3000    4000   5000                                0   1000   2000 3000    4000      5000
                                          Episodes                                                           Episodes

                                Figure 5: Cumulative regret under environments with larger state spaces.


Comparing with Bayesian algorithms. PSRL achieves a Bayesian regret guarantee for a given
prior distribution over the MDPs (Osband et al., 2013); however, the prior is not available under the
current experimental setting. While it is possible to construct an artificial prior, the performance of
these algorithms depends on the prior; that is, they gain an advantage if the prior is informative. This
makes it potentially unfair to compare them with algorithms that have frequentist regret guarantees,
as the latter cannot use any prior information and must be more conservative. For example, RLSVI,
another randomized algorithm, requires constant-scale perturbations for a Bayesian guarantee (Os-
band et al., 2016). However, the perturbations must be inflated by a factor of HSA to ensure a
frequentist regret bound (Zanette et al., 2020). Typically, the constant-scaled version empirically
performs much better for most reasonable MDPs.
One way to make the comparison viable would be to tune the frequentist algorithms. As the pur-
pose of the experiment with the RiverSwim MDP is to compare the performance of algorithms with
theoretical guarantees, we set the parameters according to their theoretical values, and hence we
do not tune the parameters and cannot include PSRL for comparison (since it does not have theo-
retical values for its parameters in this setting). In these two additional experiments, we consider
their settings to be closer to real-world environments, where tuning the parameters becomes highly
necessary. Therefore, we tune the algorithms and include PSRL. For EQO, tuning the algorithm is
straightforward: treat ck in Algorithm 1 as a k-independent parameter as in Theorems 1, 3 and 4 and
tune its value. However, as mentioned earlier, the other algorithms have multiple terms with com-
plicated structures as bonuses, and how they should be tuned is not clear. For the results of Figure 5,
a multiplicative factor for the whole bonus term is set as a tuning parameter, therefore maintaining
the same complexity as EQO.

H                     E XPLOITING U NIFORM -R EWARD S ETTING
Although our Assumption 1 generalizes the uniform-reward setting, algorithms may perform better
when prior information that the reward at each time step is at most 1 is available. Algorithm 3
describes how EQO may adapt to the uniform-reward setting. We show that the theoretical guarantees
enjoyed by Algorithm 1 remain valid for Algorithm 3 under the uniform-reward setting, and provide
additional experimental results that compare the performance of the algorithms when all of them
exploit the uniform reward structure. Our algorithm continues to exhibit its superiority over the
other algorithms.

H.1                    T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES FOR U NIFORM -R EWARD S ETTING

In this subsection, we rigorously demonstrate that under the uniform-reward setting, Algorithm 3
enjoys the same theoretical guarantees as Theorems 1 to 4. Set λk as defined in each of the theorems
and let c′k = 7ℓ1,k /λk , so that c′k H = ck . We note that under this choice of parameters, the bonus


                                                                     45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3: EQO for Uniform-Reward Setting
   Input: {c′k }∞
                k=1
 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 2     Set N k (s, a), r̂k (s, a), and P̂ k (s′ |s, a) as in Algorithm 1;
 3     for h = H, H − 1, . . . , 1 do
 4         foreach (s, a) ∈ S × A do
 5             bk (s, a) ← c′k (H −nh + 1)/N k (s, a);                                        o
                               (
                                           k            k             k k
                                  min   r̂   (s, a) +  b  (s, a) + P̂  Vh+1 (s, a), H − h + 1   if N k (s, a) > 0
 6             Qkh (s, a) ←                                                                                       ;
                                  H −h+1                                                        if N k (s, a) = 0
 7         Vhk (s) ← maxa∈A Qkh (s, a) for all s ∈ S;
 8         πhk (s) ← argmaxa∈A Qkh (s, a) for all s ∈ S;
 9     Execute π k and obtain τ k = (sk1 , ak1 , Rhk , . . . , skH , akH , RH
                                                                            k
                                                                              , skH+1 );



term of Algorithm 3 is less than or equal to the bonus term of Algorithm 1. Therefore, the parts
where we derive upper bounds for bk (s, a) in the analysis remain valid, and the only part where we
need lower bounds for bk (s, a) is in the proof of Lemma 2, where we show the quasi-optimism. We
show that quasi-optimism holds under the different choice of bonus terms when the reward structure
is uniform, which implies that Algorithm 3 enjoys the same theoretical guarantees.
First, the high-probability events of Lemmas 5, 6 and 8 should be adjusted to the new bounds of
  ∗
Vh+1   and Rhk . Vh∗ (s) is at most H − h + 1 for all s ∈ S and Rhk is at most 1. One can easily derive
from the proofs that the inequalities of each lemma can be replaced with the following inequalities
respectively:

                          ∗            λk 1{h ̸= H}          ∗              3(H − h)ℓ1,k
              (P̂ k − P )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤               Var(Vh+1    )(s, a) +                 ,
                                         4(H − h)                            λk N k (s, a)
                         ∗             1        ∗             6(H − h)2 ℓ1,k
           (P − P̂ k )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a) ≤ Var(Vh+1   )(s, a) +                   ,
                                       2                         N k (s, a)
                                                        ℓ1,k
               r̂k (s, a) − r(s, a) ≤ λk r(s, a) +               ,
                                                   λk N k (s, a)
where we define 1{h ̸= H}/(H − h) to be 0 when h = H. Let E ′ be the counterpart of E such that
the events of Lemmas 5, 6 and 8 are replaced by the events above.
Now, we show that Algorithm 3 enjoys quasi-optimism.
Lemma 38 (Quasi-optimism for Algorithm 3). Under E ′ , it holds that for all S ∈ S, h ∈ [H], and
k ∈ N,
                                             3
                                    Vhk (s) + λk (H − h + 1) ≥ Vh∗ (s) .
                                             2

Proof. We prove the following inequality by backward induction on h ∈ [H + 1]:

                                                   1{h ̸= H + 1} ∗ 2
                 Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ λk 2Vh∗ (s) −                (Vh ) (s) .
                                                   2(H − h + 1)
It is easy to show that the inequality holds when h = H + 1 or Vhk (s) = H − h + 1. Suppose h ≤ H
and Vhk (s) < H − h + 1, and that the inequality holds for h + 1. Following the proof of Lemma 2
with the refined concentration inequalities, we arrive at the following inequality:
                                          (6(H − h) + 1)ℓ1,k
      Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ −bk (s, a∗ ) +                          + λk r(s, a∗ ) + 2λk P Vh+1∗
                                                                                               (s, a∗ )
                                             λk N k (s, a∗ )
                                 λk 1{h ̸= H}           ∗
                                                             )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                                                                             ∗
                                                                                 )2 (s, a∗ ) .

                               +                Var(Vh+1                                                (42)
                                  2(H − h)


                                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              7(H−h+1)ℓ                            (6(H−h)+1)ℓ
We first note that bk (s, a∗ ) = λk N k (s,a∗1,k
                                              )
                                                 ≥                1,k
                                                     λk N k (s,a∗ )
                                                                      , therefore the sum of the first
                                                                                        ∗
two terms is not greater than 0. Now, we bound the last term. Note that Var(Vh+1           )(s, a∗ ) −
    ∗         ∗            ∗     ∗ 2
P (Vh+1 )(s, a ) = −(P Vh+1 (s, a )) is non-positive, therefore we have that
                                             λk 1{h ̸= H}      ∗
                                                                   )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                       )2 (s, a∗ )

                                                          Var(Vh+1
                                              2(H − h)
                                                      λk            ∗
                                                                       )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                            )2 (s, a∗ ) ,

                                             ≤               Var(Vh+1                                                                                       (43)
                                                2(H − h + 1)
where the inequality also holds for h = H as both sides are 0 in that case. Applying Lemma 27, we
obtain that
                                       ∗
                                  Var(Vh+1 )(s, a∗ ) − P (Vh+1
                                                           ∗
                                                               )2 (s, a∗ ) ≤ −(Vh∗ )2 (s) + 2(H − h + 1)r(s, a∗ ) .                                         (44)
Combining inequalities (42),(43), and (44), we conclude that
                                                                                     λk
                      Vh∗ (s) − Vhk (s) ≤ λk r(s, a∗ ) + 2λk P Vh+1
                                                                ∗
                                                                    (s, a∗ ) −             (V ∗ )2 (s) + λk r(s, a∗ )
                                                                               2(H − h + 1) h

                                                                 1
                                        = λk 2Vh∗ (s) −                   (Vh∗ )2 (s) ,
                                                           2(H − h + 1)
completing the induction argument.

H.2                         A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

                                                UCBVI-BF         EULER             ORLC                               MVP         EQO (Ours)
                                ×105   Riverswim S=10, H=40                                                    ×105         Riverswim S=20, H=80
                          1.5                                                                            5.0
      Cumulative Regret


                                                                                     Cumulative Regret


                                                                                                         4.0
                          1.0
                                                                                                         3.0
                          0.5                                                                            2.0
                                                                                                         1.0
                          0.0                                                                            0.0
                                0.0    0.2     0.4      0.6    0.8       1.0                                   0.0      0.2      0.4      0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                 Episodes                1e5                                                       Episodes           1e5
                                ×105   Riverswim S=30, H=120                                                   ×105     Riverswim S=40, H=160
                                                                                                   15.0
                    10.0
                                                                                                   12.5
Cumulative Regret


                                                                               Cumulative Regret


                          8.0                                                                      10.0
                          6.0                                                                       7.5
                          4.0                                                                       5.0
                          2.0                                                                       2.5
                          0.0                                                                       0.0
                                0.0    0.2     0.4      0.6    0.8       1.0                                   0.0      0.2      0.4      0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                 Episodes                1e5                                                       Episodes           1e5

Figure 6: Cumulative regret of algorithms under the RiverSwim MDP with varying S and H. All
algorithms are aware of the uniform reward structure of the MDP.

We provide additional experimental results showing the performance of the algorithms when the
uniform reward structure is exploited. Note that the RiverSwim MDP satisfies the uniform-reward
assumption. To fairly compare algorithms that are analyzed under more general assumptions, we
adjust them according to the following criteria:

                          (a) If the algorithms clip the estimated values by H, we adjust it to H − h + 1, which is the
                              maximum possible value for any state at time step h.


                                                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (b) If the algorithms have any terms proportional to H in their bonus, we change them to H −h,
        as it is intuitive that the optimistic bonus term should not account for how many time steps
        have passed before the current step.

We note that in the experiment presented in Section 5, the algorithms are not allowed to exploit the
uniform reward structure. Therefore, algorithms that originally exploit it underwent the opposite
conversion for fair comparisons. We do not claim that these simple conversions ensure the validity
of the analyses under the opposite assumptions. However, we believe that they are sufficient for
numerical comparisons.
We display the results in Figure 6. We exclude UCRL2 as it is originally designed for MDPs without
horizons, and we could not find any straightforward conversions for it. With the additional informa-
tion, all the algorithms exhibit significant improvements in their performance when compared with
Figure 3. We emphasize that our algorithm continues to demonstrate its superior performance over
the other algorithms.


                                                48
