Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNA LIGN : U NSUPERVISED DYNAMIC TAXONOMY
A LIGNMENT FOR C ROSS -D OMAIN S EGMENTATION
 Han Sun1 Rui Gong2∗ Ismail Nejjar1 Olga Fink1
 1
  EPFL 2 Amazon
 {han.sun, ismail.nejjar, olga.fink}@epfl.ch                               ruigong@amazon.com

                                               A BSTRACT
             Current unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods for semantic segmen-
             tation typically assume identical class labels between the source and target do-
             mains. This assumption ignores the label-level domain gap, which is common in
             real-world scenarios, thus limiting their ability to identify finer-grained or novel
             categories without requiring extensive manual annotation. A promising direc-
             tion to address this limitation lies in recent advancements in foundation models,
             which exhibit strong generalization abilities due to their rich prior knowledge.
             However, these models often struggle with domain-specific nuances and under-
             represented fine-grained categories. To address these challenges, we introduce
             DynAlign , a framework that integrates UDA with foundation models to bridge
             both the image-level and label-level domain gaps. Our approach leverages prior
             semantic knowledge to align source categories with target categories that can be
             novel, more fine-grained, or named differently (e.g., ‘vehicle’ to {‘car’, ‘truck’,
             ‘bus’}). Foundation models are then employed for precise segmentation and cate-
             gory reassignment. To further enhance accuracy, we propose a knowledge fusion
             approach that dynamically adapts to varying scene contexts. DynAlign generates
             accurate predictions in a new target label space without requiring any manual an-
             notations, allowing seamless adaptation to new taxonomies through either model
             retraining or direct inference. Experiments on the street scene semantic segmen-
             tation benchmarks GTA→Mapillary Vistas and GTA→IDD validate the effective-
             ness of our approach, achieving a significant improvement over existing methods.
             Our code is publically available at https://github.com/hansunhayden/DynAlign.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation is a crucial computer vision task that assigns category labels to each pixel in
an image, enabling detailed scene understanding. Driven by advancements in deep learning, the field
has recently seen significant progress, with applications ranging from autonomous driving (Cheng
et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2023) to medical image diagnosis (Cao et al., 2022). Despite this progress,
models trained on labeled source datasets often struggle to generalize to data with different distri-
butions due to variations in weather, illumination, or object appearance, resulting in degraded per-
formance. While re-training or fine-tuning models can address this issue, these approaches require
annotated in-domain data, which is particularly costly for semantic segmentation.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) addresses the challenge of adapting a model trained on a
labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain by mitigating the adverse effects of domain
shift without requiring costly data annotations. However, most UDA are constrained by domain-
specific knowledge from the available datasets and typically operate under closed-set assumptions,
where the label spaces of the two domains are identical. This assumption limits their applicability
in real-world scenarios, where source and target datasets often exhibit the label-level taxonomy gap
- including variations in class categories, semantic contexts, and category granularity.
To overcome this limitation, open-set Domain Adaptation (DA) methods have been developed to
recognize novel classes in the target domain (Saito & Saenko, 2021; Li et al., 2023). However,
these methods are only capable of distinguishing unknown classes from known ones and do not
provide detailed classifications for new target classes. To solve this, taxonomy-adaptive domain
     ∗
         This work was done before Rui Gong joined Amazon.


                                                      1
                mapping                             traffic lane marking, …}    𝚽
                           road     sand ⊃ {roadside sand, piled sand, …}
   𝒚
   !𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔                                                                                      𝔽'                         𝒚
                                                                                                                          &𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔
                                    taxonomy mapping
                                                                                context-aware text feature
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                                                                                 Prior
                                                                                               Knowledge


                              UDA
                                                                                              Open-Vocabulary
                                                                                               Segmentation


            (a) UDA: domain-specific knowledge                          (b) Open-vocabulary segmentation: prior knowledge

                               Prior                                   person                       road       terrain
                             Knowledge



                             DynAlign
                                                                       person     rider    road crosswalk snow mountain   bench    boat

   (c) DynAlign: domain-specific & prior knowledge                                  (d) Example of taxonomy adaptation

Figure 1: DynAlign and taxonomy adaptation. Current UDA methods focus solely on domain-
specific knowledge transfer and assume consistent class labels across domains, limiting their flexi-
bility in adapting to different taxonomies. Open-vocabulary segmentation models excel with broader
taxonomies through large-scale pretraining but lack the precision of domain-specific models for spe-
cialized tasks. In contrast, DynAlign integrates with any UDA model and flexibly adapts to diverse
taxonomies and scene contexts, leveraging the prior knowledge of foundational models.

adaptation has been proposed, enabling UDA in settings where the target domain adopts a label space
different from that of the source domain (Gong et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023a). These methods aim
to align differing taxonomies by leveraging relationships between source and target classes but still
require prior knowledge about the target labels through annotated samples from the target domain.
These challenges highlight the need for a more flexible approach that can simultaneously manage
domain shifts while accommodating new taxonomies without requiring additional annotations from
the target domain. Despite the significance of this problem, fully unsupervised methods that can
address both domain shifts and taxonomy discrepancies remain largely underexplored.
Recent advancements in foundation models offer a promising direction to overcome these limi-
tations. By leveraging large-scale pretraining on diverse datasets, these models can generalize
across varied domains, tackling the challenges posed by limited domain knowledge and unseen
categories. For instance, recent open-vocabulary semantic segmentation works (Ghiasi et al., 2022)
leverage the knowledge in foundation models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and Segment Any-
thing (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023), enabling segmentation across a broad range of unbounded class
labels. However, despite their strong generalization ability, foundation models often struggle with
inferior performance compared to domain-specific models trained on in-domain datasets. Their
broad focus can limit their effectiveness in specialized tasks, such as street scene understanding,
where fine-grained segmentation requires detailed, domain-specific knowledge.
To conclude, existing works have been tackling image-level and label-level domain gaps separately,
while the intersection of these two problems remains underexplored. In this work, we propose a
new benchmark of unsupervised taxonomy adaptation, addressing both image-level and label-level
domain gaps without supervision, as shown in Figure 1 (c). To achieve this, we propose DynAlign ,
a novel approach that integrates both domain-specific knowledge and rich open-world prior knowl-
edge from foundation models. The framework first leverages domain-specific knowledge by aligning
the data distributions of the source and target domains within the UDA paradigm. Subsequently, to
incorporate prior knowledge from foundation models, DynAlign dynamically adapts to new scene
contexts by retrieving in-domain predictions and extending the knowledge with foundation models
to generate predictions in the new target label space, accommodating the different taxonomy in the
target domain. In DynAlign , foundational model knowledge is fused in three modules. First, Large
Language Model (LLM) is used for semantic taxonomy mapping and context-aware descriptions.
For instance, the source domain label ‘road’ is mapped to {‘road’, ‘sidewalk’, ‘lane marking’, etc.}
in the target domain, and then each label such as ‘lane marking’ can be further enriched with more
precise descriptions like {‘traffic lane marking’, ‘double lines’} to capture the current context and
improve semantic granularity. Then, SAM is employed to refine the coarse semantic masks gener-
ated by the UDA model, providing more fine-grained masks within precise boundaries (e.g., seg-
menting ‘lane marking’, ‘catch basin’ within the ‘road’ region). Lastly, a knowledge fusion mech-
anism is introduced, where CLIP is leveraged to extract textual features based on the context-aware
taxonomy provided by LLM and reassign semantic labels to the proposed mask regions, effectively


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fusing UDA knowledge with prior knowledge. Predictions from DynAlign can be directly used or
leveraged as pseudo-labels to train an offline segmentation model on the target domain, enabling
instant inference without the need for target domain annotations.
Our approach operates in a fully unsupervised manner, integrating seamlessly with any UDA-based
semantic segmentation model. By leveraging the prior knowledge of foundation models, it strength-
ens in-domain predictions and flexibly adapts to new classes and scene contexts. When the target
label set changes, only the taxonomy mapping needs to be updated to instantly predict on the tar-
get dataset without requiring additional training. This adaptability offers a highly flexible solution
for cross-domain semantic segmentation in dynamic, real-world environments with changing tax-
onomies. We conduct extensive experiments on the GTA→ Mapillary Vistas and GTA → IDD street
scene semantic segmentation benchmarks. The results demonstrate that our method effectively com-
bines domain-specific knowledge with prior knowledge from foundation models, achieving superior
performance in the unsupervised taxonomy-adaptive domain adaptation task.


2     R ELATED W ORKS

2.1   U NSUPERVISED D OMAIN A DAPTATION

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to minimize the domain gap and transfer knowledge
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Due to the ubiquity of domain gaps,
UDA methods have been widely applied to major computer vision problems including image and
video classification (Zhang et al., 2023; Lai et al., 2023; Zara et al., 2023), object detection (Chen
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2022b;c; Fan et al., 2023b), and semantic segmentation (Tsai et al., 2018;
Hoyer et al., 2022a; 2023). UDA approaches typically minimize domain gaps through methods like
discrepancy minimization (Long et al., 2015), adversarial training (Ganin et al., 2016; Long et al.,
2018; Shi & Liu, 2024), self-training (Pan et al., 2019; Mei et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). Recently,
foundation models have been used to further enhance the adaptation performance by leveraging
large-scale pretraining (Fahes et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024; Gondal et al., 2024).
While traditional UDA methods assume a consistent label space between the source and target do-
mains , this assumption is often violated in real-world scenarios. To address this, several specialized
UDA methods have been developed to handle different label shift scenarios (Tachet des Combes
et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2023; Westfechtel et al., 2023). Partial DA (Cao et al., 2018; Guo et al.,
2022) addresses situations where the target domain contains a subset of the source domain’s classes.
Open-set DA (Saito & Saenko, 2021; Li et al., 2023) handles cases where the target domain includes
unknown classes not present in the source domain. Universal DA (You et al., 2019; Qu et al., 2024)
aims to adapt to target domains with any combination of known and unknown classes.
Typically, In the field of cross-domain semantic segmentation, various UDA approaches have been
proposed to address the challenges posed by the fine-grained task. Class-incremental DA (Kundu
et al., 2020) focuses on adding new classes while preserving knowledge of previously learned ones.
Open-set adaptation methods (Bucher et al., 2021; Choe et al., 2024) aim to predict the boundaries of
unknown classes. However, these works can only distinguish between the unknown classes and the
known ones and do not perform further classification on the unknown classes. Taxonomy adaptive
DA (Gong et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023a) utilizes a more flexible taxonomy mapping where the target
label space differs from the source domain. Despite being able to distinguish novel target classes
further, these methods cannot be applied in a fully unsupervised DA setting as they rely on few-shot
labeled samples from the target domain to gain knowledge on novel classes. Instead, DynAlign
leverage prior knowledge from foundation models for unsupervised adaptation.


2.2   O PEN - VOCABULARY S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims to assign a semantic label to each pixel of an im-
age using an arbitrary open-vocabulary label set (Xian et al., 2019; Bucher et al., 2019). Recent
advancements in vision-language models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) have enabled zero-shot
classification with enhanced generalization ability from large-scale pretraining, leading to their wide
application in open-vocabulary tasks, including semantic segmentation (Li et al., 2022a).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To adapt CLIP for better performance in dense prediction tasks, different approaches have been
explored, including fine-tuning CLIP (Liang et al., 2023; Cho et al., 2024) and modifying CLIP’s
model architecture (Wang et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024). For finer segmentation boundaries, two-
stage frameworks involving mask proposal generation followed by classification remain prominent
in open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (Kirillov et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023a; Ding et al., 2022).
The recent advent of Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) provides a free and
precise mask proposal generation approach and thus integrated by several works to enhance the
performance (Shi & Yang, 2024; Li et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024). Despite these advancements,
open-vocabulary methods struggle with domain-specific nuances and fine-grained categories (Zhou
& Beyerer, 2023; Wu et al., 2023b). Wei et al. (2024) leverages vision foundation models to improve
the generalization ability of task-specific semantic segmentation models. Yilmaz et al. (2024) incor-
porates domain-specific knowledge into the open-vocabulary framework through supervised prompt
fine-tuning, whereas our work focuses on fully unsupervised adaptation.

3    P ROBLEM D EFINITION
We formulate the problem of unsupervised taxonomy adaptive cross-domain semantic segmentation
as follows: given a labeled source domain Ds with a label set Cs , our goal is to achieve semantic
segmentation on an unlabeled target domain Dt with a known label set Ct . Specifically, we have:
    • a labeled source domain Ds = {Xs , Ys }, where Xs ∈ RH×W ×3 represents RGB images and
      Ys denotes pixel-wise annotations in the source label set Cs = {c1s , c2s , . . . , cm
                                                                                           s }.
    • an unlabeled target domain Dt = {Xt }. The ground truth pixel-wise annotations belong to the
      known target label space Ct = {c1t , c2t , ..., cnt } and are not available during training.
    • Cs and Ct may have inconsistent taxonomies. This inconsistency may involve differences
      in label granularity, hierarchical class structures (such as subclasses), or the introduction of
      entirely new categories in Ct , as illustrated in Figure 1 (d).
Formally: Let Ps and Pt represent the distributions of source domain data Xs and target domain
data Xt , respectively. In the context of taxonomy-adaptive cross-domain semantic segmentation,
three primary challenges need to be addressed:
    • Image-level domain gap: the source and target data have distinct data distributions (Ps ̸= Pt ).
    • Label-level taxonomy inconsistency: the source and target label sets are different (Cs ̸= Ct ).
    • Absence of target domain annotations: no labeled data is available for the target domain.
We aim to train a model using both the labeled source domain Ds and the unlabeled target domain
Dt , and evaluate the performance on the target dataset Dt within the label space Ct .

4    M ETHOD
Method Overview In this work, we propose DynAlign, a novel framework for unsupervised
taxonomy-adaptive cross-domain semantic segmentation that fuses domain-specific knowledge with
text and visual prior knowledge. Our method comprises three main stages: incorporating domain
knowledge, incorporating prior knowledge, and combining them through a knowledge fusion mech-
anism, as illustrated in Figure 2. In the first stage, we integrate domain-specific knowledge by
training a domain-specific model on the available labeled source domain and unlabeled target do-
main, which generates predictions within the source label space (Section 4.1). In the second stage,
we incorporate both text & vision prior knowledge to address the label-level taxonomy inconsis-
tency. Specifically, we use LLM to construct a taxonomy mapping to link the source labels with the
target labels and further enrich the target labels with context descriptions (see Section 4.2). Then we
utilize SAM to generate mask proposals that segment the image into fine-grained semantic regions
and extract multi-scale visual information for each region (see Section 4.3). In the final stage, we
introduce knowledge fusion mechanism (see Section 4.4), where the domain-specific predictions
and prior knowledge are integrated based on CLIP. As shown in Figure 3, for each mask proposal
from SAM, we take the majority pixel label of in-domain prediction as the initial source label and
retrieve the correlated target classes from the taxonomy mapping. CLIP is then used to extract the
multi-scale regional visual features and the context-aware text features for the mapped target classes.
Finally, each fine-grained mask region is reclassified based on CLIP feature similarity.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                                              𝒑𝒔𝒆𝒖𝒅𝒐 − 𝒍𝒂𝒃𝒆𝒍

                        Domain knowledge              𝑼𝑫𝑨                   road → road                       Knowledge fusion
                                                                            terrain → terrain
                                                                            unlabeled → unlabeled
                                                            𝒇𝒔→𝒕                         …



                            𝑫𝒔 = {𝑿𝒔, 𝒚𝒔}                                             𝒚
                                                                                      '𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔

                           vision
                                                                                                            𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷
                            𝑺𝑨𝑴                                       𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷 𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒓
                                                                                                          𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒊𝒍𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚
                            text                                                          vision & text
                                                          road lane-marking
                            LLM               road →          sand
                                              terrain →
                         (Taxonomy                           mountain
      𝑫𝒕 = {𝑿𝒕 }          Mapping)                                                 Prior knowledge
                                              unlabeled → bench                                                                y+ 𝒕 𝝐ℂ$

Figure 2: DynAlign overview. DynAlign integrates with any UDA model, leveraging its domain-
specific knowledge and enhancing it with prior knowledge from foundation models. DynAlign starts
with coarse UDA model predictions, followed by: 1) LLM constructing taxonomy mappings to align
source and target domains; 2) SAM generating fine-grained masks. CLIP is deployed to fuse the
               𝑺𝑨𝑴


                                                                                              …
visual knowledge  from SAM with the semantic knowledge
                                                   𝚽𝐕      from LLM to reassign accurate labels.
                                                                                  road 0.3
The CLIP-fused predictions can be used as pseudo-labels to𝐹further
                                                               𝔽* fine-tune
                                                                     𝐹(     the UDA
                                                                            𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷     model.
        X𝒕                                                                            )                                    lane-marking 0.6
                             mask proposals           global region                                           𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒊𝒍𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚
                                                                               multi-scale visual feature                  sand 0.1
4.1     D OMAIN - SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
                                      road ⊃ {main road, driving lane, …}
                Taxonomy       lane-marking ⊃ {street lane marking,


                                                                                                …
To gain domain-specific   knowledge,     given      a labeled source       𝐓 domain Ds and an unlabeled target do-
                 mapping                       traffic lane marking, …} 𝚽
main Dt , we train a domain-specific
                         road          modelsand,
                               sand ⊃ {roadside    fs→t       by …}
                                                       piled sand, leveraging data from both domains. Specifically,
      𝒚
      !𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔                                                                           𝔽                   𝒚
                                                                                                           &𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔
we follow    the UDA paradigm, taxonomy
                                which mapping
                                          aligns the data distribution                of'the source and target
                                                                        context-aware text feature
                                                                                                                 domains.
This adapted model integrates supervised knowledge from the source domain with visual informa-
tion from the target domain, enabling it to generate accurate predictions on the unlabeled target
dataset Dt within the source label space Cs .                                             Prior
                                                                                                  Knowledge
In our experiments, we develop an UDA model inspired by the architecture proposed by Hoyer et al.
(2022b). The model comprises  UDA a hierarchical transformer encoder, based on the design of Xie et al.
(2021), combined with a multi-scale decoder that effectively integrates      Open-Vocabulary
                                                                                   contextual information from
                                                                              Segmentation
low-level features. Initially, the model is trained using a supervised cross-entropy              loss on the labeled
source domain Ds . Then, we adapt it to the unlabeled target domain Dt through an unsupervised
            (a) UDA:
self-training.  This domain-specific knowledge
                      adaptation process    incorporates a(b)teacher
                                                                Open-vocabulary
                                                                        networksegmentation:
                                                                                   that generatesprior knowledge
                                                                                                        pseudo-labels
for the target domain, whichPrior
                                are then weighted based       on
                                                           person confidence    estimates
                                                                                road         to   account for uncer-
                                                                                              terrain
tainty. These weighted pseudo-labels
                             Knowledge     are used to further refine the model’s performance on the target
domain. The adapted model learns shared feature representations for both domains, enabling it to
effectively handle image-level domain shifts. Detailed model architecture and training procedures
are provided in the Appendix DynAlign
                                   A.1. We leverage the knowledge learned by fs→t to generate initial
predictions ŷt for the target images within the sourcepersonlabelrider
                                                                    set Croad
                                                                          s . crosswalk snow mountain bench boat

       (c) DynAlign: domain-specific & prior knowledge                              (d) Example of taxonomy adaptation
4.2     S EMANTIC TAXONOMY MAPPING

The acquired domain-specific model is constrained by the in-domain knowledge, thus limiting their
ability to generalize beyond the learned source label space to a new target label space. To bridge
this gap, we introduce a taxonomy reasoning process that adapts the label space from Cs to Ct . This
taxonomy mapping enables the model to semantically link source domain labels to the known target
domain label set Ct . For instance, the source label ‘road’ can be mapped to more granular target
domain labels such as {‘road’, ‘sidewalk’, ‘curb’, ‘lane marking’, ‘rail track’, etc.}. We construct a
taxonomy mapping for each source label to connect the source and target label spaces. This mapping
is flexibly defined, allowing for differences in label granularity, hierarchical class structures (such as
subclasses), or the introduction of entirely new categories, as shown in Figure 1 (d).
Formally, given the source domain label set Cs = {c1s , c2s , . . . , cm
                                                                       s } and the target domain label set
Ct = {c1t , c2t , ..., cnt }, we define the taxonomy mapping for each source domain label cis as:

                                              cis → Cit ⊆ Ct ,              1≤i≤m                                                             (1)
where Cit represents an arbitrary subset of Ct that semantically correlates with the source domain
label cis . For novel classes that are not present in the source domain, we map them to each source


                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


label, enabling better discovery of these new classes. Further details about the taxonomy mapping
can be found in the Appendix A.7.
To extract meaningful semantic features, we use the CLIP text encoder to encode text features for
each target label. Original class labels often lack sufficient context and semantic richness, leading to
ambiguity and imprecision. For example, the label ‘bridge’ in street scene segmentation datasets is
too generic and might be interpreted as a bridge over a river rather than a pedestrian bridge in urban
environments. This lack of specificity can cause confusion and misclassification in the segmentation
process, resulting in inferior performance. To address this, we enhance the semantic clarity of each
target class label by expanding it with contextually relevant synonyms or related phrases. For each
target class label, we use GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) to generate a set of contextually relevant
terms, such as ‘bridge’ → {‘road bridge’, ‘footbridge’, ‘pedestrian bridge’, etc.}. These terms are
generated by prompting GPT-4 with descriptions of the dataset context and the original class label.
More details are provided in the appendix A.8. This additional contextual information helps reduce
ambiguity and improve the accuracy of mask region classification. We then compute the context-
aware text feature for each target domain label. Specifically, for each target domain label cjt ∈ Ct ,
we generate a context description set Cjcontext and compute the CLIP encoded text feature for each
description ccontext ∈ Cjcontext . The text feature for class label cjt is then obtained by averaging all
the contextual description features, as follows:


                         Ftj = average ΦT (ccontext ),    ccontext ∈ Cjcontext                       (2)

where ΦT (·) represents CLIP text encoder. We then aggregate these features to form the final text
feature representations of the target domain label space denoted as Ftarget = {Ft1 , Ft2 , ..., Ftn }.
For each source label cis , we retrieve its mapped target labels Cit and the corresponding feature
representation set FiT ⊆ Ftarget as the semantic representation.

4.3   V ISUAL PRIOR KNOWLEDGE

To identify new labels in the target domain, it is essential to align visual information with the target
domain label set and its novel semantic categories. Therefore, we incorporate prior knowledge from
general-purpose foundation models to enhance visual understanding. We first generate mask pro-
posals using the Segment-Anything-Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023), which is renowned for its
zero-shot capability to produce high-quality, fine-grained masks with precise segmentation bound-
aries. With SAM, we are able to obtain a set of mask regions that likely correspond to semantically
meaningful object boundaries.
Next, we capture semantic visual information for each mask region by extracting visual embeddings
using CLIP, which requires capturing both fine-grained details and broader contextual information.
To obtain more representative features, we propose multi-scale visual feature extraction, which
concatenates local and multi-scale global features. Given a target domain image xt , and a binary
mask proposal m from SAM, we obtain the masked local region r = xt ⊙ m and a bounding box b
that crops the masked region. The local feature is extracted with CLIP vision encoder ΦV (·), as:

                                               Fl = ΦV (b)                                           (3)

Specifically, we use ConvCLIP (Yu et al., 2024) vision encoder due to its advantage in dense predic-
tion tasks. To capture broader contextual information, we incorporate global features by averaging
embeddings across multiple scales. This is achieved by adding multi-scale padding around each
local bounding box region b, as illustrated in Figure 3. The padding size is adjusted based on the
class labels, with larger objects like ‘road’ assigned larger padding sizes, and smaller objects like
‘bicycle’ assigned smaller padding sizes. For each bounding box b, we create a set of padded global
regions B and extract the corresponding global feature:

                                      Fg = {ΦV (bk )},     bk ∈ B                                    (4)

To combine both local and global visual information, we extract the final visual feature FV as the
weighted sum of Fg and Fl . Specifically, we calculate the cosine similarity between the local feature


                                                   6
                                                                                                   𝒑𝒔𝒆𝒖𝒅𝒐 − 𝒍𝒂𝒃𝒆𝒍
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                           Domain knowledge            𝑼𝑫𝑨                      road → road                         Knowledge fusion
                                                                                terrain → terrain
                                                                                unlabeled → unlabeled
                                                             𝒇𝒔→𝒕                            …


Fl and each global feature Fgk ∈ Fg . The similarity scores ϕk are computed as follows:
                              𝑫𝒔 = {𝑿𝒔, 𝒚𝒔}                                                  𝒚
                                                                                             '𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔
                                                                          T
                              vision
                                                       (Fl ) Fgk
                                  ϕk = ⟨Fl , Fgk ⟩ =                  ,                           Fgk ∈ Fg .                                          (5)
                                                     ∥Fl ∥ ∥Fgk ∥ + ϵ                                           𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷
                              𝑺𝑨𝑴                                       𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷 𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒓
                                                                                                              𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒊𝒍𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚
where ϵ is a small constant. Subsequently, we derive the final multi-scale visual feature FV for the
current mask region bytextaggregating the local       feature F withvision
                                               road lane-marking l
                                                                         the&global
                                                                              text
                                                                                    features Fg , weighted by
                         LLM         road →
                                      ϕk . This
their respective cosine similarities terrain →
                                                   aggregation
                                                   sand            ensures that both local details and broader
                      (Taxonomy
contextual information   contribute effectively tomountain
                       Mapping)
                                                        the visual feature representation:
      𝑫𝒕 = {𝑿𝒕 }                                unlabeled → bench                         Prior knowledge                           y+ 𝒕 𝝐ℂ$

                                              Σ(ϕk Fgk + (1 − ϕk )Fl )
                                  FV =                                 ,                         Fgk ∈ Fg .                                           (6)
                                                       |Fg |

                     𝑺𝑨𝑴


                                                                                                   …
                                                                              𝚽𝐕
                                                                                                                               road 0.3
                                                                                            𝐹)    𝔽*         𝐹(       𝑪𝑳𝑰𝑷     lane-marking 0.6
        X𝒕                                                                                                          𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒊𝒍𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚
                               mask proposals          global region                                                           sand 0.1
                                                                                   multi-scale visual feature

                                        road ⊃ {main road, driving lane, …}
                   Taxonomy             lane-marking ⊃ {street lane marking,


                                                                                                       …
                    mapping                             traffic lane marking, …}       𝚽𝐓
                               road     sand ⊃ {roadside sand, piled sand, …}
       𝒚
       !𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔                                                                                          𝔽'                         𝒚
                                                                                                                                  &𝒕 𝝐ℂ𝒔
                                        taxonomy mapping
                                                                                       context-aware text feature

Figure 3: Foundational models and knowledge fusion. The fine-grained mask proposals from
SAM are encoded into multi-scale visual features using CLIP’s vision          Priorencoder, while the enriched
target domain taxonomies from LLM are encoded as context-aware              Knowledge
                                                                                text features via CLIP’s text
encoder. The similarity between these visual and text embeddings is then calculated to reassign
                              UDA
semantic taxonomies accurately                                             target domain. Here, ΦV (·) and
                                      to the fine-grained masks in theOpen-Vocabulary
  T
Φ (·) denote the CLIP vision and text encoders, respectively. Fl Segmentationand Fg represent the local and
global features, while FV denotes their weighted sum, forming the final extracted multi-scale visual
feature to represent  the mask region.
            (a) UDA: domain-specific       FT refers to the(b)
                                     knowledge              extracted  text feature
                                                               Open-vocabulary        set ofprior
                                                                               segmentation: candidate   classes.
                                                                                                  knowledge

4.4     K NOWLEDGE FUSIONPrior                                                person                        road        terrain
                                  Knowledge

Given the domain-specific knowledge and prior knowledge from foundation models, we aim to
fuse them to bridge both image-level
                         DynAlign
                                     and label-level domain gaps. The general fusion process of
DynAlign is shown in Figure 3.
                                                                              person     rider    road crosswalk snow mountain    bench        boat
Given a target image xt , we generate mask proposals that segment the image into fine-grained re-
gions (c) DynAlign: domain-specific & prior knowledge
       using SAM. For each mask region m, we first associate   (d) Example of taxonomy adaptation
                                                                   it with the source domain label space
by retrieving in-domain knowledge from the label prediction ŷt generated by model fs→t (as de-
scribed in Section 4.1) The initial label cis for mask region m is determined by the majority of
predicted pixel labels within that mask area. To reassign each mask region with new target labels,
given the source label cis , we retrieve its related target domain label subsets cis → Cit ⊆ Ct and the
corresponding feature representation set FT ⊆ Ftarget using prior knowledge from the taxonomy
mapping (see Section 4.2). Additionally, based on the initial label cis , we adjust the appropriate
padding size of the global region B (see Section 4.3) accordingly to enrich the visual context and
extract the multi-scale visual feature FV , serving as the regional visual feature representation. Fi-
nally, each mask region is reassigned a new target label based on the largest similarity between the
context-aware text features FT and multi-scale visual feature FV as:

                                         ϕ = ⟨FV , FT ⟩ ,                 ỹt = argmax(ϕ)                                                             (7)

We reassign the label of each mask region from ŷs to the newly estimated ỹt when the confidence
exceeds 0.5. This reassignment is applied to every mask proposal within the image sample xt ,
thereby updating the pixel-wise semantic pseudo-labels in the target domain.
DynAlign generates predictions for new classes in the target domain that were not present in the
source domain, eliminating the need for manual annotations. This capability allows the model to
adapt flexibly to new target classes and when the target label set changes, we simply redefine the


                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


taxonomy mapping to generate new predictions for the target domain dataset. This two-step process–
mapping known classes and discovering new ones – enables our framework to effectively adapt to
the target domain’s taxonomy in a fully unsupervised manner.

5      E XPERIMENT

5.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Datasets We evaluate our method using the synthetic dataset GTA as the source domain and two real-
world datasets, Mapillary Vistas and India Driving Dataset (IDD), as target domains. GTA (Richter
et al., 2016) is a synthetic dataset with pixel-level annotations for 19 semantic classes. It serves as
the labeled source domain in our experiments. Mapillary Vistas (Neuhold et al., 2017) contains
25k high-resolution images collected from a wide variety of environments, weather conditions, and
geographical locations. It is annotated with 66 object categories, providing a highly challenging real-
world target domain. IDD dataset (Varma et al., 2019), captured from Indian urban driving scenes, is
characterized by complex and varied road environments. It contains 10,003 images annotated with
25 semantic classes at level 3 granularity. For evaluation, we focus on 45 classes from Mapillary
Vistas and 24 from IDD, excluding small-scale or less informative categories.
Experimental setup For the unsupervised taxonomy-adaptive DA task, we use the GTA training
set as the labeled source domain and the training sets of Mapillary Vistas and IDD as the unlabeled
target domains. No target domain annotations are used during training, ensuring a fully unsuper-
vised domain adaptation setup. We perform image-level adaptation by training the model fs→t on
the labeled source domain and each of the unlabeled target domains separately, following the de-
fault training parameters in Hoyer et al. (2022b). For label-level adaptation, we define a taxonomy
mapping between the source and target labels (see Appendix A.7) and context descriptions for target
labels (see Appendix A.8). Performance is reported on the validation set of each target dataset. We
employ the ViT-L SAM model (Kirillov et al., 2023) and the ConvNeXt-Large CLIP model (Yu
et al., 2024) by default. More experimental details are provided in the appendix A.1.
Evaluation metrics We evaluate the performance using two standard semantic segmentation met-
rics. Mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) calculates the average intersection over union for each
class and then averages across all classes. Mean Accuracy (mAcc) calculates the percentage of
correctly predicted pixels for each class and then averages the results across all classes.

5.2     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to investigate the fully unsupervised taxonomy-
adaptive domain adaptation problem. Traditional DA methods are limited to fixed label spaces,
making them inapplicable to our problem setting. Therefore, we compare our proposed method,
DynAlign , with open-vocabulary segmentation methods, Grounded-SAM (Ren et al., 2024) and
OWL-VIT (Matthias Minderer, 2023). Additionally, we evaluate the naive combination of these
methods with HRDA, where HRDA generates predictions for classes matching the source labels,
while open-vocabulary methods are employed to predict new classes (see Appendix A.3 for more
illustration). The comparative results are summarized in Table 1.
      Table 1: Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation comparisons on Mapillary Vistas and IDD
                                   Mapillary Vistas                  IDD
           Methods           all      known         unknown all     known    unknown
                          mACC mIoU mACC mIoU mACC mIoU mACC mIoU mACC mIoU mACC mIoU
       Grounded-SAM       33.1   28.6   46.7   43.0   24.0   18.3   36.0   30.8   43.7   37.2   16.1   14.1
       OwlVIT-SAM         29.6   19.5   32.7   26.7   27.5   14.7   31.6   20.9   33.3   23.1   27.3   15.2
           HRDA            -      -     75.8   65.8    -      -      -      -     68.9   61.3    -      -
    HRDA + Grounded-SAM   40.4   32.9   63.6   53.1   25.0   19.4   51.7   39.4   65.6   49.3   16.1   14.1
    HRDA + OwlVIT-SAM     40.2   28.8   56.1   48.4   29.5   15.6   55.9   40.2   67.1   49.9   27.3   15.2
            Ours          53.0   36.7   72.6   62.4   39.9   19.6   57.7   41.7   66.8   50.9   34.3   18.1


On the Mapillary dataset, open-vocabulary methods, which relies solely on foundation models,
demonstrate limited performance. By integrating domain-specific knowledge through HRDA,


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the performance improves, with HRDA + Grounded-SAM reaching 32.9% and HRDA + OWL-
ViT-SAM achieving 28.8% mIoU. Notably, our method, DynAlign , significantly outperforms
all baselines, achieving the highest mIoU of 36.7%. Results on IDD show consistent trends.
Open-vocabulary methods alone perform modestly with mIoUs of 30.8% for Grounded-SAM and
20.9% for OWL-ViT-SAM. When combined with HRDA, performance improves to 39.4% and
40.2%, respectively. DynAlign demonstrates again superior performance with the highest mIoU
of 41.7%. Notably, for unknown classes, DynAlign achieves an mIoU of 18.1%, surpassing HRDA
+ Grounded-SAM at 14.1% and HRDA + OWL-ViT-SAM at 15.2%, showing a substantial im-
provement in accurately segmenting unseen categories. The results demonstrate that incorporating
domain-specific knowledge through UDA significantly enhances performance, even when leverag-
ing strong foundation models for open-vocabulary tasks. DynAlign not only preserves the domain
knowledge from the UDA baseline but also retains the flexibility to accommodate new classes. This
highlights its advantages in effectively integrating both domain knowledge and prior knowledge,
highlighting its advantage over traditional UDA methods and open-vocabulary approaches.
We present qualitative comparison results on the Mapillary Vistas dataset in Figure 5. The key new
classes are highlighted under each set of results. Our method clearly outperforms the baselines by
producing more precise boundaries, better detection of new classes, and more accurate predictions.

5.3   P SEUDO - LABEL T RAINING FOR S EGMENTATION M ODEL

While DynAlign demonstrated superior perfor-       60
                                                                    56.2        DynAlign (Direct inference)
mance over baseline open-vocabulary methods        55                           DynAlign (Pseudo-labels)
during inference, we also explored its capabil-           53.0
ity to generate pseudo-labels for training a new   50
segmentation model on the target domain’s tax-
onomy. This approach aims to reduce infer-         45
                                                     Percentage (%)


ence time and potentially boost segmentation
                                                   40                                           38.9
accuracy. By generating pseudo-labels on the                                      36.7
Mapillary Vistas training set using DynAlign       35
, we train a semantic segmentation model in
the new label space (details provided in Ap-       30
pendix A.1). Figure 4 compares direct infer-
ence using DynAlign and performance of the         25
trained segmentation model on the validation       20
set. The pseudo-label trained model outper-                    mACC                     mIoU
                                                                         Metric
forms direct inference, with mACC improving Figure 4: Performance comparison between di-
from 53.0% to 56.2% and mIoU from 36.7% rect inference and pseudo-label training using Dy-
to 38.9%. These results suggest that DynAlign nAlign on the Mapillary Vistas dataset.
can generate high-quality pseudo-labels, en-
abling the training of segmentation models that can greatly boost the efficiency and maintain im-
proved performance on the target domain. We report the memory usage and computational efficiency
of DynAlign in both direct inference and pseudo-labeling in the appendix A.2.
Table 2: Ablations on multi-scale visual                              Table 3: Ablations on CLIP vision en-
feature and context-aware text feature                                coders
        Modules           Mapillary Vistas      IDD                      model    Mapillary Vistas      IDD
 MS (vision)  CA (text)   mACC      mIoU     mACC   mIoU                          mACC      mIoU     mACC   mIoU
      %           %        44.0      29.0    52.9       37.9             CLIP      50.8      35.0    54.7   38.0
      %           !        45.4      29.4    52.5       38.0           MaskCLIP    50.5      34.7    54.1   37.5
      !           %        50.2      35.6    57.0       39.9            SCLIP      50.9      36.0    56.8   39.4
      !           !        53.0      36.7    57.7       41.7           ConvCLIP    53.0      36.7    57.7   41.7

5.4   A BLATION S TUDIES

Multi-scale visual feature & context-aware text feature ablation In contrast to the basic CLIP
features, we enhance feature representations by introducing context-aware text feature (CA-Text)
and multi-scale visual feature (MS-vision). As shown in Table 2, these two strategies have distinct
impacts on the performance. Incorporating multi-scale visual features improves the Mapillary mIoU


                                                    9
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      from 29.0% to 35.6% and the IDD mIoU from 37.9% to 39.9%. The context-aware text feature
      shows modest gains, particularly on Mapillary, where mIoU rises from 29.0% to 29.4%. Combining
      both components yields the best results (Mapillary mIoU: 36.7%, IDD mIoU: 41.7%).
      DynAlign modules. Table 3 compares the performance of various CLIP backbones in DynAlign
      framework. ConvCLIP (Yu et al., 2024), the only convolution-based model, outperforms ViT-based
      models including CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), MaskCLIP (Dong et al., 2023), and SCLIP (Wang
      et al., 2023), and achieves the best results, with a Mapillary Vistas mIoU of 36.7% and an IDD mIoU
      of 41.7%. The result shows its advantage in dense prediction tasks when input sizes scale up.
      Table 4 shows shows the performance on the Mapillary
      Vistas dataset when replacing corresponding modules                             Table 4: Ablations on DynAlign modules
      in DynAlign with MIC (Hoyer et al., 2023), Mobile-
                                                                                              Method                mIoU   mAcc
      SAM (Zhang et al.), and Llama (Touvron et al., 2023).
                                                                                           HRDA → MIC               37.7   54.4
      The results demonstrate consistently strong perfor-
                                                                                         SAM → MobileSAM            35.2   51.5
      mance across various model integrations, emphasiz-                                   GPT-4 → Llama            37.5   52.1
      ing DynAlign ’s flexibility in seamlessly incorporating                              DynAlign (Ours)          36.7   53.0
      foundation models into domain-specific tasks.
               road               sidewalk                     sky                     vegetation        terrain              wall
               person            traffic sign                  traffic light            pole             building             unlabeled


4pc
               lane-marking general             lane-marking crosswalk                billboard      street light          utility pole


               lane-marking general             street light                   curb


               lane-marking general             street light                   curb        bridge      manhole             utility pole

                                                                                             (d) HRDA                 (e) HRDA
            (a) Image            (b) Ground Truth               (c) DynAlign (ours)
                                                                                          + Grounded-SAM            + OwlVIT-SAM
      Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons on Mapillary Vistas dataset. DynAlign effectively segments
      new and fine-grained classes on the target domain, showing strong taxonomy adaptation capabilities.

      6   C ONCLUSION
      In this paper, we propose DynAlign to address the challenge of unsupervised taxonomy-adaptive
      cross-domain semantic segmentation, effectively segmenting images across domains with differ-
      ent taxonomies without requiring target domain annotations. DynAlign integrates domain-specific
      knowledge by utilizing UDA models to bridge the image-level domain gap, and leverages foundation
      models to resolve label-level taxonomy inconsistencies between domains. The approach demon-
      strates significant improvements over existing methods on the Mapillary Vistas and IDD street scene
      datasets, consistently achieving higher mIoU scores for both known and unknown classes.
      To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to define and address the unsupervised taxonomy-
      adaptive domain adaptation problem. Our results demonstrate that DynAlign outperforms not only
      open-vocabulary segmentation methods but also their naive combinations with domain adaptation
      techniques. While our research focuses on road scene understanding, the framework has the poten-
      tial to be extended to other domains with evolving taxonomies.


                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Maxime Bucher, Tuan-Hung Vu, Matthieu Cord, and Patrick Pérez. Zero-shot semantic segmenta-
 tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Maxime Bucher, Tuan-Hung Vu, Matthieu Cord, and Patrick Pérez. Handling new target classes
 in semantic segmentation with domain adaptation. Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
 212:103258, 2021.
Hu Cao, Yueyue Wang, Joy Chen, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Qi Tian, and Manning Wang.
  Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation. In European conference
  on computer vision, pp. 205–218. Springer, 2022.
Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Partial transfer learning with
  selective adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 2724–2732, 2018.
Yuhua Chen, Wen Li, Christos Sakaridis, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Domain adaptive faster
  r-cnn for object detection in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 3339–3348, 2018.
Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1290–1299, 2022.
Seokju Cho, Heeseong Shin, Sunghwan Hong, Anurag Arnab, Paul Hongsuck Seo, and Seungryong
  Kim. Cat-seg: Cost aggregation for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4113–4123, 2024.
Seun-An Choe, Ah-Hyung Shin, Keon-Hee Park, Jinwoo Choi, and Gyeong-Moon Park. Open-set
  domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23943–23953, 2024.
Zheng Ding, Jieke Wang, and Zhuowen Tu. Open-vocabulary universal image segmentation with
  maskclip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08984, 2022.
Xiaoyi Dong, Jianmin Bao, Yinglin Zheng, Ting Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Hao Yang, Ming Zeng,
  Weiming Zhang, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Nenghai Yu. Maskclip: Masked self-
  distillation advances contrastive language-image pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10995–11005, June 2023.
Mohammad Fahes, Tuan-Hung Vu, Andrei Bursuc, Patrick Pérez, and Raoul De Charette. Poda:
 Prompt-driven zero-shot domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
 ference on Computer Vision, pp. 18623–18633, 2023.
Jianan Fan, Dongnan Liu, Hang Chang, Heng Huang, Mei Chen, and Weidong Cai. Taxonomy
   adaptive cross-domain adaptation in medical imaging via optimization trajectory distillation. In
   Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 21174–21184,
   2023a.
Qi Fan, Mattia Segu, Yu-Wing Tai, Fisher Yu, Chi-Keung Tang, Bernt Schiele, and Dengxin Dai. To-
  wards robust object detection invariant to real-world domain shifts. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2023). OpenReview, 2023b.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  Journal of machine learning research, 17(59):1–35, 2016.
Saurabh Garg, Nick Erickson, James Sharpnack, Alex Smola, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and
  Zachary Chase Lipton. Rlsbench: Domain adaptation under relaxed label shift. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10879–10928. PMLR, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Golnaz Ghiasi, Xiuye Gu, Yin Cui, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Scaling open-vocabulary image segmentation
  with image-level labels. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 540–557. Springer,
  2022.
Muhammad Waleed Gondal, Jochen Gast, Inigo Alonso Ruiz, Richard Droste, Tommaso Macri,
 Suren Kumar, and Luitpold Staudigl. Domain aligned clip for few-shot classification. In Pro-
 ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 5721–
 5730, 2024.
Rui Gong, Martin Danelljan, Dengxin Dai, Danda Pani Paudel, Ajad Chhatkuli, Fisher Yu, and
  Luc Van Gool. Tacs: Taxonomy adaptive cross-domain semantic segmentation. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19–35. Springer, 2022.
Pengxin Guo, Jinjing Zhu, and Yu Zhang. Selective partial domain adaptation. In BMVC, pp. 420,
  2022.
Lukas Hoyer, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Daformer: Improving network architectures and
  training strategies for domain-adaptive semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9924–9935, 2022a.
Lukas Hoyer, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Hrda: Context-aware high-resolution domain-
  adaptive semantic segmentation. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 372–391.
  Springer, 2022b.
Lukas Hoyer, Dengxin Dai, Haoran Wang, and Luc Van Gool. Mic: Masked image consistency for
  context-enhanced domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11721–11732, 2023.
Jitesh Jain, Jiachen Li, Mang Tik Chiu, Ali Hassani, Nikita Orlov, and Humphrey Shi. Oneformer:
   One transformer to rule universal image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
   ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2989–2998, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
Jogendra Nath Kundu, Rahul Mysore Venkatesh, Naveen Venkat, Ambareesh Revanur, and
  R Venkatesh Babu. Class-incremental domain adaptation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
  16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIII 16, pp.
  53–69. Springer, 2020.
Zhengfeng Lai, Noranart Vesdapunt, Ning Zhou, Jun Wu, Cong Phuoc Huynh, Xuelu Li, Kah Kuen
  Fu, and Chen-Nee Chuah. Padclip: Pseudo-labeling with adaptive debiasing in clip for unsuper-
  vised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 16155–16165, 2023.
Boyi Li, Kilian Q Weinberger, Serge Belongie, Vladlen Koltun, and René Ranftl. Language-driven
  semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03546, 2022a.
Wuyang Li, Xinyu Liu, and Yixuan Yuan. Sigma: Semantic-complete graph matching for domain
 adaptive object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 5291–5300, 2022b.
Wuyang Li, Jie Liu, Bo Han, and Yixuan Yuan. Adjustment and alignment for unbiased open set
 domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 24110–24119, 2023.
Xiangtai Li, Haobo Yuan, Wei Li, Henghui Ding, Size Wu, Wenwei Zhang, Yining Li, Kai Chen, and
  Chen Change Loy. Omg-seg: Is one model good enough for all segmentation? In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 27948–27959, 2024.
Yu-Jhe Li, Xiaoliang Dai, Chih-Yao Ma, Yen-Cheng Liu, Kan Chen, Bichen Wu, Zijian He, Kris
  Kitani, and Peter Vajda. Cross-domain adaptive teacher for object detection. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7581–7590, 2022c.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Feng Liang, Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Kunpeng Li, Yinan Zhao, Hang Zhang, Peizhao Zhang,
  Peter Vajda, and Diana Marculescu. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted
  clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 7061–7070, 2023.

Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features with
 deep adaptation networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 97–105. PMLR,
 2015.

Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Conditional adversarial
 domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Neil Houlsby Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection.
  NeurIPS, 2023.

Ke Mei, Chuang Zhu, Jiaqi Zou, and Shanghang Zhang. Instance adaptive self-training for unsuper-
  vised domain adaptation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow,
  UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXVI 16, pp. 415–430. Springer, 2020.

Gerhard Neuhold, Tobias Ollmann, Samuel Rota Bulo, and Peter Kontschieder. The mapillary vistas
  dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 4990–4999, 2017.

Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Yehao Li, Yu Wang, Chong-Wah Ngo, and Tao Mei. Transferrable prototyp-
  ical networks for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2239–2247, 2019.

Sanqing Qu, Tianpei Zou, Lianghua He, Florian Röhrbein, Alois Knoll, Guang Chen, and Changjun
  Jiang. Lead: Learning decomposition for source-free universal domain adaptation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23334–23343,
  2024.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang,
  Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual
  tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.

Stephan R Richter, Vibhav Vineet, Stefan Roth, and Vladlen Koltun. Playing for data: Ground truth
  from computer games. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam,
  The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14, pp. 102–118. Springer, 2016.

Kuniaki Saito and Kate Saenko. Ovanet: One-vs-all network for universal domain adaptation. In
  Proceedings of the ieee/cvf international conference on computer vision, pp. 9000–9009, 2021.

Cheng Shi and Sibei Yang. The devil is in the object boundary: towards annotation-free instance
  segmentation using foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11957, 2024.

Lianghe Shi and Weiwei Liu. Adversarial self-training improves robustness and generalization for
  gradual domain adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Remi Tachet des Combes, Han Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Domain adaptation
  with conditional distribution matching and generalized label shift. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 33:19276–19289, 2020.

Song Tang, Wenxin Su, Mao Ye, and Xiatian Zhu. Source-free domain adaptation with frozen
  multimodal foundation model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23711–23720, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Yi-Hsuan Tsai, Wei-Chih Hung, Samuel Schulter, Kihyuk Sohn, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Manmohan
  Chandraker. Learning to adapt structured output space for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7472–7481, 2018.
Girish Varma, Anbumani Subramanian, Anoop Namboodiri, Manmohan Chandraker, and CV Jawa-
  har. Idd: A dataset for exploring problems of autonomous navigation in unconstrained envi-
  ronments. In 2019 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision (WACV), pp.
  1743–1751. IEEE, 2019.
Feng Wang, Jieru Mei, and Alan Yuille. Sclip: Rethinking self-attention for dense vision-language
  inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01597, 2023.
Zhixiang Wei, Lin Chen, Yi Jin, Xiaoxiao Ma, Tianle Liu, Pengyang Ling, Ben Wang, Huaian Chen,
  and Jinjin Zheng. Stronger fewer & superior: Harnessing vision foundation models for domain
  generalized semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 28619–28630, 2024.
Thomas Westfechtel, Hao-Wei Yeh, Qier Meng, Yusuke Mukuta, and Tatsuya Harada. Backprop in-
  duced feature weighting for adversarial domain adaptation with iterative label distribution align-
  ment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pp.
  392–401, 2023.
Jianzong Wu, Xiangtai Li, Henghui Ding, Xia Li, Guangliang Cheng, Yunhai Tong, and
   Chen Change Loy. Betrayed by captions: Joint caption grounding and generation for open vo-
   cabulary instance segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
   Computer Vision, pp. 21938–21948, 2023a.
Size Wu, Wenwei Zhang, Lumin Xu, Sheng Jin, Xiangtai Li, Wentao Liu, and Chen Change Loy.
  Clipself: Vision transformer distills itself for open-vocabulary dense prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.01403, 2023b.
Yongqin Xian, Subhabrata Choudhury, Yang He, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Semantic pro-
  jection network for zero-and few-label semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8256–8265, 2019.
Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Seg-
  former: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 34:12077–12090, 2021.
Gonca Yilmaz, Songyou Peng, Francis Engelmann, Marc Pollefeys, and Hermann Blum. Opendas:
  Domain adaptation for open-vocabulary segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20141, 2024.
Kaichao You, Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Universal
  domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 2720–2729, 2019.
Qihang Yu, Ju He, Xueqing Deng, Xiaohui Shen, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Convolutions die hard:
  Open-vocabulary segmentation with single frozen convolutional clip. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Haobo Yuan, Xiangtai Li, Chong Zhou, Yining Li, Kai Chen, and Chen Change Loy. Open-
  vocabulary sam: Segment and recognize twenty-thousand classes interactively. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.02955, 2024.
Giacomo Zara, Subhankar Roy, Paolo Rota, and Elisa Ricci. Autolabel: Clip-based framework for
  open-set video domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11504–11513, 2023.
C Zhang, D Han, Y Qiao, JU Kim, SH Bae, S Lee, and CS Hong. Faster segment anything: Towards
  lightweight sam for mobile applications. arxiv 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14289.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pan Zhang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Dong Chen, Yong Wang, and Fang Wen. Prototypical pseudo
  label denoising and target structure learning for domain adaptive semantic segmentation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12414–
  12424, 2021.
Yixin Zhang, Zilei Wang, Junjie Li, Jiafan Zhuang, and Zihan Lin. Towards effective instance dis-
  crimination contrastive loss for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 11388–11399, 2023.
Jingxing Zhou and Jürgen Beyerer. Category differences matter: A broad analysis of inter-category
   error in semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, pp. 3870–3880, June 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

OVERVIEW
The supplementary material presents the following sections to strengthen the main manuscript:

    — Sec. A.1 includes more implementation details.
    — Sec. A.2 presents memory usage and computational efficiency comparison.
    — Sec. A.3 provides examples and further explanation of naive combination of HRDA with
      open-vocabulary approaches, as mentioned in Table 1
    — Sec. A.4 presents ablations on CLIP confidence thresholding.
    — Sec. A.5 provides additional experimental results under different DA settings.
    — Sec. A.6 provides detailed per-class experimental results in Table 1.
    — Sec. A.7 and Sec. A.8 provides details of building taxonomy mapping and context descrip-
      tions for each target label.

A.1     M ODEL ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING

HRDA for UDA segmentation model For the UDA segmentation model, we follow HRDA (Hoyer
et al., 2022b). We follow the HRDA framework, which combines large low-resolution (LR) crops
for capturing scene context with small high-resolution (HR) crops for fine detail. These two types
of inputs are combined using a learned scale attention mechanism, which enables the model to
effectively handle multi-resolution information. In addition, HRDA uses overlapping slide inference
to refine the generated pseudo-labels, ensuring that the context and details of the images are well-
represented in the segmentation maps. The HRDA framework builds on the DAFormer (Hoyer et al.,
2022a) architecture, which incorporates a domain-robust transformer backbone to extract features
and perform segmentation. A self-training strategy with a teacher-student model is used, where the
teacher generates pseudo-labels for the target domain, and these pseudo-labels are weighted based on
a confidence score to prevent error accumulation during training. The teacher model is updated using
an exponential moving average (EMA) of the student model’s weights, ensuring stable pseudo-labels
over time. In our experiments, we follow the default training parameters in the GTA → CityScapes
setting and adapt from the labeled GTA dataset to the unlabeled Mapillary Vistas/IDD respectively.
The labeled GTA training set and unlabeled Mapillary Vistas/IDD training set are used to train the
UDA Framework.
Mask2Former for target domain segmentation To train a domain-specific model on the target
domain, we utilize the Mask2Former architecture. The model comprises a backbone network that
extracts low-resolution features, a pixel decoder that upscales these features, and a transformer de-
coder for processing object queries. It deploys masked attention, which focuses on local regions
of the predicted mask, improving convergence and handling small objects. In our experiment, we
generate pseudo-labels on the target training set using DynAlign and train Mask2Former with these
labels on the target dataset to improve segmentation performance.
All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB GPU.

A.2     C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY


Our method comprises three main components: the UDA semantic segmentation model (HRDA),
SAM, and CLIP. For semantic segmentation on high-resolution images, the memory usage primarily
depends on the semantic segmentation model (HRDA), while the inference time is influenced by the
reassignment of novel class labels. We provide detailed information on memory usage, inference
time, and model parameters in table 5.
The total model parameter count of our method includes the UDA model parameters, plus 308M for
SAM (ViT-L) and 351M for CLIP (ConvNeXt-Large). The reported total memory usage corresponds
to the memory allocated during the complete inference process for a single image. Overall, our


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table 5: Computational efficiency and memory usage of DynAlign

           Model                              Memory Usage      Inference Time   Model Parameters
           HRDA                                 23.9 GB              1.9 s             86 M
           Ours (HRDA)                          34.8 GB              64.1 s           668 M
           DAFormer                             10.5 GB              0.7 s             86 M
           Ours (DAFormer)                      21.7 GB              64.1 s           668 M
           Ours (pseudo-label, HRDA)            23.9 GB              1.9 s             86 M
           Ours (pseudo-label, DAFormer)        10.5 GB              0.7 s             86 M
           Ours (pseudo-label, Mask2Former)      3.7 GB              0.3 s            215 M


framework requires reasonable computational resources. Moreover, the UDA framework can be
flexibly substituted to accommodate memory limitations. As shown in the table, replacing HRDA
with DAFormer significantly reduces memory consumption. For efficient inference, a segmentation
model can also be trained using pseudo-labels generated by our framework, as described in *Section
5.3*. For example, a trained Mask2Former model using our inference pseudo labels, indicated as
Ours (pseudo-label, Mask2Former), achieves inference in just 0.3 seconds per single image, offering
a significant efficiency boost while maintaining high performance.


A.3    E XAMPLES OF NAIVE COMBINATION OF HRDA WITH OPEN - VOCABULARY
       APPROACHES

For a naive combination of in-domain predictions with prior knowledge as baseline methods, we
take the in-domain segmentation results produced by HRDA and layer them with the new class
predictions from open-vocabulary models. As demonstrated in Figure 6, the open-vocabulary pre-
dictions for known classes in the source domain label space are discarded. This ensures that only
novel class predictions from the open-vocabulary model are added on top of the HRDA predictions,
preserving in-domain knowledge from HRDA.


                                                  +                              =


                                                  +                              =

      (a) Image                  (b) HRDA                  (c) Grounded-SAM              (d) HRDA
                                                                                      + Grounded-SAM

                       Figure 6: Illutration on HRDA+Grounded-SAM baseline



A.4    A BLATIONS ON CLIP CONFIDENCE THRESHOLD

In our experiments, we set the confidence threshold to 0.5 by default for reassigning the class label.
We conduct ablation studies with varying confidence thresholds, as presented in Table 6. The results
show that while the mAcc improves with a lower confidence threshold for assigning new class labels,
the mIoU may decrease correspondingly. Overall, DynAlign demonstrates robustness and is not very
sensitive to the confidence threshold within a certain value range.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 6: Ablations on CLIP confidence threshold

                           Threshold      0.4     0.5    0.6     0.7     0.8    0.9
                             mIoU        35.9    36.7    37.6   36.5     36.6   36.5
                             mAcc        54.3    53.0    52.1   50.3     47.3   46.5



A.5   E XPERIMENTS UNDER MORE DA SETTINGS

To validate the effectiveness of our methods in diverse practical scenarios, we implement additional
experiments under the following settings: 1) Traditional UDA Setting: In this case, the target label
space is identical to the source label space. We adapt from GTA to Cityscapes, both using the
same label space. 2) Fine-to-Coarse Setting: Here, the target domain labels are coarser than the
source domain labels. For this, we adapt from Mapillary (45 classes) to Cityscapes (19 classes). As
shown in Table 7, in both the traditional UDA and fine-to-coarse settings, where sufficient domain
knowledge about the label space is available, our framework preserves the in-domain performance
and provides slight improvements when adequate in-domain knowledge is already present.
In Table 8, we present results under taxonomy-adaptive domain adaptation with a smaller label-
space domain gap. Specifically, we adapt from Synthia (16 classes) to Cityscapes (19 classes).
These results highlight that our method not only maintains strong performance on known classes
but also predicts effectively for unknown classes.

Table 7: Semantic segmentation comparison on Mapillary under traditional UDA and fine-to-coarse
setting

                                            Setting                    mIoU     mAcc
                            GTA to Cityscapes (HRDA, 19 → 19)          74.9     82.0
                             GTA to Cityscapes (Ours, 19 → 19)         75.9     83.7
                           Mapillary to Cityscapes (Ours, 45 → 19)     70.4     81.5



Table 8: Semantic segmentation comparison on Mapillary under coarse-to-fine setting with small
label domain gap

                       Settings                    all classes       known classes     unknown classes
                                                 mIoU      mAcc      mIoU    mAcc      mIoU    mAcc
        Synthia to Cityscapes (HRDA, 16 → 16)    N/A        N/A      66.8     73.7      N/A     N/A
         Synthia to Cityscapes (Ours, 16 → 19)   61.6       72.7     68.8     77.5      23.2    47.0



A.6   P ER - CLASS EVALUATION RESULTS

For experimental results in Table 1, we provide the corresponding per-class evaluation in Table 9
and Table 10.

A.7   TAXONOMY M APPING

We provide the detailed taxonomy mapping that maps each source label to its correlated target labels
in Table 11 and Table 12. We utilizes GPT-4 to generate an initial proposal for potentially correlated
taxonomy mappings between the source and target domains and introduce human intervention to
refine these mappings due to the differing definitions of classes across datasets. For example, in the
Mapillary dataset, the term ”guard rail” specifically refers to roadside guard rails, whereas in other
datasets or in general usage, it may represent a broader guarding fence. For the same reason, we
exclude labels with inherent ambiguity, which we refer to classes that are broad or highly context-
dependent. (For example, the class ”other vehicles” may encompass various types of vehicles that
are not explicitly defined in the dataset, making precise labeling a challenge. Similarly, the class
”ego vehicle” refers specifically to the vehicle equipped with the camera, which often appears only
partially in the image.) We examine the generated taxonomy mapping to ensure that the mappings


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Per-class semantic segmentation evaluation results on Mapillary. (lane marking is refered
as lm).

                            Grounded-      Grounded-      OwlVIT-     OwlVIT-SAM      Ours
                               SAM      SAM + HRDA          SAM          + HRDA
                           IoU   Acc    IoU     Acc    IoU    Acc    IoU     Acc    IoU    Acc
                 curb      1.6   1.6     1.6    1.6    18.7 27.0     18.7    27.0   16.3   44.9
                fence      30.3 33.3    40.0    48.1   18.9 22.3     32.9    37.8   45.6   53.2
            guard rail     21.3 28.8    21.3    28.8   17.9 36.1     17.9    36.1   15.3   21.1
                 wall      1.3   1.4    35.5    55.2   11.4 19.3     30.4    41.8   39.3   59.0
             rail track    10.7 12.0    10.7    12.0    2.2    4.3    2.2    4.3    17.0   18.1
                 road      81.9 93.7    79.0    93.5   54.0 58.6     58.5    65.9   70.2   77.1
             sidewalk      33.0 34.6    42.7    64.0   32.2 43.0     40.3    53.7   27.8   33.3
               bridge      41.7 46.8    41.7    46.8   30.7 43.6     30.7    43.6   20.8   23.3
             building      70.1 81.6    80.3    94.5   44.0 52.8     71.8    81.1   76.5   85.6
               tunnel      0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0     1.2    3.6    1.2    3.6    13.4   79.5
               person      67.9 78.6    74.9    85.6   29.5 33.3     69.0    78.3   77.7   89.3
             bicyclist     8.3   9.4    21.6    36.4   10.6 12.6     35.1    66.8   53.8   72.0
          motorcyclist     13.9 32.1    13.9    32.1    9.9   11.7    9.9    11.7   51.6   58.3
         lm - crosswalk 20.3 24.4       20.3    24.4    8.9   14.8    8.9    14.8   20.0   56.6
          lm - general     1.6   1.6     1.6    1.6    12.4 19.8     12.4    19.8   18.0   41.8
            mountain       29.1 32.9    29.1    32.9   16.1 37.8     16.1    37.8   43.8   56.5
                sand       29.6 35.7    29.6    35.7   24.1 38.1     24.1    38.1   18.4   49.2
                  sky      91.7 92.9    94.8    99.0   69.0 70.5     73.2    76.1   95.1   97.8
                snow       34.1 34.5    34.1    34.5   26.9 38.9     26.9    38.9   40.9   77.5
               terrain     12.3 12.5    48.1    93.1    0.3    0.3   47.6    82.7   48.5   84.4
            vegetation     28.0 28.3    81.2    85.3   19.1 20.3     72.3    75.5   82.0   85.7
                water      81.1 81.7    81.1    81.7   72.2 87.9     72.2    87.9   47.3   56.0
              banner       5.3   5.4     5.3    5.4     6.8   10.0    6.8    10.0    0.5    0.7
               bench       44.3 48.7    44.3    48.7   23.7 46.4     23.7    46.4    1.2   78.9
             billboard     12.9 15.1    12.9    15.1   15.3 32.1     15.3    32.1   28.1   55.8
           catch basin     0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     8.9   18.1
             manhole       19.3 19.8    19.3    19.8   20.4 40.5     20.4    40.5   23.7   25.3
          phone booth      12.8 26.6    12.8    26.6    1.9   35.7    1.9    35.7    0.8   57.8
           street light    8.0   46.4    8.0    46.4    3.0   32.6    3.0    32.6   15.2   21.2
                 pole      22.4 24.9    33.0    43.6   15.5 16.6     29.1    37.2   41.9   57.6
       traffic sign frame 0.4    0.9     0.4    0.9     3.2    7.6    3.2    7.6     0.1    0.1
           utility pole    27.0 31.1    27.0    31.1   23.2 29.5     23.2    29.5   23.8   25.2
           traffic light   60.3 64.5    56.4    65.1   26.2 28.1     53.5    61.0   59.8   73.0
      traffic sign (back) 0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0     7.8   19.9    7.8    19.9    3.4    5.1
      traffic sign (front) 30.7 32.5    40.4    43.1   29.2 32.0     45.8    48.1   61.8   66.8
             trash can     48.5 49.8    48.5    49.8   28.0 42.9     28.0    42.9   15.0   19.4
              bicycle      57.1 63.6    49.9    54.3   28.1 58.1     49.0    53.3   57.1   62.9
                 boat      40.0 62.9    40.0    62.9   12.4 63.8     12.4    63.8    7.4   12.8
                  bus      76.0 81.7    60.9    67.1   39.7 60.6     51.8    56.7   68.3   73.1
                  car      62.1 64.5    65.1    68.1   26.9 34.6     49.6    51.7   88.1   92.0
              caravan      0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.2    0.0    0.2    24.1   82.6
           motorcycle      49.2 52.8    53.2    61.4   37.2 39.7     54.9    62.9   65.1   76.6
              on rails     0.0   0.0     9.0    10.2    0.0    0.0   28.1    30.4   53.3   59.3
               trailer     0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0     0.1    5.7    0.1    5.7     1.4   20.0
                truck      0.0   0.0    11.5    13.5    0.0    0.0   14.3    16.5   65.0   80.4
          Average       28.6    33.1    32.9   40.4    19.5   29.6   28.8   40.2    36.7 53.0



are accurate and contextually appropriate. The taxonomy mapping significantly reduces effort com-
pared to tasks such as pixel-wise manual annotation and only needs to be defined once per dataset
pair. We highlight the identical classes in source and target domains in blue.

A.8   C ONTEXT NAMES

We provide the context names used to describe the target names under the scene context in Table 13,
14, and 15. We generate those names by providing GPT-4 with the instruction:


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 10: Per-class semantic segmentation evaluation results on IDD

                           Grounded-        Grounded-          OwlVIT-          OwlVIT-SAM           Ours
                              SAM         SAM + HRDA             SAM               + HRDA
                          IoU   Acc       IoU    Acc         IoU   Acc         IoU     Acc        IoU    Acc
              road        83.5 88.9       84.6   94.5        76.0 81.9         84.9    96.4       85.9   99.1
      drivable fallback   17.2 23.9       17.2   23.9        0.0   0.0          0.0     0.0        2.9   3.4
           sidewalk       15.8 18.8       12.8   68.9        3.6   17.7        15.6    74.6       17.0   72.2
    non-drivable fallback 13.8 18.8       13.7   14.2        1.9   2.4         14.1    14.6        4.9   5.1
            person        25.1 71.8       57.3   72.7        13.6 27.4         56.8    71.8       59.5   74.6
             rider        0.2   0.2       64.4   78.4        0.6   0.6         63.5    77.2       67.7   80.3
         motorcycle       57.4 62.9       64.4   77.4        34.2 36.4         64.1    77.0       67.2   80.1
            bicycle       33.7 36.2       15.2   38.5        2.6   34.0        16.2    38.4       15.8   39.5
        autorickshaw      0.0   0.0       0.0     0.0        34.7 46.0         34.7    46.0       36.5   81.4
               car        84.5 88.9       63.8   96.8        22.8 23.1         69.0    96.0       70.2   80.9
             truck        72.3 77.8       86.2   91.7        31.6 35.2         80.7    84.9       86.8   91.9
               bus        74.8 81.6       68.4   71.4        42.8 47.8         63.6    66.1       68.8   71.9
              curb        6.8   7.3       6.8     7.3        14.9 30.6         14.9    30.6       14.7   18.2
              wall        4.7   4.7       40.8   66.5        8.0   8.9         40.8    59.8       41.9   67.6
             fence        8.3   21.2      20.2   33.8        5.5   13.4        21.5    34.9       22.3   35.1
          guard rail      8.2   13.0      8.2    13.0        9.3   28.5         9.3    28.5       13.9   22.1
           billboard      22.3 23.7       22.3   23.7        16.1 25.8         16.1    25.8       43.9   60.7
         traffic sign     14.8 16.0       10.3   33.1        16.3 70.4         23.3    78.2       31.0   80.3
         traffic light    23.7 24.5       19.5   22.5        6.4   13.1        19.3    22.3       23.9   27.2
              pole        8.7   8.8       34.1   39.4        19.2 21.5         33.8    38.9       35.4   41.0
     obs-str-bar-fallback 0.9   0.9       0.9     0.9        0.0   0.0          0.0     0.0        6.4   9.5
           building       45.3 60.0       51.8   87.1        26.1 49.0         52.0    83.9       54.3   82.6
            bridge        43.3 44.2       43.3   44.2        31.6 60.4         31.6    60.4        8.1   44.7
          vegetation      12.4 12.4       84.5   94.5        21.5 22.6         84.3    94.0       80.6   87.0
               sky        91.4 92.8       94.6   98.8        84.1 93.8         94.7    98.7       82.3   85.3
          Average          30.8   36.0    39.4     51.7      20.9     31.6     40.2     55.9      41.7 57.7



                         Table 11: Taxonomy mapping from GTA to Mapillary
        Source Label                                        Target Label Set
            road                      road, sidewalk, snow, sand, water, catch basin, manhole,
                                      rail track, lane marking-crosswalk, lane marking-general
           sidewalk                                 sidewalk, curb, snow, sand, water
           building                         building, bridge, tunnel, phone booth, billboard,
              wall                          wall, bridge, tunnel, trash can, banner, billboard
             fence                                            fence, guard rail
              pole                pole, utility pole, trash can, banner, street light, traffic sign frame
         traffic light                                    traffic light, street light
         traffic sign                  traffic sign (front), traffic sign (back), billboard, banner
          vegetation                                          vegetation, snow
            terrain                               terrain, mountain, snow, sand, water
              sky                                                     sky
            person                                                  person
             rider                                         bicyclist, motorcyclist
               car                                            car, trailer, boat
             truck                                              truck, caravan
              bus                                                     bus
             train                                                  on rails
         motorcycle                                               motorcycle
            bicycle                                                 bicycle
          unlabeled                                  bench, billboard, bridge, tunnel


Generate new class names within the context of street scene semantic segmentation, using the orig-
inal class name as the head noun. Use synonyms or subcategories of the original class that make
sense within this context, and if the class has multiple meanings, add specific context to avoid ambi-
guity. Please provide the original class names along with context names.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 12: Taxonomy mapping from GTA to IDD
         Source Label                                    Target Label Set
               road                                road, sidewalk, drivable fallback
            sidewalk                  sidewalk, curb, drivable fallback, non-drivable fallback
            building                                  building, bridge, billboard,
               wall                          wall, obs-str-bar-fallback, bridge, billboard
              fence                             fence, guard rail, obs-str-bar-fallback
               pole                                                 pole
          traffic light                                         traffic light
          traffic sign                               traffic sign, billboard, banner
           vegetation                               vegetation, obs-str-bar-fallback
             terrain                     terrain, non-drivable fallback, obs-str-bar-fallback
                sky                                                  sky
             person                                                person
              rider                                      bicyclist, motorcyclist
                car                                         car, autorickshaw
              truck                                           truck, caravan
                bus                                                  bus
              train                                           other vehicles
          motorcycle                                            motorcycle
             bicycle                                              bicycle
           unlabeled                                        billboard, bridge


For each label, we generate 10 context names. For labels without ambiguity, e.g. sky, we only use
the original label for the text feature extraction.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Table 13: Context names for IDD labels

 Target Label          Context Names
 road               road, main road, driving lane, paved road, highway, residential street, arterial road, rural road, city
                    road, thoroughfare
 drivable fallback drivable terrain, traffic lane, vehicle lane, driveable path, car lane, driveable street, urban roadway,
                    paved path, driveable surface, roadway
 sidewalk           sidewalk, pavement, footpath, walkway, pedestrian path, side path, sidewalk pavement, urban side-
                    walk, street sidewalk, sidewalk lane, sidewalk area
 non-drivable fall- non-drivable terrain, pedestrian area, park path, garden path, bike lane, footpath, public plaza, grass
 back               area, green space, pedestrian walkway, non-driveable zone
 person             person
 rider              rider
 motorcycle         motorcycle
 bicycle            bicycle
 autorickshaw       autorickshaw, three-wheeler, tuk-tuk, auto-rickshaw, motorized rickshaw, auto taxi, rickshaw, three-
                    wheeled taxi, auto, motor tricycle, auto rickshaw
 car                car, sedan, hatchback, coupe, convertible, SUV, sports car, station wagon, compact car, electric car,
                    luxury car
 truck              truck, pickup truck, semi-truck, delivery truck, dump truck, fire truck, tow truck, box truck, flatbed
                    truck, garbage truck, tanker truck
 bus                bus
 vehicle fallback   other vehicles, train, tram, metro, trolleybus, light rail, cable car
 curb               curb, road curb, sidewalk curb, curbside, street curb, pavement curb, curb edge, curb line, curb
                    boundary, urban curb, curb strip
 wall               wall, barrier wall, protective wall, retaining wall, boundary wall, perimeter wall, dividing wall,
                    sound barrier wall, security wall, freestanding wall, partition wall
 fence              fence, building fence, road fence, vehicle separation fence, pedestrian fence, safety fence, boundary
                    fence, traffic fence, divider fence, protective fence, barrier fence
 guard rail         guard rail, road guard rail, highway guard rail, safety guard rail, traffic guard rail, barrier guard rail,
                    roadside guard rail, protective guard rail, metal guard rail, crash barrier, median guard rail
 billboard          billboard, advertising billboard, roadside billboard, digital billboard, outdoor billboard, highway
                    billboard, commercial billboard, urban billboard, street billboard, electronic billboard, large bill-
                    board
 traffic sign       traffic sign, road sign, highway sign, street sign, regulatory sign, warning sign, directional sign,
                    informational sign, traffic control sign, signpost, traffic marker
 traffic light      traffic light, traffic signal, stoplight, traffic control light, intersection signal, traffic lamp, signal light,
                    road signal, street light, traffic signal light, traffic control signal
 pole               pole, street pole, lamp pole, traffic pole, sign pole, light pole, support pole, signal pole, flag pole,
                    decorative pole, banner pole
 obs-str-bar-       obstructive structures and barriers, construction barrier, roadblock, traffic cone, temporary fence,
 fallback           safety barrier, barricade, obstruction, traffic barricade, road barrier, construction zone marker
 building           building, structure, edifice, construction, residential building, commercial building, office building,
                    apartment building, skyscraper, public building, urban building
 bridge             road bridge, footbridge, pedestrian bridge, walking bridge, footpath bridge, foot crossing, small
                    bridge, pedestrian crossing, walkway bridge, urban footbridge, trail bridge
 vegetation         vegetation, urban vegetation, city greenery, roadside plants, street vegetation, urban foliage, city
                    flora, park vegetation, public greenery, urban plants, green space
 sky                sky


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 14: Context names for Mapillary labels (Part 1)

 Target Label          Context Names
 Road               road, main road, driving lane, paved road, highway, residential street, arterial road, rural road, city
                    road, thoroughfare
 Snow               snow, snow pile, street snow, roadside snow, accumulated snow, snowbank, plowed snow, urban
                    snow, compacted snow, snow drift, snow on pavement
 Sand               sand, sand pile, street sand, roadside sand, piled sand, sandbank, accumulated sand, urban sand,
                    sand on pavement, construction sand, loose sand
 Catch Basin        catch basin, road catch basin, street catch basin, roadside catch basin, storm drain, drainage basin,
                    sewer catch basin, street drain, gutter catch basin, road drain, stormwater basin
 Manhole            manhole, road manhole, street manhole, sewer manhole, manhole cover, utility manhole, drainage
                    manhole, storm drain manhole, roadside manhole, underground access, inspection manhole
 Pothole            pothole, road pothole, street pothole, asphalt pothole, pavement pothole, highway pothole, surface
                    pothole, pothole damage, roadway pothole, pothole crater, pothole on pavement
 Bike Lane          bike lane, marked bike lane, roadside bike lane, main road bike lane, dedicated bike lane, paved bike
                    lane, urban bike lane, bike path, protected bike lane, street bike lane, lane-marked bike lane
 Rail Track         rail track, tram rail track, train rail track, street rail track, road rail track, urban rail track, tramway
                    track, railroad track, commuter rail track, embedded rail track, rail track on pavement
 Lane Marking - crosswalk lane marking, street crosswalk marking, pedestrian crosswalk marking, zebra crossing
 Crosswalk          marking, road crosswalk marking, intersection crosswalk marking, painted crosswalk, crosswalk
                    lines, crosswalk road marking, sidewalk crosswalk marking
 Lane Marking - general lane marking, road lane marking, street lane marking, highway lane marking, pavement lane
 General            marking, lane divider marking, traffic lane marking, lane line marking, roadway lane marking, lane
                    boundary marking, asphalt lane marking
 Water              water, urban water, river water, lake water, city river, roadside pond, street water, urban pond, city
                    lake, small urban river, stormwater
 Sidewalk           sidewalk, pavement, footpath, walkway, pedestrian path, side path, sidewalk pavement, urban side-
                    walk, street sidewalk, sidewalk lane, sidewalk area
 Curb               curb, road curb, sidewalk curb, curbside, street curb, pavement curb, curb edge, curb line, curb
                    boundary, urban curb, curb strip
 Pedestrian Area    pedestrian area, street pedestrian area, pedestrian zone, pedestrian walkway, pedestrian street, urban
                    pedestrian area, pedestrian plaza, pedestrian path, sidewalk pedestrian area, pedestrian crossing area,
                    designated pedestrian area
 Building           building, structure, edifice, construction, residential building, commercial building, office building,
                    apartment building, skyscraper, public building, urban building
 Bridge             road bridge, footbridge, pedestrian bridge, walking bridge, footpath bridge, foot crossing, small
                    bridge, pedestrian crossing, walkway bridge, urban footbridge, trail bridge
 Billboard          billboard, advertising billboard, roadside billboard, digital billboard, outdoor billboard, highway
                    billboard, commercial billboard, urban billboard, street billboard, electronic billboard, large bill-
                    board
 Tunnel             tunnel, road tunnel, tunnel entrance, highway tunnel, urban tunnel, vehicle tunnel, tunnel passage,
                    tunnel opening, subway tunnel, underground tunnel, traffic tunnel
 Wall               wall, barrier wall, protective wall, retaining wall, boundary wall, perimeter wall, dividing wall,
                    sound barrier wall, security wall, freestanding wall, partition wall
 Traffic Sign Frame traffic sign frame, signpost frame, traffic sign holder, sign frame, sign support frame, road sign
                    frame, traffic sign structure, sign mounting frame, sign frame support, traffic sign bracket
 Trash Can          trash can, street trash can, public trash can, roadside trash can, outdoor trash can, urban trash can,
                    sidewalk trash can, street garbage can, public waste bin, street litter bin, municipal trash can
 Banner             banner, advertising banner, promotional banner, street banner, event banner, hanging banner, outdoor
                    banner, banner sign, vertical banner, display banner, publicity banner
 Fence              fence, building fence, road fence, vehicle separation fence, pedestrian fence, safety fence, boundary
                    fence, traffic fence, divider fence, protective fence, barrier fence
 Guard Rail         guard rail, road guard rail, highway guard rail, safety guard rail, traffic guard rail, barrier guard rail,
                    roadside guard rail, protective guard rail, metal guard rail, crash barrier, median guard rail
 Pole               pole, street pole, lamp pole, traffic pole, sign pole, light pole, support pole, signal pole, flag pole,
                    decorative pole, banner pole
 Utility Pole       utility pole, electric pole, telephone pole, power pole, transmission pole, cable pole, utility line pole,
                    utility post, service pole, communication pole, distribution pole
 Street Light       street light, street lamp, road light, streetlight, lamp post, street lighting, urban street light, sidewalk
                    light, public street light, street lantern, street illumination
 Front Side Of front side of traffic sign, traffic sign front, front face of traffic sign, sign front, traffic sign face, front
 Traffic Sign       panel of traffic sign, signboard front, traffic sign display, front view of traffic sign, sign front side,
                    traffic sign surface
 Back Side Of back side of traffic sign, traffic sign back, back face of traffic sign, sign back, rear of traffic sign,
 Traffic Sign       signboard back, traffic sign reverse, sign back panel, back side of sign, traffic sign rear view, reverse
                    side of traffic sign
 Traffic Light      traffic light, traffic signal, stoplight, traffic control light, intersection signal, traffic lamp, signal light,
                    road signal, street light, traffic signal light, traffic control signal
 Vegetation         vegetation, urban vegetation, city greenery, street vegetation, roadside vegetation, urban plants, city
                    foliage, urban flora, street greenery, public vegetation, cityscape vegetation


                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 15: Context names for Mapillary labels (Part 2)

 Target Label   Context Names
 Terrain        terrain, urban terrain, city landscape, street terrain, roadside terrain, urban ground, cityscape terrain,
                urban land, urban surface, city terrain, urban topography
 Mountain       mountain, mountain peak, mountain range, mountain slope, rocky mountain, highland mountain,
                mountain summit, alpine mountain, mountain ridge, forest mountain, mountain terrain
 Sky            sky
 Person         person
 Bicyclist      bicyclist, bike rider, cyclist, bicycle rider, bicycle commuter, mountain biker, road cyclist
 Motorcyclist   motorcyclist, motorcycle rider, motorcycle driver, motorbike rider, motorcycle commuter, road mo-
                torcyclist
 Car            car, sedan, hatchback, coupe, convertible, SUV, sports car, station wagon, compact car, electric car,
                luxury car
 Trailer        trailer, utility trailer, travel trailer, cargo trailer, flatbed trailer, camper trailer, enclosed trailer, live-
                stock trailer, dump trailer
 Boat           boat, sailboat, motorboat, fishing boat, speedboat, yacht, canoe, kayak, pontoon boat, dinghy, house-
                boat
 Truck          truck, pickup truck, semi-truck, delivery truck, dump truck, fire truck, tow truck, box truck, flatbed
                truck, garbage truck, tanker truck
 Caravan        caravan, travel caravan, camper caravan, motorhome, touring caravan, RV (recreational vehicle),
                fifth-wheel caravan, pop-up caravan, teardrop caravan, static caravan, off-road caravan
 Bus            bus
 On Rails       on rails
 Motorcycle     motorcycle
 Bicycle        bicycle
 Bench          bench, street bench, public bench, park bench, sidewalk bench, outdoor bench, urban bench, pave-
                ment bench, city bench, public seating bench, roadside bench


                                                           24
