Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ENSE G ROUNDING : I MPROVING D ENSE L ANGUAGE -
V ISION S EMANTICS FOR E GO - CENTRIC 3D V ISUAL
G ROUNDING
 Henry Zheng1∗, Hao Shi1∗, Qihang Peng1 , Yong Xien Chng1 , Rui Huang1 ,
 Yepeng Weng2 , Zhongchao Shi2 , Gao Huang1B
 1
   Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 AI Lab, Lenovo Research
 {jh-zheng22,shi-h23,pqh22,chngyx10,hr20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 {wengyp1,shizc2}@lenovo.com
 {gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Enabling intelligent agents to comprehend and interact with 3D environments
             through natural language is crucial for advancing robotics and human-computer
             interaction. A fundamental task in this field is ego-centric 3D visual grounding,
             where agents locate target objects in real-world 3D spaces based on verbal descrip-
             tions. However, this task faces two significant challenges: (1) loss of fine-grained
             visual semantics due to sparse fusion of point clouds with ego-centric multi-view
             images, (2) limited textual semantic context due to arbitrary language descriptions.
             We propose DenseGrounding, a novel approach designed to address these issues
             by enhancing both visual and textual semantics. For visual features, we introduce
             the Hierarchical Scene Semantic Enhancer, which retains dense semantics by cap-
             turing fine-grained global scene features and facilitating cross-modal alignment.
             For text descriptions, we propose a Language Semantic Enhancer that leverages
             large language models to provide rich context and diverse language descriptions
             with additional context during model training. Extensive experiments show that
             DenseGrounding significantly outperforms existing methods in overall accuracy,
             with improvements of 5.81% and 7.56% when trained on the comprehensive full
             dataset and smaller mini subset, respectively, further advancing the SOTA in ego-
             centric 3D visual grounding. Our method also achieves 1st place and receives
             Innovation Award in the CVPR 2024 Autonomous Grand Challenge Multi-view
             3D Visual Grounding Track, validating its effectiveness and robustness. Code


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen increasing attention in the field of embodied AI, with the introduction of
3D visual grounding benchmarks (Achlioptas et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024)
prompting a surge of research works (Guo et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2021; Jain
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024). The task of 3D visual
grounding, which aims to locate target objects in real-world 3D environments based on natural
language descriptions, is a fundamental perception task for embodied agents. This capability is
crucial for enabling agents to interact with and understand their surroundings through language,
facilitating applications in robotics and human-computer interaction. For instance, accurate 3D
visual grounding empowers robots to perform tasks such as object retrieval and manipulation based
on verbal instructions, enhancing their functionality in service and assistive scenarios.
Despite these advances, significant challenges continue to hinder the performance of 3D perception
systems. One major challenge lies in how embodied agents perceive their environment, as they typ-
ically rely on ego-centric observations from multiple views while moving around, lacking a holistic,
scene-level perception. Some methods attempt to enhance scene-level understanding using recon-
structed scene-level 3D point clouds (Wu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2022; Yang
    ∗
        Equal contributions. B Corresponding author.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               😀 Augmented Description:
                                                                                                                                  Sampled Point
        🤔        Description:
                                                                                                     View
                                                                                                               View
                                                                                                                                 Cloud (only ~2%)

                                                 Select the box that is in proximity to
        the box that is near the printer
                                                the printer, it is situated near the oven     View
                                                                                                        View

                                                                                              Dense Semantics                   Sparse Geometrics


                           Box                             Box
                                              Printer                                                                 Sparse Fusion

                                                                               Oven

                                                                                                      Limited points on small objects


                                                  Additional             Intended
            Distractor           Anchors
                                                   Anchors                 Target


                 (a) Insufficient language semantics due to limited context.                (b) Semantics loss due to sparse fusion.



Figure 1: (a) illustrates how limited context due to arbitrary descriptions leads to insufficient lan-
guage semantics. (b) highlights the issue of losing fine-grained semantics in sparse fusion.


et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; 2024b;c) following the previous 3D perception
methods (Wu et al., 2024b; Jiang et al., 2020), but these approach are impractical in real-world appli-
cations where such comprehensive scene-level information is not readily available. In this context,
EmbodiedScan (Wang et al., 2024) have emerged, utilizing multi-view ego-centric RGB-D scans
to address the need for models to understand scenes directly from sparse views. It decouples the
encoding of RGB images and depth-reconstructed point clouds from ego-centric views to extract
both semantic and geometric information. Semantic features are then projected onto 3D space using
intrinsic and extrinsic matrices to create a semantically enriched sparse point cloud for bounding
box regression. However, due to the high number of points in the reconstructed point cloud and
computational limitations, only a sparse subset (around 2%) is sampled. This sampling results in a
significant loss of visual semantics, limiting the model’s ability to retain fine-grained object details,
especially for smaller objects, and ultimately hindering grounding performance.
Another challenge is the ambiguity in natural language descriptions found in existing datasets (Chen
et al., 2020; Achlioptas et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2024). Humans naturally provide concise instruc-
tions, often lacking critical reference points or anchor objects, which leads to inherent ambiguities.
For example, a command like ”Please get the water bottle on top of the table” does not specify which
table or provide additional context in environments with multiple similar objects. This conciseness
makes it difficult for models to disambiguate between similar objects within complex scenes (Wang
et al., 2024). Furthermore, the increased complexity of scenes in new datasets—such as a more
similar objects instances in a single scene—exacerbates this issue. In result, training on these data
may cause model to have suboptimal performance. While previous attempts have been made to
enrich descriptions using large language models with predefined templates (Guo et al., 2023) or by
concatenating related descriptions (Wang et al., 2024), these methods have not fully mitigated the
ambiguities present in the annotations and have not utilize the available informations in the dataset.
Addressing these challenges is crucial for advancing the field of embodied AI perception and en-
hancing the practical utility of 3D visual grounding in real-world applications. In response to these
challenges, we propose DenseGrounding, a novel method for multi-view 3D visual grounding that
alleviates the sparsity in both visual and textual features. Specifically, to address the loss of fine-
grained visual semantics, we introduce the Hierarchical Scene Semantic Enhancer (HSSE), which
enriches visual representations with global scene-level semantics. HSSE operates hierarchically,
starting with view-level semantic aggregation that integrates multi-scale features from RGB images
within each view to capture detailed view-level semantics. Then, HSSE performs scene-level se-
mantic interaction to combine these aggregated multi-view semantics with language features from
descriptions, promoting cross-modal fusion and a hoslistic understanding of the scene. Finally,
HSSE conducts semantic broadcast that infuses the enriched global scene-level semantics into the
multi-scale feature maps of depth-reconstructed point cloud, improving their fine-grained semantics.


                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To mitigate the ambiguity in natural language descriptions used for training, for the text modality, we
propose the Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE) that constructs a scene information database based
on the existing dataset, EmbodiedScan. This database captures crucial information about object
relationships and locations within the scene. During training, the LSE leverages LLM to enriches
input descriptions with additional anchors and context, reducing confusion among similar objects
and providing more robust representations by incorporating external knowledge. This enrichment
increases the semantic richness of the language descriptions and reduces inherent ambiguities.
By addressing the ambiguities in annotated text and enhancing the model’s capacity to capture scene-
level global visual semantics from ego-centric multi-view inputs, DenseGrounding, advances the
state-of-the-art in 3D visual grounding. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, highlighting the importance of enriched textual descriptions and bidirectional interaction
between text and visual modalities in overcoming the limitations of previous methods.
Our main contributions are as follows:

       • We develop a novel Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE) that employs LLM-assisted de-
         scription augmentation to increase semantic richness and significantly reduce ambiguities
         in natural language descriptions. By leveraging an LLM grounded in a scene information
         database, our approach enriches the diversity and contextual clarity of the textual features.
       • We introduce a Hierarchical Scene Semantic Enhancer (HSSE) that effectively aggregates
         ego-centric multi-view features and captures fine-grained scene-level global semantics.
         HSSE enables interaction between textual and visual features, ensuring the model captures
         both global context and detailed object semantics from ego-centric inputs.
       • Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the EmbodiedScan benchmark, sub-
         stantially outperforming existing approaches. We secured first place in the CVPR 2024
         Autonomous Driving Grand Challenge Track on Multi-View 3D Visual Grounding (Zheng
         et al., 2024), demonstrating the practical effectiveness and impact of our contributions.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

3D Visual Grounding. The integration of language and 3D perception for scene understanding is
crucial in embodied AI, enabling agents to navigate, understand, and interact with complex real-
world environments. Key tasks (Chen et al., 2020; Achlioptas et al., 2020b; Azuma et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2021) in this domain, 3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) (Wu et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2022;
Zhu et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2022; 2024a; Cai et al., 2022), 3D Captioning (Huang et al., 2024a;
Chen et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2022) and 3D Question Answering (3DQA) (Huang et al., 2024a),
combine natural language understanding with spatial reasoning to advance multimodal intelligence
in 3D spaces. Our work focuses on ego-centric 3D visual grounding tasks that integrate multimodal
data to localize objects in 3D space.
Major 3D visual grounding methods can be divided into one-stage and two-stage architectures. One-
stage approaches (Chen et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2022; Geng & Yin, 2024; He
& Ding, 2024) fuse textual and visual features in a single step, enabling end-to-end optimization
and faster inference. Recent works have optimized single stage methods in various ways: 3D-
SPS (Luo et al., 2022) progressively selects keypoints guided by language; ViewInfer3D (Geng &
Yin, 2024) uses large language models (LLMs) to infer embodied viewpoints; and RefMask3D (He
& Ding, 2024) integrates language with geometrically coherent sub-clouds via cross-modal group-
word attention, producing semantic primitives that enhance vision-language understanding.
Two-stage approaches (Yang et al., 2019; Achlioptas et al., 2020a; Huang et al., 2022; Guo et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2024a; Chang et al., 2024) first use pre-trained object detectors (Jiang et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2024b) to generate object proposals or utilize ground truth bounding boxes, which are
then matched with the linguistic input. Advances in this framework include the Multi-View Trans-
former (Huang et al., 2022), projecting the 3D scene into a holistic multi-view space; ViewRe-
fer (Guo et al., 2023), leveraging LLMs to expand grounding texts and enhancing cross-view in-
teractions with inter-view attention; and MiKASA Transformer (Chang et al., 2024), introducing
a scene-aware object encoder and a multi-key-anchor technique to improve object recognition and
spatial understanding. In our paper, we target the more challenging setting of single-stage methods.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLMs for Data Augmentation. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Du et al., 2021) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities. Fully lever-
aging the power of LLMs beyond language processing, some recent studies have successfully in-
tegrated them with other modalities, leading to the development of highly effective multi-modal
methods (Moon et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2024) for vision-language tasks.
However, directly utilizing LLM or VLMs in robotics perception tasks remains a research ques-
tion (Kim et al., 2024; Zhen et al., 2024; Phan et al., 2024). Therefore, leveraging LLMs to directly
implement data augmentation and maximizing their potential to enhance text data diversity become
a new trend (Peng et al., 2023; Khan et al., 2023; Dunlap et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023; Ding et al.,
2024). Among them, ALIA (Dunlap et al., 2023) leverages LLMs to generate image descriptions and
guide language-based image modifications, augmenting the training data. This approach surpasses
traditional data augmentation techniques in fine-grained classification, underscoring the value of
LLM-driven augmentation in visual tasks. In 3D visual grounding, although ViewRefer (Guo et al.,
2023) employs LLMs to augment textual data through rephrasing view-dependent descriptions from
varying perspectives, however the data samples are augmented individually and suffer from limited
textual semantic information. To obtain high-quality description augmentations that disambiguate
among similar items and more robust representations, we utilize LLMs to enrich input descriptions
utilizing readily available information in the dataset as additional context.


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1   E GO -C ENTRIC 3D V ISUAL G ROUNDING

In real-world scenarios, intelligent agents perceive their environment without any prior scene knowl-
edge. They often rely on ego-centric observations, such as multi-view RGB-D images, rather than
pre-established scene-level priors like pre-reconstructed 3D point clouds of the entire scene, as com-
monly used in previous studies (Wu et al., 2024b; Huang et al., 2024b; Chng et al., 2024).
Following Wang et al. (2024), we formalize the ego-centric 3D visual grounding task as follows:
Given a language description L ∈ RT , together with V views of RGB-D images {(Iv , Dv )}Vv=1 ,
where Iv ∈ RH×W ×3 represents the RGB image and Dv ∈ RH×W denotes the depth im-
age of the v-th view along with their corresponding sensor intrinsics {(KvI , KvD )}Vv=1 and ex-
trinsics {(TvI , TvD )}Vv=1 , the objective is to output a 9-degree-of-freedom (9DoF) bounding box
B = (x, y, z, l, w, h, θ, ϕ, ψ). Here, (x, y, z) are the 3D coordinates of the object’s center, (l, w, h)
are its dimensions, and (θ, ϕ, ψ) are its orientation angles. The task is to determine B such that it
accurately corresponds to the object described by L within the scene represented by {(Iv , Dv )}Vv=1 .

3.2   OVERVIEW OF THE A RCHITECTURE

We adopt and improve upon the previous SOTA in ego-centric 3D visual grounding (Wang et al.,
2024). To prevent geometric information from interfering with semantic extraction and fully lever-
age each modality’s strengths, Wang et al. (2024) decouple the encoding of input RGB and depth
signals from each ego-centric views, following Liu et al. (2023). Specifically, the depth data from
each view is transformed into a partial point cloud, which is then integrated into a holistic 3D point
cloud P ∈ RN ×3 using global alignment matrices, thereby preserving precise geometric details.
Next, a semantic encoder and a geometric encoder extract multi-scale semantic and geomet-
ric features from {Iv }Vv=1 and P , respectively, denoted as {FSem
                                                                 s
                                                                   }Ss=1 ∈ RV ×Hs ×Ws ×Cs and
    s   S       N ×Cs
{FGeo }s=1 ∈ R        . Here, N is the total number of points sampled from all perspective views,
and S is the number of scale for the encoded feature maps.
The semantic features from RGB data are then lifted to the 3D space using intrinsic and extrinsic
matrices {(KvI , TvI )}Vv=1 , and concatenated with geometric features at multiple scales, followed by
fusion through a Feature Pyramid Network (FPN). However, due to the large number of points in
the depth-reconstructed point cloud and computational limitations, only a sparse subset (about 2%)
is sampled, and the semantic features at unsampled locations are discarded, resulting in significant
semantic information loss. To address this issue, we introduce a Hierarchical Scene Semantic En-
hancer module (detailed in Sec. 4.1) to improve scene-level semantics. The enhanced features are


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         find the chair beside the table
                                       🤔                                                                                                              FFN
                                                                                                                                                                          Bbox
                                                                                                                                                                          Head


         find the chair beside the table,                                                                                                        Text-Guided


                                                                            Semantic Enhancer
                                                                            Hierarchical Scene
          nearest to the television, and                                                                                                        Cross Attention
             furthest to the windows
        Language Semantic Enhancer
                                           😀Text Encoder
                                                                                                                                                Vision-Guided
                                                                                                 View 1
                                                                View 1                                                                          Cross Attention
                                                                ......                           ......

                                                                View V                           View V

                                           Semantic Encoder                                                                                       Self Attention

                                                                                                                                  Query
                                                                                                             Multi-scale         Selection
                                                                                                              Fusion
                                                                                                                                             Multi-modal Decoder
                                           Geometric Encoder
                                                                   (a) Overview of DenseGrounding

           (b) Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE)                                                           (c) Hierarchical Scene Semantic Enhancer (HSSE)

         Object Location Branch                     Predicted             Bbox                                       pool                         pool
                                                      Bbox               Labels                             View 1                       View V

                                3D Detection
                                                                OR
                                   Model
                                                                                                             View-level                View-level
                                                                                                                             ......
                                                                                                          Semantic Aggregate        Semantic Aggregate
                                                                                                                                                                   Text Feature
          Object Relation Branch

                                Select K                                 Scene Info
                                                                         Database                                      Scene-level
                                                                                                                        Scene-levelSemantic Interaction
          Language Desc
                                                                                                                         Scene-levelSemantic
                                                                                                                                     SemanticInteraction
                                                                                                                                               Interaction



                       🤔                                                     😀
                                                  With back to the guitar, select
          Facing the front of                                                                                          Sematic                       Sematic
          the guitar, choose
                                                   the curtain that is on the left                        View 1                ...... View 1
                                                   of it, near the bed, between                                       Broadcast                     Broadcast
           the curtain to the
                                                  the picture and clock, and far
               right of it
                                                       away from the bicycle
             Input Text                                                                                                 View 1                           View V
                                                       Augmented Text


Figure 2: (a) shows overall framework, while (b) details the Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE)
module, and (c) describes the Hierarchical Scene Semantic Enhancer (HSSE) module.

then fed into the decoder, which remains unchanged from the previous work, where the visual tokens
most similar to the text features are selected as queries.


4     M ETHOD

In this section, we present our proposed method, DenseGrounding, for ego-centric 3D visual ground-
ing. As shown in Figure 2, our method consists of three key components: Hierarchical Scene Se-
mantic Enhancer (Sec. 4.1), LLM-based Language Semantic Enhancer (Sec. 4.2), and an Enhanced
Baseline model (Sec. 4.3). We will describe each component in detail in the following subsections.

4.1   H IERARCHICAL S CENE S EMANTIC E NHANCER

To mitigate the semantic loss inherent in sparse point clouds, we introduce the Hierarchical Scene
Semantic Enhancer (HSSE) module, which extracts individual view semantics and enriches visual
representation with global scene-level semantics. This enriched information is then unprojected to
the depth reconstructed point cloud during fusion, minimizing the semantic loss.
Our proposed HSSE module works in a hierarchical manner, starting with view-level semantic ag-
gregation to capture view-level semantics from individual egocentric perspective views. Then, it
fuses these aggregated view semantics with language semantics, facilitating scene-level multi-view
semantic interaction and cross-modal feature fusion. Moreover, a broadcast module integrates these
scene-level semantics into multi-scale semantic feature maps, enriching the fine-grained semantics
in the sparse point cloud. Finally, the HSSE employs an aggregation-broadcast mechanism to filter
out irrelevant information, ensuring efficient and streamlined semantic transfer to the point cloud for
enhanced performance.


                                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


View-Level Semantic Aggregation. With the encoded 2D features from each view, HSSE performs
view-level semantic aggregation to capture view-level global semantics within each view. For the
                                                      v,s S
v-th view, given the multi-scale semantic features {FSem }s=1 ∈ RHs ×Ws ×Cs extracted from RGB
image, we aim to capture the salient semantic cues in each view.
First, these semantic features are processed through a Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) to integrate
information across different scales. A specific scale s of the feature map is then selected as the
                    v
reference feature FRef ∈ RHs ×Ws ×Cs .
                                        s
                                                           !
                                       X               v,i
                         v
                       FRef = Conv         Upsample(FSem ) ∈ RHs ×Ws ×Cs                       (1)
                                         i=1

Next, adaptive average pooling is applied to the reference feature to reduce its spatial dimensions,
yielding the initial query features FQv ∈ Rhs ×ws ×Cs .

                                    FQv = Pool(FRef
                                                v
                                                    ) ∈ Rhs ×ws ×Cs                                 (2)
Subsequently, we compute the cross-attention between the pooled queries and the reference feature
to aggregate semantic information at the view level.
                          F̂Qv = CrossAttn(Q = FQv , K = FRef
                                                          v          v
                                                              , V = FRef )                          (3)

where F̂Qv ∈ Rhs ×ws ×Cs encapsulates the global semantics of the view. We then apply self attention
layer, to further refine the features and model intra-view relationships.
                            F̂Qv = SelfAttn(Q = F̂Qv , K = F̂Qv , V = F̂Qv )                        (4)

Scene-Level Semantic Interaction. Moreover, HSSE conducts scene-level semantic interaction by
integrating the aggregated multi-view semantics {F̂Qv }Vv=1 with the language semantics FLang derived
from the language description. To promote cross-modal fusion and scene-level interaction among
multi-view semantics, we concatenate {F̂Qv }Vv=1 with FLang and apply Lscene layers of self-attention.
                            ′
                                       ′
                       [{F̂Qv }Vv=1 , FLang ] = SelfAttnLscene ([{F̂Qv }Vv=1 ; FLang ]),            (5)
           ′
                                                                  ′
where {F̂Qv }Vv=1 captures the scene-level global semantics, and FLang represents the refined language
semantics after the interaction.
                                                                                               ′
Semantic Broadcast. Finally, HSSE broadcasts the scene-level global semantics F̂Qv back to the
                                       s,v S
multi-scale semantic feature maps {FSem    }s=1 ∈ RHs ×Ws ×Cs for each view. Specifically, we com-
                                                    s,v S                                      ′
pute cross-attention between the spatial features {FSem }s=1 and the scene-level semantics F̂Qv , treat-
ing the spatial features as queries.
                     s,v S                      s,v S                          ′           ′
                  {F̂Sem }s=1 = CrossAttn(Q = {FSem }s=1 , K = F̂Qv , V = F̂Qv )                    (6)
         s,v S
where {F̂Sem }s=1 represents the enhanced feature maps enriched with scene-level global semantics.

4.2   LLM- BASED L ANGUAGE S EMANTIC E NHANCER

Human interactions with intelligent agents often involve casual and vague language descriptions,
resulting in input that lacks clear anchors, limited textual context, and ambiguities. To address this,
we propose a Language Semantic Enhancement (LSE) pipeline based on Large Language Models
(LLMs) to enhance the training data. This pipeline enriches input language descriptions by lever-
aging LLMs, which are grounded with a Scene Information Database (SIDB) containing object
locations and relationships, providing more contextual details of the corresponding scene.

Construct Scene Information Database (SIDB). Visual grounding datasets are typically built on
indoor 3D detection datasets, where collected RGB-D images or point clouds are used to represent
a scene. Each object within the scene is annotated with 3D bounding boxes, which visual grounding
datasets extend by adding language descriptions detailing the object’s relationship to its surround-
ings. To ensure accurate contextualization for LLMs augmenting these language descriptions, we

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


propose to construct a Scene Information Database (SIDB) based on the annotated training set that
is also used by all baseline methods for model training.
For each 3D scene, we follow the design of the datasets and assume that every language description
targets a specific bounding box. These descriptions are grouped according to their corresponding
scenes, allowing the SIDB to store detailed object relationships within each scene. This approach
enables LLMs to better understand the spatial and relational dynamics of objects in a given scene,
leading to a more holistic comprehension of the environment.
Moreover, to provide location information about the object instances in the scene, we enrich each of
the descriptions in SIDB with position information from the original dataset annotations or pseudo-
labels from the detection model, associating each described object with its spatial location. These
descriptions, combining both spatial and semantic information, form the backbone of the SIDB.
By providing this structured and detailed knowledge, the SIDB allows LLMs to generate more
contextually informed and reliable text descriptions grounded in the specific dynamics of each scene.

Prompt for LLM-based Enhancement. To effectively enrich the input descriptions, we design a
prompt for the LLM that leverages the SIDB to generate more detailed and contextually rich de-
scriptions. By instructing the LLM to utilize positional relationships among objects in the scene, the
prompt ensures sufficient and reliable anchors, encouraging the description of the target object using
multiple reference objects to minimize ambiguity and distractions. For instance, it draws on spatial
context from the database to more accurately reflect the object’s relationships to surrounding items.
Moreover, the prompt guides the LLM to maintain consistency between the original and augmented
text by preserving the original content while adding additional information, which reduces the risk
of the generated text deviating from the initial prompt.

Enhance Description with LLM and SIDB. For each description to be augmented (raw descrip-
tion), we select the k most related context descriptions in the corresponding scene based on object
names from the SIDB and provide them to the LLM. Details on the context description selection can
be found in Appendix A.5.2. The LLM leverages the database to incorporate spatial and semantic
details, aiming to enrich the text with additional contextual anchors that can help prevent confusion
with similar-looking objects.

4.3   E NHANCED BASELINE

In this work, we introduce a strong baseline by building upon the state-of-the-art method estab-
lished by EmbodiedScan for ego-centric multiview 3D visual grounding and further boosting its
performance. More details about the proposed improvements can be found in the Appendix A.1.1.


5     E XPERIMENTS

Dataset and Benchmark. The EmbodiedScan dataset (Wang et al., 2024), used in our experiments,
is a large-scale, multi-modal, ego-centric dataset for comprehensive 3D scene understanding. It
consists of 5,185 scene scans sourced from well-known datasets such as ScanNet (Dai et al., 2017),
3RScan (Wald et al., 2019), and Matterport3D (Chang et al., 2017). This extensive dataset pro-
vides a diverse and rich foundation for 3D visual grounding tasks, offering broader scene coverage
compared to prior datasets. This makes the dataset significantly larger and more challenging than
previous ones, providing a more rigorous benchmark for 3D visual grounding tasks.
For benchmarking, the official dataset maintains a non-public test set for the test leaderboard and
divides the original training set into new subsets for training and validation. In this paper, we refer
to these as the training and validation sets, while the non-public test set is called the testing set.

Experimental Settings. Due to resource limitations, we reserve the full training dataset for baseline
comparisons on the test set and leaderboard submissions to ensure a fair and comprehensive evalua-
tion. For the ”mini” data in the Data column of Table 1 and analysis experiments in Sec. 5.2, we use
a smaller subset of the data as a proxy task in performing experiments. The subset is referred to as
mini sets, available through the official release by Wang et al. (2024).


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Validation Result: Accuracy performance of the models on the official full validation set.
We follow the experimental setting proposed by Wang et al. (2024) and use the RGB-D as visual
input. The ’Data’ column indicates the data split used. † denotes the improved baseline discussed
in Sec. 4.3. The results reported for EmbodiedScan are obtained by re-evaluating the validation set
using the officially provided weights.

                                                     Easy Hard             Indep Dep           Overall
                  Method                   Data
                                                    ACC25 ACC25            ACC25 ACC25         ACC25
        ScanRefer (Chen et al., 2020)       Full       13.78      9.12     13.44     10.77     12.85
       BUTD-DETR (Jain et al., 2022)        Full       23.12     18.23     22.47     20.98     22.14
          L3Det (Zhu et al., 2023a)         Full       24.01     18.34     23.59     21.22     23.07
      EmbodiedScan (Wang et al., 2024)      Full       39.28     30.88     38.23     39.30     38.60
             DenseGrounding                 Full       45.31     34.23     44.40     44.42     44.41
                                                       (+6.03)   (+3.35)   (+6.17)   (+5.12)    (+5.81)

      EmbodiedScan (Wang et al., 2024)     Mini        34.09     30.25     33.56     34.20     33.78
             EmbodiedScan†                 Mini        36.23     30.51     35.89     34.30     35.77
                                                       (+2.14)   (+0.26)   (+2.33)   (+0.10)    (+1.99)
             DenseGrounding                Mini        41.95     34.38     40.89     42.19     41.34
                                                       (+7.86)   (+4.13)   (+7.33)   (+7.99)    (+7.56)


We report accuracy using the official metric, considering instances where IoU exceeds 0.25. Addi-
tionally, we present results for ”Easy” and ”Hard” scenes, classifying a scene as ”Hard” if it contains
3 or more objects of the same class. The ”Dep” and ”Indep” metrics further challenge spatial under-
standing ability by assessing its performance with and without perspective-specific descriptions.

Implementation Details. We follow EmbodiedScan (Wang et al., 2024) by using feature encoders,
sparse fusion modules, and a DETR-based (Carion et al., 2020) decoder. Specifically, we use
ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) and MinkNet34 (Choy et al., 2019) as the 2D and 3D vision encoders,
respectively. Moreover, as mentioned in Sec. 4.3, we replace RoBERTA with CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) text encoder as language feature encoders. We first pre-train our image and point cloud en-
coders on the 3D object detection task, adhering to EmbodiedScan’s training settings and integrating
CBGS (Zhu et al., 2019). The LSE-augmented text is generated using GPT4-o mini and is utilized
exclusively during training. For inference, our model processes descriptions directly, without any
enhancement, aligning with our baseline methods for fair comparison. More details in App. A.1.2.


5.1    M AIN R ESULTS


Evaluation. We evaluate the 3D visual grounding performance of our proposed method,
DenseGrounding, and report the results in Table 1, where we compare it against established SOTA
methods from the dataset benchmark. The table is divided into two sections: the upper half presents
models trained on the full training set, while the lower half showcases performance using a mini
training set, which is approximately 20% of the full dataset.
On the full training set, DenseGrounding achieves a significant improvement of 5.81% over the pre-
vious strongest baseline, EmbodiedScan. This substantial gain highlights the effectiveness of our
approach in leveraging extensive training data to capture complex visual-linguistic correlations in
3D environments. It demonstrates our method’s superior ability to understand and ground linguistic
expressions in rich visual scenes. When trained on the more manageable mini-training set, we intro-
duce an enhanced baseline, denoted as EmbodiedScan† , which achieves a 1.99% performance gain
over the original EmbodiedScan. This stronger baseline ensures a more rigorous and fair compar-
ison with our method. Remarkably, even against this enhanced baseline, DenseGrounding attains
a substantial 5.57% improvement in overall accuracy, culminating in a total performance gain of
7.56% over the previous state-of-the-art. Specifically, on hard samples, where scenes contain more
than three objects of the same class, we observe a 4.14% increase in accuracy. This demonstrates
our method’s proficiency in accurately identifying the correct target among similar-looking objects.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 2: Ablation on LSE. R and L refers to           Table 3: Ablation of Proposed Methods. The
 object relationship and object location infor-        reported values are Accuracies for predic-
 mation in SIDB, respectively.                         tions greater than 25% IoU with groundtruth.

        Method          Easy Hard Overall                LSE    HSSE      Easy     Hard     Overall
   Concat Samples      36.80 31.44     36.37                              35.77    30.51     35.77
   LLM                 37.69 31.97     37.23                      ✓       39.58    32.60     39.02
   LLM+DB(R)           38.48 33.54     38.08              ✓               39.67    34.49     39.25
   LLM+DB(R+L)         39.29 33.55     38.82              ✓       ✓       41.95    34.38     41.34


As detailed in Table 1, DenseGrounding consistently outperforms the baselines across various
evaluation categories, including both easy and hard samples, as well as in view-independent and
view-dependent tasks. These consistent gains across different metrics underscore the robustness
and generalizability of our approach in 3D visual grounding tasks. Moreover, our model not only
achieves the highest performance among all methods but also secured 1st place in the CVPR 2024
Autonomous Driving Grand Challenge Track on Multi-View 3D Visual Grounding.

5.2   A NALYSIS E XPERIMENTS

Effectiveness of Each Component. We conduct an ablation analysis to assess the effectiveness
of each component, as shown in Tab. 3. Our baseline is an enhanced model that excludes text
augmentations and semantic enhancements. Introducing the augmented data led to a remarkable
accuracy improvement of 3.48%, highlighting its significant impact. The further integration of the
HSSE module provided an additional performance boost of 2.09%. Furthermore, the combined use
of LSE and HSSE resulted in a 5.57% accuracy improvement on hard samples compared to the
baseline, underscoring our model’s enhanced capacity for both visual and language understanding,
particularly in disambiguation of challenging cases.

Ablation on LSE. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed LSE, we conducted experiments
comparing several text augmentation methods. The ”Concat Samples” method from Embodied-
Scan disambiguate descriptions by concatenating multiple annotations. ”LLM” refers to our re-
implementation of template-based LLM augmentation used by Viewrefer (Guo et al., 2023). Our
method, ”LLM+DB(R),” employs LLM with SIDB incorporating object relationships only, while
”LLM+DB(R+L)” extends this approach by adding location information from 3D bounding boxes.
It is worth noting that since ”Concat Samples” method only has about 25% data, we limit other meth-
ods to use 25% data for fair comparisons. The results demonstrate that ”LLM+DB(R+L)” achieves
the notable over all improvement of 2.45% against naive baseline, confirming the effectiveness of
incorporating both object relationships and location data in augmentation process.

Ablation on HSSE Components. We further explore the design of the HSSE module through
comprehensive experiments, as presented in Tab. 4 and 5. In Tab. 4, we conduct an ablation study
to determine the optimal number of self-attention layers needed for effective learning of the scene-
feature representation. Additionally, Tab. 5 examines the impact of varying feature map sizes for the
pooled FQv feature. The results indicate that a small feature map size may be insufficient to capture
the necessary information, while an excessively large feature map may include redundant details.
Based on these findings, we adopted the best configuration for our final model.

5.3   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

We present qualitative results to illustrate the effectiveness of DenseGrounding in improving ego-
centric 3D visual grounding performance. Figure 3 shows a comparison between our model and our
baseline model, EmbodiedScan. It can be clearly seen that our method outperforms the baseline in
correctly identifying the target objects based on ambiguous descriptions. In cases where the baseline
model struggles to disambiguate between multiple similar objects, DenseGrounding successfully de-
tects the correct target by leveraging its enriched textual descriptions and robust cross-modal interac-
tions. For instance, in environments where descriptions such as ”select the keyboard that is close to


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Table 4: Ablation on the number of self at-        Table 5: Ablation on the view feature map
     tention layers for HSSE.                           size after pooling for HSSE.

           Lscene      Easy    Hard    Overall            Pooled Size   Easy    Hard      Overall
              1        40.15   35.44   39.77                  1         40.61   34.91     40.15
              2        40.76   32.70   40.11                  3         41.92   33.75     41.26
              3        41.95   34.38   41.34                  5         41.95   34.38     41.34
              4        41.06   33.96   40.49                  7         41.92   34.28     41.30
              6        40.66   33.23   40.06                  9         40.05   34.60     39.61


        Text Input             Ground Truth                Baseline                     Ours

    choose the chair that
    is far from the copier


  select the keyboard
 that is close to the fan


     select the lamp that
    is in front of the door


Figure 3: Qualitative Analysis. Comparison of Ground Truth, our baseline and DenseGrounding.
Ground truth boxes are shown in green, baseline in red, and DenseGrounding’s predictions in blue.


the fan” are provided, our model accurately localizes the keyboard, while the baseline misidentifies
nearby objects. This improvement is attributed to HSSE, which captures both fine-grained details
and provides better alignment with text, enabling better object identification. These qualitative re-
sults demonstrate the enhanced performance of DenseGrounding, especially in complex scenes with
multiple distractors, solidifying its robustness and precision in real-world applications.

5.4      L IMITATIONS

While the DenseGrounding significantly improves the ego-centric 3D visual grounding task perfor-
mance, it has limitations. In real-life applications, vague or ambiguous descriptions from human
instructions pose challenges, as the model struggles without the necessary information to resolve
ambiguities. The lack of clear instructions limits the effectiveness of the embodied agent. Future
research should explore integrating human-agent interaction, allowing the model to query users for
clarification, and improving adaptability and robustness in real-world scenarios.


6      C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose DenseGrounding, a novel approach to address the challenges of ambiguity
in natural language descriptions and loss of fine-grained semantic features in multi-view 3D visual
grounding. By leveraging LLMs for description enhancement and introducing the HSSE to enhance
fine-grained visual semantics, our method significantly improves the accuracy and robustness of 3D
visual grounding in ego-centric environments. Extensive experiments on the EmbodiedScan bench-
mark demonstrate that DenseGrounding outperforms existing state-of-the-art models, securing first
place in the CVPR 2024 Autonomous Grand Challenge. These results highlight the importance of
enriched language descriptions and effective cross-modal feature interactions for advancing embod-
ied AI perception and enabling real-world applications in robotics and human-computer interaction.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work is supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2024YFB4708200 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20173.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Panos Achlioptas, Ahmed Abdelreheem, Fei Xia, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Leonidas Guibas.
  Referit3d: Neural listeners for fine-grained 3d object identification in real-world scenes. In ECCV,
  2020a.

Panos Achlioptas, Ahmed Abdelreheem, Fei Xia, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Leonidas J. Guibas.
  ReferIt3D: Neural listeners for fine-grained 3d object identification in real-world scenes. In
  ECCV, 2020b.

Daichi Azuma, Taiki Miyanishi, Shuhei Kurita, and Motoaki Kawanabe. Scanqa: 3d question an-
  swering for spatial scene understanding. In CVPR, 2022.

Daigang Cai, Lichen Zhao, Jing Zhang, Lu Sheng, and Dong Xu. 3djcg: A unified framework for
  joint dense captioning and visual grounding on 3d point clouds. In CVPR, 2022.

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In ECCV. Springer, 2020.

Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva,
  Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor
  environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158, 2017.

Chun-Peng Chang, Shaoxiang Wang, Alain Pagani, and Didier Stricker. Mikasa: Multi-key-anchor
  & scene-aware transformer for 3d visual grounding. In CVPR, 2024.

Dave Zhenyu Chen, Angel X Chang, and Matthias Nießner. Scanrefer: 3d object localization in
  rgb-d scans using natural language. In ECCV. Springer, 2020.

Sijin Chen, Hongyuan Zhu, Xin Chen, Yinjie Lei, Gang Yu, and Tao Chen. End-to-end 3d dense
   captioning with vote2cap-detr. In CVPR, 2023.

Xinpeng Chen, Lin Ma, Jingyuan Chen, Zequn Jie, Wei Liu, and Jiebo Luo. Real-time referring
  expression comprehension by single-stage grounding network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03426,
  2018.

Zhenyu Chen, Ali Gholami, Matthias Nießner, and Angel X Chang. Scan2cap: Context-aware dense
  captioning in rgb-d scans. In CVPR, 2021.

Yong Xien Chng, Xuchong Qiu, Yizeng Han, Yifan Pu, Jiewei Cao, and Gao Huang. Explor-
  ing contextual modeling with linear complexity for point cloud segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.21211, 2024.

Christopher Choy, JunYoung Gwak, and Silvio Savarese. 4d spatio-temporal convnets: Minkowski
  convolutional neural networks. In CVPR, 2019.

Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias
  Nießner. Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In CVPR, 2017.

Bosheng Ding, Chengwei Qin, Ruochen Zhao, Tianze Luo, Xinze Li, Guizhen Chen, Wenhan Xia,
  Junjie Hu, Anh Tuan Luu, and Shafiq Joty. Data augmentation using llms: Data perspectives,
  learning paradigms and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02990, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang.
  Glm: General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.10360, 2021.
Lisa Dunlap, Alyssa Umino, Han Zhang, Jiezhi Yang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Trevor Darrell. Di-
  versify your vision datasets with automatic diffusion-based augmentation. NeurIPS, 36, 2023.
Chun Feng, Joy Hsu, Weiyu Liu, and Jiajun Wu. Naturally supervised 3d visual grounding with
  language-regularized concept learners. In CVPR, 2024.
Liang Geng and Jianqin Yin. Viewinfer3d: 3d visual grounding based on embodied viewpoint
  inference. IEEE RA-L, 2024.
Zoey Guo, Yiwen Tang, Ray Zhang, Dong Wang, Zhigang Wang, Bin Zhao, and Xuelong Li.
  Viewrefer: Grasp the multi-view knowledge for 3d visual grounding. In ICCV, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.
Shuting He and Henghui Ding. Refmask3d: Language-guided transformer for 3d referring segmen-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18244, 2024.
Haifeng Huang, Yilun Chen, Zehan Wang, Rongjie Huang, Runsen Xu, Tai Wang, Luping Liu, Xize
  Cheng, Yang Zhao, Jiangmiao Pang, et al. Chat-scene: Bridging 3d scene and large language
  models with object identifiers. NeurIPS, 2024a.
Rui Huang, Songyou Peng, Ayca Takmaz, Federico Tombari, Marc Pollefeys, Shiji Song, Gao
  Huang, and Francis Engelmann. Segment3d: Learning fine-grained class-agnostic 3d segmen-
  tation without manual labels. In ECCV, 2024b.
Rui Huang, Henry Zheng, Yan Wang, Zhuofan Xia, Marco Pavone, and Gao Huang. Training an
  open-vocabulary monocular 3d detection model without 3d data. In NeurIPS, 2024c.
Shijia Huang, Yilun Chen, Jiaya Jia, and Liwei Wang. Multi-view transformer for 3d visual ground-
  ing. In CVPR, 2022.
Ayush Jain, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, Ishita Mediratta, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Bottom up top down
  detection transformers for language grounding in images and point clouds. In ECCV. Springer,
  2022.
Li Jiang, Hengshuang Zhao, Shaoshuai Shi, Shu Liu, Chi-Wing Fu, and Jiaya Jia. Pointgroup:
  Dual-set point grouping for 3d instance segmentation. In CVPR, 2020.
Zaid Khan, Vijay Kumar BG, Samuel Schulter, Xiang Yu, Yun Fu, and Manmohan Chandraker.
  Q: How to specialize large vision-language models to data-scarce vqa tasks? a: Self-train on
  unlabeled images! In CVPR, 2023.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Yue Liao, Si Liu, Guanbin Li, Fei Wang, Yanjie Chen, Chen Qian, and Bo Li. A real-time cross-
  modality correlation filtering method for referring expression comprehension. In CVPR, 2020.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
Zhijian Liu, Haotian Tang, Alexander Amini, Xinyu Yang, Huizi Mao, Daniela L Rus, and Song
  Han. Bevfusion: Multi-task multi-sensor fusion with unified bird’s-eye view representation. In
  ICRA. IEEE, 2023.
Junyu Luo, Jiahui Fu, Xianghao Kong, Chen Gao, Haibing Ren, Hao Shen, Huaxia Xia, and Si Liu.
  3d-sps: Single-stage 3d visual grounding via referred point progressive selection. In CVPR, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jong Hak Moon, Hyungyung Lee, Woncheol Shin, Young-Hak Kim, and Edward Choi. Multi-modal
  understanding and generation for medical images and text via vision-language pre-training. IEEE
  Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 26(12), 2022.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
Thinh Phan, Khoa Vo, Duy Le, Gianfranco Doretto, Donald Adjeroh, and Ngan Le. Zeetad: Adapt-
  ing pretrained vision-language model for zero-shot end-to-end temporal action detection. In
  WACV, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Johanna Wald, Armen Avetisyan, Nassir Navab, Federico Tombari, and Matthias Nießner. Rio: 3d
  object instance re-localization in changing indoor environments. In ICCV, 2019.
Tai Wang, Xiaohan Mao, Chenming Zhu, Runsen Xu, Ruiyuan Lyu, Peisen Li, Xiao Chen, Wenwei
  Zhang, Kai Chen, Tianfan Xue, Xihui Liu, Cewu Lu, Dahua Lin, and Jiangmiao Pang. Embod-
  iedscan: A holistic multi-modal 3d perception suite towards embodied ai. In CVPR, 2024.
Tung-Yu Wu, Sheng-Yu Huang, and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang. Dora: 3d visual grounding with order-
  aware referring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16539, 2024a.
Xiaoyang Wu, Li Jiang, Peng-Shuai Wang, Zhijian Liu, Xihui Liu, Yu Qiao, Wanli Ouyang, Tong
  He, and Hengshuang Zhao. Point transformer v3: Simpler faster stronger. In CVPR, 2024b.
Yanmin Wu, Xinhua Cheng, Renrui Zhang, Zesen Cheng, and Jian Zhang. Eda: Explicit text-
  decoupling and dense alignment for 3d visual grounding. In CVPR, 2023.
Li Yang, Ziqi Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Yan Xu, Wei Liu, Ying Shan, Bing Li, Weiping Yang, Peng Li,
  Yan Wang, et al. Exploiting contextual objects and relations for 3d visual grounding. In NeurIPS,
  2024.
Sibei Yang, Guanbin Li, and Yizhou Yu. Dynamic graph attention for referring expression compre-
  hension. In ICCV, 2019.
Lichen Zhao, Daigang Cai, Lu Sheng, and Dong Xu. 3dvg-transformer: Relation modeling for
  visual grounding on point clouds. In ICCV, 2021.
Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and
  Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.09631, 2024.
Henry Zheng, Hao Shi, Yong Xien Chng, Rui Huang, Zanlin Ni, Tan Tianyi, Peng Qihang, Weng
  Yepeng, Zhongchao Shi, and Gao Huang. Denseg: Alleviating vision-language feature sparsity
  in multi-view 3d visual grounding. In CVPRW, 2024.
Benjin Zhu, Zhengkai Jiang, Xiangxin Zhou, Zeming Li, and Gang Yu. Class-balanced grouping
  and sampling for point cloud 3d object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09492, 2019.
Chenming Zhu, Wenwei Zhang, Tai Wang, Xihui Liu, and Kai Chen. Object2scene: Putting ob-
  jects in context for open-vocabulary 3d detection, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2309.09456.
Ziyu Zhu, Xiaojian Ma, Yixin Chen, Zhidong Deng, Siyuan Huang, and Qing Li. 3d-vista: Pre-
  trained transformer for 3d vision and text alignment. In CVPR, 2023b.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
C ONTENTS

    A.1 More Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14
          A.1.1 Enhanced Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14
          A.1.2 Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14
    A.2 Performance on Individual Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14
    A.3 Analysis on Limited Data Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    A.4 Robustness Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    A.5 Implementation Details of LSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
          A.5.1 Prompt for LSE module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15
          A.5.2 Details on SIDB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

A.1     M ORE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1.1     E NHANCED BASELINE
First, we replace the RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) language encoder with the CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) encoder. Given that visual grounding requires a deep understanding of both linguistic in-
structions and environmental visual features, strong cross-modal alignment is critical for success.
CLIP, specifically designed for such tasks, provides superior alignment between language and vi-
sion, making it a natural fit for this application. Moreover, visual grounding often involves identify-
ing a diverse range of objects, and the original EmbodiedScan model relies on a detection pipeline
to pretrain the visual feature encoders. However, this approach can be hampered by the long-tailed
distribution of objects in the pretraining dataset, leading to suboptimal detection performance. To ad-
dress this, we incorporate the Class-Balanced Grouping and Sampling (CBGS) method (Zhu et al.,
2019) during pretraining, which has proven effective in mitigating data imbalance and enhancing
detection accuracy across rare and common object categories.

A.1.2     H YPERPARAMETERS
Our multi-view visual grounding model, DenseGrounding, is trained with the AdamW optimizer
using a learning rate of 5e-4, weight decay of 5e-4, and a batch size of 48. The model is trained for
12 epochs, with the learning rate reduced by 0.1 at epochs 8 and 11. All other settings align with
EmbodiedScan.

A.2     P ERFORMANCE ON I NDIVIDUAL C LASSES

We show the performance of our method on the individual classes in the validation set in Fig. 4


        Figure 4: Performance of our method on each class in validation set of EmbodiedScan



                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3     A NALYSIS ON L IMITED DATA S CENARIO

In Figure 5, we present a comparative analysis of the performance between our method and the
baseline under varying amounts of training data. The results clearly demonstrate that our method
consistently outperforms the baseline, especially in scenarios with limited data availability. Notably,
when trained on just 40% of the training data, our method surpasses the baseline model that was
trained on 80% of the data. This highlights the data efficiency and robustness of our approach,
indicating its effectiveness even when training data is scarce.


      Figure 5: Comparison of DenseGrounding and EmbodiedScan on limited data scenario.


A.4     ROBUSTNESS A NALYSIS

                           Table 6: Zero-shot Cross Dataset Performance

           Method            Training Scenes       Testing Scenes     Easy     Hard    Overall
         EmbodiedScan      3RScan+Matterport           Scannet       9.95     7.94       9.81
        DenseGrounding     3RScan+Matterport           Scannet       18.57    12.42     18.14

Cross-dataset evaluation is essential for testing the generalization capabilities and robustness of
egocentric 3D visual grounding methods. This process is particularly challenging due to differences
in camera settings, scene layouts, and object characteristics in visual data across various datasets,
which can significantly impact model performance. To further assess the zero-shot generalization of
our approach, we reorganized the EmbodiedScan dataset to create a zero-shot setting. Specifically,
we trained our model exclusively on scenes from 3RScan and Matterport3D and then evaluated its
performance on ScanNet scenes, which were entirely unseen during training. This setup tests the
model’s ability to adapt to new environments with different camera settings and scene characteristics.
As shown in Table 6, our method significantly outperforms the baseline in this zero-shot setting,
demonstrating superior robustness and the ability to generalize effectively to new and diverse scenes
despite the inherent cross-dataset challenges.

A.5     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF LSE

In this section, we provide the implementation details of the Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE)
module, focusing on how the LLM is prompted. We delve into the specific prompts used and explain
how information is selected to provide context to the LLM.

A.5.1    P ROMPT FOR LSE MODULE
In this section, we present the prompts used in the Language Semantic Enhancer (LSE) module,
along with an example input and output, as illustrated in Fig. 6.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    [System]

    You are an AI spatial reasoning assistant specialized in rephrasing expressions related to 3D indoor
    scenes. Your task is to rephrase the given expression, enhancing the accuracy of spatial relationships
    based on the provided context.
    Below are some expressions (visual grounding descriptions) that describe the scene and one specific
    expression that needs rephrasing. The text after LOCATION INFO provides the 3D position of the
    objects centers (unit: meters) in the lidar coordinate system.
    Enhance this specific expression's accuracy and diversity by using more anchor points.

    NOTE:
    1. Input:

         Several visual grounding descriptions that provide reliable positional information. Each description
         includes the 3D coordinates of objects, the coordinates are given as (x, y, z) with units in meters.
         A visual grounding description that needs rephrasing.

    2. Output: A rephrased visual grounding description.
    3. Ensure that the target object remains unchanged.
    4. Use the positional relationships of more objects in the scene to describe it, ensuring higher accuracy
    and without any potential ambiguity.
    5. Only describe spatial relationships with high confidence; avoid adding extra information or
    assumptions.
    6. Understand the spatial relationships between objects based on their 3D coordinates as a supplement
    to spatial information.
    7. DO NOT provide the LOCATION INFO in the rephrased expression.
    8. Just output the rephrased sentence directly, prohibit outputting any other statements.

    Example 1 (maybe not in this scene):
    Before rephrase:
    select the pillow that is near the decoration. LOCATION INFO: pillow is located at (2.5, 2.8, 0.7).
    decoration is located at (1.25, 3.5, 0.5)

    After rephrase:
    Choose the pillow near the decoration, it is also situated beneath the mirror and positioned between the
    fireplace and the decoration

    Example 2 (maybe not in this scene):
    ....

    [User]
    Visual Grounding Descriptions:

         choose the clock that is in front of the towel. LOCATION INFO: clock is located at (0.04, -1.85, 1.52).
         towel is located at (0.15, 1.97, 0.55)
         select the clock that is farthest from the pitcher. LOCATION INFO: clock is located at (0.07, -2.08,
         1.85). pitcher is located at (-1.44, 1.50, 0.85)
         the clock that is closer to the chandelier. LOCATION INFO: clock is located at (0.04, -1.85, 1.52).
         chandelier is located at (0.24, 2.38, 2.20)
         ........

    Visual grounding description that needs rephrasing:
    the clock that is closer to the refrigerator. LOCATION INFO: clock is located at (0.04, -1.85, 1.52).
    refrigerator is located at (-1.05, 0.50, 0.76)
    Now, rephrase it according to the above requirements.

    [Assistant]
    Choose the clock that is closer to the refrigerator, positioned beneath the chandelier and in front of
    the towel


                Figure 6: Sample Input and Output of LLM for Language Enhancement


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5.2   D ETAILS ON SIDB

Context Description Selection. Given a text description to be augmented (i.e., the raw description)
and a SIDB containing text descriptions (i.e., context descriptions), we select k relevant context
descriptions (we used k=50) to provide the LLM with scene and object relationship information.
Specifically, when selecting descriptions as context to be utilized by the LLM for augmentation, we
find descriptions in the SIDB that both belong to the same scene as the raw description and contain
the target or anchor class of the raw description in their text. If more than 50 descriptions qualify,
we randomly select 50 descriptions from among them. Conversely, if fewer than 50 descriptions
qualify, we randomly select from the descriptions in the same scene. This strategy simplifies the
process of context selection and allows for diversity in the context provided to the LLM.


                                                 17
