Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTROLLABLE C ONTEXT S ENSITIVITY
AND THE K NOB B EHIND I T

 Julian MinderD,@,∗ Kevin DuD,∗ Niklas StoehrD Giovanni MoneaN
 Chris Wendler@ Robert West@ Ryan CotterellD
 D
   ETH Zürich @ EPFL N Cornell University
 jminder@ethz.ch {kevin.du, niklas.stoehr, ryan.cotterell}@inf.ethz.ch
 {chris.wendler, robert.west}@epfl.ch giovanni@cs.cornell.edu



                                                  A BSTRACT

            When making predictions, a language model must trade off how much it relies
            on its context versus its prior knowledge. Choosing how sensitive the model is
            to its context is a fundamental functionality, as it enables the model to excel at
            tasks like retrieval-augmented generation and question-answering. In this paper,
            we search for a knob that controls this sensitivity, determining whether language
            models answer from the context or their prior knowledge. To guide this search,
            we first design a task for controllable context sensitivity. In this task, we feed
            the model a context, e.g., Paris is in England, and a question, e.g., Where is
            Paris?. Then, we instruct the model to either use its prior or contextual knowledge
            and evaluate whether it generates the correct answer for both intents, i.e., either
            France or England. When fine-tuned on this task, instruct versions of Llama-3.1,
            Mistral-v0.3, and Gemma-2 can solve it with high accuracy (85–95%). Analyzing
            these high-performing models, we narrow down which layers may be important
            to context sensitivity using a novel linear time algorithm. Then, in each model, we
            identify a 1-dimensional subspace in a single layer that encodes whether the model
            follows context or prior knowledge. Interestingly, while we identify this subspace
            in a fine-tuned model, we find that the exact same subspace serves as an effective
            knob in not only that model but also non-fine-tuned instruct and base models
            of that model family. Finally, we show a strong correlation between a model’s
            performance and how distinctly it separates context-agreeing from context-ignoring
            answers in this subspace. Our results suggest that a single fundamental subspace
            facilitates how the model chooses between context and prior knowledge.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Language models are often prompted with a query and preceding context, e.g., in retrieval-augmented
generation or document analysis. In such applications, the language model needs to integrate
information from both the context and its prior knowledge stored in its parameters. In some cases,
we may prefer the model to rely more on the context, e.g., to avoid hallucinating responses based
on outdated prior knowledge (Zhang et al., 2023); however, in other cases, we may prefer the model
to rely more on its prior knowledge, e.g., to avoid being misled by misinformation provided in the
context (Hong et al., 2024). As a motivating example, consider a document analysis application
in which a language model is asked to help understand an opinion article in a newspaper. The
user prompts the language model with the text of the article and then further prompts the model
to summarize it with the query What is the main argument of this article?. In this case, the model
should rely heavily on the context, i.e., the text of the article. Then, however, the user prompts
the language model with the query What are some criticisms of this argument?. For the model to
generate a useful response to this second prompt, the model cannot fully rely on the context of the
article itself: an opinion piece may be written very authoritatively as if its conclusion was established
fact, but still contains misleading claims in support of the writer’s argument. Thus, in response to
the second prompt, the language model should draw more upon its prior knowledge of the issue
    *
        These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and related opinions than blindly following the context. More broadly, because the optimal degree of
context sensitivity depends highly on the use case, we contend that it is desirable to be able to specify
how much and whether the model should be influenced by the context versus its prior knowledge.
Studies on the tension between context and prior knowledge have primarily focused on knowledge
conflicts (Longpre et al., 2021), in which a given context directly contradicts information assumed
to be in a model’s prior knowledge about a query. For example, a language model trained on a
sufficient amount of data should be able to reply to the query What’s the capital of France? with
Paris. However, if the context The capital of France is London. is prepended to the query, the model
needs to decide whether to respond based on the context (London) or its prior knowledge (Paris).
Prior studies (Longpre et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b; Du et al., 2024; Monea et al., 2024; Ortu et al.,
2024; Xie et al., 2024; Basmov et al., 2024) have shown that models will draw from context for
some questions and prior knowledge from others. To investigate mechanisms underlying how the
model draws from the context or prior knowledge, Yu et al. (2023), Ortu et al. (2024) and Jin et al.
(2024) have searched for attention heads that promote each answer. However, these studies do not
focus on whether or how the model deliberately mediates which source to rely on.
To this question of how, we hypothesize that there is a simple fundamental mechanism in the form
of a subspace within the language model that facilitates the binary decision of whether to rely on
the context or the prior knowledge. To guide our search for such a subspace, we design and execute
a structured recipe. First, we create the controllable context sensitivity (CCS) task which augments
the standard knowledge conflict setting with an intent, such as Ignore the context or Listen to the
context. By disambiguating whether the model should follow context or prior knowledge through
a simple addition to the prompt, we are able to identify and evaluate its behavior in both modes for
the same context–query pair. We adapt models for this task using fine-tuning and in-context learning,
then evaluate them on in-domain and out-of-domain test sets to assess whether they have developed
a deeper ability to choose between context and prior knowledge beyond surface-level heuristics.
In our case study on the Llama-3.1-8B family (Dubey et al., 2024), we find that both fine-tuning
and in-context learning are moderately effective, with models excelling on in-domain test sets and
significantly improving over zero shot baselines on out-of-domain test sets.
Armed with models that can perform the CCS task reasonably well, we then explore the mechanisms
that facilitate their behavior in this task. Building on insights from Jin et al. (2024), we hypothesize
that for a model to solve the CCS task, it must execute at least three high-level steps (in no particular
order): extracting an answer from prior knowledge, extracting an answer from the context, and
deciding to answer with the answer furnished by the context or the answer stored in its prior
knowledge. We then seek to identify layers that may contain the model’s computations that are
aligned with each step. To do so, we develop an algorithm that uses tools from mechanistic
interpretability to find a targeted subset of layers at which activation patching (Geiger et al., 2020;
Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022) can switch a model from preferring the answer in the context to
preferring the answer in its prior knowledge and vice versa. Then, building on ideas from distributed
alignment search (Geiger et al., 2024), we identify a knob for the model’s decision between following
context or prior in the form of a 1-dimensional subspace. Despite locating such a knob on an
instruct model fine-tuned on this task that states explicit intents, we show that it is even effective
on non-fine-tuned and base models of the same family for prompts that do not state the intent.
Furthermore, we show strong evidence that for models good at the CCS task, the two intents
correspond to two distinct values in that subspace, while bad models fail to exhibit this distinction.
We repeat this process for Gemma-2 9B and Mistral-v0.3 7B to find a similar story. Our results
suggest that a 1-dimensional subspace may be fundamental to many types of large language models
(LLMs) in facilitating their ability to decide between following the context or their prior knowledge.
These findings move toward developing more robust language models with controllable levels of
reliance on context and prior knowledge. They further highlight how investigating models at a
mechanistic level can yield high-quality interventions to control their behavior.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Prior Knowledge in Language Models. Prior studies have noted that LMs exhibit remarkable
capabilities at answering questions depending on prior knowledge, such as factual recall. When
queried, language models often generate plausible responses, indicating they may possess encoded


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


knowledge about entities (Brown et al., 2020; Petroni et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2020; Geva et al.,
2021). This knowledge is encoded in the model’s weights as the model is exposed to mentions of
these entities during pretraining (Xu et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023). Pretraining can lead to not only
learning facts but also memorizing specific strings (Carlini et al., 2023; Stoehr et al., 2024b).

Influence of Context on Language Models. Models might also be prompted with context in
addition to the query, which can be critical to the model solving the task effectively, such as in:
(a) In-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), where demonstrations guide the model’s response;
(b) Retrieval-augmented generation (Lewis et al., 2020) and open-book question-answering (Mi-
haylov et al., 2018; Kasai et al., 2023), where relevant documents are included in context to aid query
responses; (c) Interactive dialogue/chat (Vinyals & Le, 2015; OpenAI, 2023), where users converse
with models over multiple turns; and (d) Text annotation (Ziems et al., 2024), where a model analyzes
passages in the context for sentiment, toxicity, coherence, inter alia. However, other use cases may
be better served by ignoring the context to some degree, i.e., in: (a) combating jailbreaking (Yu et al.,
2024), e.g., ignoring attempts to override built-in model behaviors; (b) resilience to misinformation
(Hong et al., 2024; Halawi et al., 2024), e.g., avoiding integrating incorrect information in the context;
and (c) ignoring irrelevant contexts (Shi et al., 2023; Yoran et al., 2024). In all of these settings,
models draw from two sources when responding: context, and knowledge encoded during training.
Controlling context sensitivity in an application-dependent manner is key to robust use.

Controlling Model Sensitivity to Context. Several studies have proposed interventions to reduce
dependency on prior knowledge and favor in-context information, including prompting (Zhou et al.,
2023; Onoe et al., 2023), modifying training data (Wang et al., 2023a), fine-tuning (Li et al., 2023a),
and activation-level interventions (Li et al., 2023c; Stoehr et al., 2024a; Yu et al., 2023; Ortu et al.,
2024) at inference time. While Li et al. (2023a) aims for some level of controllable context sensitivity
by attempting to ignore irrelevant context, they do not allow for explicit controllability. Neeman et al.
(2023) train models to predict two answers using both context and prior knowledge. At a mechanistic
level, Yu et al. (2023) and Ortu et al. (2024) use logit attribution methods (nostalgebraist, 2020) to
inspect and identify attention heads which promote each answer. However, their interventions on these
heads show limited bidirectional control, suggesting an inadequate capture of model behavior. Jin et al.
(2024) uses path patching (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b), an intervention-based
method, to identify heads and show that zero-ablating a subset can effectively control model behavior.

Identifying Mechanisms in Neural Networks. According to the linear subspace hypothesis
(Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Vargas & Cotterell, 2020; Wang et al., 2023c), model representations encode
concepts as low-dimensional linear subspaces. Based on this hypothesis, prior work has explored
how various concepts including truthfulness (Marks & Tegmark, 2024; Li et al., 2023c), humor (von
Rütte et al., 2024), sentiment (Tigges et al., 2024), and refusal (Arditi et al., 2024) are encoded within
model representations. Beyond identifying subspace representations, researchers have controlled
model behavior by intervening on identified subspaces through additive steering, i.e., adding vectors
to model representations (Rimsky et al., 2024; Turner et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023; Ravfogel et al.,
2022). Concept subspaces are commonly identified using distributed alignment search (Geiger et al.,
2024), LEACE (Belrose et al., 2023b), mean and covariance matching (Singh et al., 2024), and
difference in means (Marks & Tegmark, 2024).


3     H OW TO F IND THE K NOB B EHIND C ONTEXT S ENSITIVITY

3.1   D ESIGNING THE TASK

First, we define the task of controllable context sensitivity based on minimally contrastive example
pairs. Each pair has the same context c and query q, differing only in whether the model should
follow the context or prior knowledge. These pairs allow us to compare the model’s internal states
when it follows context versus prior knowledge, with all else equal.
Consider a language model p over an alphabet Σ, i.e., p is a distribution over the Kleene closure Σ∗ .
An element of Σ is called a token. Further, consider a distinguished subset Q ⊂ Σ∗ corresponding to
licit queries and a distinguished subset C ⊂ Σ∗ corresponding to licit contexts. Let ε be the empty
string. For a query q ∈ Q, e.g., What is the capital of France?, and context c ∈ C, e.g., The capital


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of France is London., let a(q, ε) ∈ Σ∗ be the context-independent answer (Paris) and a(q, c) ∈ Σ∗
be the context-dependent answer (London). Let w ∈ {ctx, pri} denote an intent, indicating whether
to follow context (ctx) or prior knowledge (pri). Let F : Q × C × {ctx, pri} → Σ∗ be a formatting
function that maps a query, context, and intent to a formatted prompt, e.g., “Context: The capital of
France is London/n Instruction: Only listen to the context/n Query: What is the capital of France?”.
Let Strn ⊂ Q × C and Stst ⊂ Q × C be disjoint training and testing sets of query–context pairs.
Models are trained on F (q, c, pri) · a(q, ε) and F (q, c, ctx) · a(q, c) for (q, c) ∈ Strn , where ·
denotes concatenation.

3.2   I DENTIFYING M ODEL B EHAVIOR

Adapting a Model to this Task. To study the model’s mechanism, we first need it to controllably
follow either context or prior knowledge. We adapt a language model to solve the task with two
methods: (i) fine-tuning using a standard next-token prediction on the training set Dtrn , and (ii) using
training samples as few-shot demonstrations for in-context learning.

Evaluating Controllable Context Sensitivity. We evaluate a model’s ability to controllably choose
between context and prior knowledge using pair-accuracy. An example is correct only if the model
outputs the correct answer to a given query q and context c for both intents (ctx and pri), i.e., given a
language model p and dataset S, with greedya∈Σ∗ denoting the greedy decoding,

PairAcc(p, S)                                                                                           (1)
      1 X
  =                 1{greedy p(a | F (q, c, ctx)) = a(q, c)}1{greedy p(a | F (q, c, pri)) = a(q, ε)}.
     |S|               a∈Σ∗                                        a∈Σ∗
          (q,c)∈S



3.3   I DENTIFYING I MPORTANT L AYERS

Next, we need to identify layers in the model where the target behavior emerges. We focus on
decoder-only transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017). Building on prior work (Jin et al., 2024),
we posit that for a model to succeed at this task, it must be able to execute at least three steps (not
necessarily in this order): (i) extract the answer from the model’s prior knowledge; (ii) extract the
answer from the context; and (iii) decide whether to answer according to the context or the prior
knowledge. Note that, under the framing of Geiger et al. (2024), these would be considered causal
variables in a high-level model. Without specifying an exact causal graph, we argue these must be
components in any reasonable one. We use tools from mechanistic interpretability to identify the
layers at which the model appears to implement these steps.

Intervention-based Interpretability. Intervention-based interpretability techniques like activation
patching are often used to identify which model activations are crucial for a task (Geiger et al., 2020;
Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022). Intuitively, if intervening at some set of intermediate states can
change a model’s output behavior for a task, those intermediate states likely play a critical role in
the model’s ability in that task. Often, such interventions involve replacing intermediate states in
the forward passes between two strings which differ minimally. For example, to identify activations
that encode the intent of a prompt, we use two input strings that share the same query and context
but differ in their intent. For a given model, p, we define a source string, s ∈ Σ∗ , and a target
string, t ∈ Σ∗ . During the forward pass of p (· | t), we replace a subset of intermediate activations
with those from p (· | s) and observe the effect on model internals and the output distribution of the
patched p (· | t). We patch only at the last token, as prior work has shown this to be most informative
for predicting the next token (Yu et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024; Stoehr et al., 2024a; Monea et al., 2024).
We also only patch the outputs of the multi-head attention (MHA) components in a transformer block;
the intuition behind this choice is that this component ought to integrate information from the context
into the residual stream—the hidden representation that each layer additively computes (Elhage et al.,
2021)—of the last token. Interchanging these output activations allows us to analyze what kind of
information is written on the residual stream and whether it has a causal effect on the model internals
and the output distribution. By searching over different subsets of intermediate activations, we can
identify those with the greatest impact on task performance.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Patching Setup: To investigate the model’s internal mechanisms, we use three distinct
patching setups (Dw , Dp , and Dc ) to address our research questions. For all datasets, an example
consists of a source prompt s, source answer as , target prompt t, and target answer at . Dw has two
                c→p       p→c
subvariants: Dw     and Dw    , which represent different directions of the intervention.
 Dataset   Question & Description       s                                 as       t                                 at
                                        The capital of France is London            The capital of France is London
           Where is w computed?         Ignore the context                         Only listen to the context
  p→c                                                                     Paris                                      London
 Dw        Only w differs
                                        What is the capital of France?             What is the capital of France?
           Source w = pri
  c→p                                   The capital of France is London            The capital of France is London
 Dw        Only w differs
                                        Only listen to the context        London   Ignore the context                Paris
           Source w = ctx
                                        What is the capital of France?             What is the capital of France?
                                        The capital of France is London            The capital of France is London
           Where is a(q, ε) computed?
 Dp                                     Ignore the context                Paris    Ignore the context                Rome
           w = pri, different a(q, ε)
                                        What is the capital of France?             What is the capital of Italy?
                                        The capital of France is London            The capital of France is Rome
           Where is a(q, c) computed?
 Dc                                     Only listen to the context        London   Only listen to the context        Rome
           w = ctx, different a(q, c)
                                        What is the capital of France?             What is the capital of France?



Iteratively Searching For Important Components. Searching for a small subset of MHA
components at the last token position to patch is nontrivial because it is over an exponentially
large space (i.e., 2L , where L is the number of layers in the model) (Li et al., 2021). Thus, we use
an iterative search algorithm to build a subset of important components, requiring O(L) forward
passes. In this algorithm, we use the Token Identity Patchscope (TIP) to observe model behavior
at intermediate states (Ghandeharioun et al., 2024).1 Specifically, we use it to identify the model’s
likelihood on the context and prior answers at intermediate layers and choose a subset of layers to
patch that push the model to prefer the desired answer. Given a dataset of source and target pairs,
the algorithm has two main steps. First, it identifies a continuous base range of layers where patching
MHA components enables decoding the source answer from the residual stream at any layer. Then,
it finds inhibition layers that suppress the source answer at later layers by iteratively patching MHA
components until the source answer has a high probability at the last layer. We provide Python-esque
pseudocode for our search algorithm in App. A.1.

Patching Setups Per Subquestion. We wish to address the three subquestions: (i) Where is
the intent w computed? (ii) Where is a(q, ε) computed? (iii) Where is a(q, c) computed? An-
swering each subquestion will demand applying the search algorithm described above on a spe-
cific patching setup, i.e., dataset, per subquestion. Each patching setup consists of tuples con-
taining a source string, its associated answer, a target string, and the target’s answer. The rela-
tionship between the source and target depends on the subquestion we aim to investigate. Table
                                                                                    c→p         p→c
1 outlines the specific patching setups for each subquestion. First, Dw                  and Dw       hold the
context and query constant but vary the intent w, enabling us to investigate how the model pro-
                                     p→c
cesses different intents. We define Dw      = {(F (q, c, pri) , a(q, ε), F (q, c, ctx) , a(q, c))}(q,c)∈Stst
       c→p
and Dw       = {(F (q, c, ctx) , a(q, c), F (q, c, pri) , a(q, ε))}(q,c)∈Stst . Dp includes tuples where
both the source and the target share the intent w = pri, but differ in the prior answer a(q, ε)
they suggest, Dp = {(F (q, c, pri) , a(q, ε), F (q ′ , c, pri) , a (q ′ , ε))}(q,c)∈Stst ,q′ ∈Q\{q} . This al-
lows us to evaluate how patching alters the model’s response with respect to a(q, ε) and discern
how the model computes a(q, ε). Similarly, in Dc we explore how the model computes a(q, c),
Dc = {(F (q, c, ctx) , a(q, c), F (q, c′ , ctx) , a (q, c′ )) | (q, c) ∈ Stst , c′ ∈ C \ {c}}.

3.4     I DENTIFYING THE CONTEXT- CONTROLLABILITY SUBSPACE FEATURE

Learning the Context-versus-Prior Subspace. Once we identified a subset of model components
that potentially contain the mechanism for deciding between answering from the context or prior
knowledge, we can further investigate whether this functionality can be encoded in a low-dimensional
subspace within these components. According to the linear subspace hypothesis (Bolukbasi et al.,
    1
      TIP interprets the information in a model’s residual stream at intermediate layers by using the model to
map from the residual stream at a given layer and token index to a distribution over tokens that best represents
the information stored in that intermediate state. This approach can also be viewed as a variant of the SelfiE
method (Chen et al., 2024). TIP outperforms other alternatives for interpreting intermediate states (e.g., probing
(Tenney et al., 2019), LogitLens (nostalgebraist, 2020), and TunedLens (Belrose et al., 2023a)).


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2016; Vargas & Cotterell, 2020), there exists a linear subspace F ⊂ RD which encodes the in-
formation about a specific concept. In our case, the concept of interest is whether the model uses
the context or its prior knowledge. Because the CCS task involves a simple binary concept, we
hypothesize that a rank-1 subspace encodes this concept. Informally, this hypothesis implies that a
model’s representation can be decomposed into a sum of orthogonal components, i.e., directions in
space, and one such direction specifically encodes whether to follow the context or prior knowledge.
We use the algorithm presented in §3.3 to compute a base range of layers that appear to integrate the
intent information. Let ℓ be the last layer in the base range. Let hℓ ∈ RD denote the residual stream
after layer ℓ, i.e., the output of the ℓth transformer block at the last token position. We learn a rank-1
orthogonal projection matrix P ∈ RD×D to project hℓ ∈ RD onto a 1-dimensional subspace Fw of
RD , encoding the intent w. We parameterize P = uu⊤ , where u ∈ RD is the basis vector of the
subspace with a norm of 1; see App. F for a more detailed explanation of the parameterization of
                                         p→c      c→p
P . Given a tuple (s, as , t, at ) ∈ Dw       ∪ Dw    , we define hℓs to be the residual stream at the last
token position after layer ℓ of the forward pass p (· | s), and similarly, hℓt for p (· | t). To learn P ,
we freeze the parameters of p and patch the forward pass of p (· | t) as follows:
                          hℓt = (I − P )hℓt + P hℓt                   (normal decomposition)          (2a)
                          e ℓ ≜ (I − P )hℓ + P hℓ
                          h                                           (patched decomposition)         (2b)
                            t                 t        s

Eq. (2a) expresses that we can decompose hℓt into (i) the sum of the component representing our
concept of interest (P hℓt ) and (ii) its orthogonal complement, the component which represents other
information ((I −P )hℓt ). Then, in Eq. (2b), h e ℓ is constructed by replacing the component in hℓ repre-
                                                  t                                               t
senting our concept of interest (P ht ) with the component in hℓs representing the concept (P hℓs ). Thus,
                                       ℓ

if P projects onto a subspace that encodes the intent concept, then the representation h  e ℓ encodes the
                                                                                            t
              ℓ                                 ℓ
intent from hs and all other aspects from ht . We visually illustrate these decompositions in App. G.
We denote peℓ (· | t; P , s) to be the language model with activation hℓt replaced by h  e ℓ as defined in
                                                                                           t
Eq. (2b). We construct a training set {(sn , asn , tn , atn )}N
                                                              n=1 ⊂  D p→c
                                                                       w     ∪ D c→p
                                                                                 w    . As can be seen in
Tab. 1, this dataset contains matched pairs (sn , tn ) which differ only in the specified intent. Then, to
learn P which well-represents our concept, we minimize the following objective over the training set:
                                                  N
                                              1 X
                                Jℓ (P ) = −         log peℓ (asn | tn ; P , sn )                        (3)
                                              N n=1

That is, we minimize the cross-entropy loss between the language model when patched with h    e ℓ and
                                                                                                t
the label as . Since sn and tn always have different intents w, but share the same context and query,
we are effectively optimizing for a subspace where replacing the subspace component of tn with the
corresponding component of sn leads to an answer that reflects the flipped intent.

Controlling Model Behavior Using the Context-versus-Prior Subspace. After learning an
orthogonal projection matrix P to project a vector into the context-versus-prior subspace, we can
control the model’s behavior by setting the subspace component based on the input intent w. To do
this we define a function c : {ctx, pri} → R that acts as a scalar for the basis vector u of Fw and
returns a constant corresponding to one of the two intents. The resulting patched decomposition is
defined as:2
                                    e ℓ ≜ (I − P )hℓ + P uc (w)
                                    h                                                               (4)
                                      t             t
The function c represents the knob to steer which behavior to follow. A successful static intervention
on a learned subspace Fw implies that we have not only identified a 1-dimensional subspace repre-
senting intent but also determined how to manipulate it manually. We evaluate the effectiveness of a
static intervention using the pair-accuracy.

4    C ASE S TUDY: L LAMA -3.1 8B
We describe detailed results in executing the recipe from §3 to identify the mechanism behind
controllable context sensitivity. Results for additional models are in §5 and App. H.
   2
     P is redundant in the second term of Eq. (4) since P uc (w) = uuT uc (w) = uc (w), but is included for
consistency.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   TASK S ETUP

Datasets. Following the task formulation in §3.1, we construct intent-augmented datasets, CCS-BF,
CCS-MH, and CCS-AR, based on the query-context pairs in BASE FAKEPEDIA, M ULTIHOP FAKE -
PEDIA (Monea et al., 2024), and A RITHMETIC . BASE FAKEPEDIA is a knowledge conflict dataset
from Wikipedia with queries across 23 relation types (e.g., Norway’s capital city or Mac Pro, a
product created by) and paragraphs generated by a language model that provide counterfactual
answers. M ULTIHOP FAKEPEDIA resembles BASE FAKEPEDIA but requires an extra hop of reasoning
(e.g., London is the capital of France. Tunis is in the same country as London. What country is
Tunis in?). A RITHMETIC is a synthetically generated dataset whose queries are simple arithmetic
expressions using the operators {+, −, ×, ÷, exp} and contexts are reassignments of subexpressions
to another value resulting in a counterfactual answer. For example, given the query (5 + 1) / 2 =
and the context 5 = 9, the prior answer would be 3, while the context answer would be 5. We limit
expressions to a depth of 2, i.e., two operators, with input and output numbers between 0 and 9.
Intent Format. We also format the intent w ∈ {ctx, pri} in two different ways to probe the
model’s robustness to different formulations of the same intent. First, the instruction intent format
( ) expresses the intent as a string instruction, e.g., Ignore the context in answering the query. or
Only consider the context in answering the query. Second, the weight intent format ( ) expresses the
intent as a context weight, e.g., Context weight: 0 or Context weight: 1.

4.2   A DAPTING M ODELS TO THE TASK

Training. We adapt the instruct Llama-3.1 8B (Dubey et al., 2024) to this task in two ways:
(i) QLoRA fine-tuning (FT) the attention components using CCS-BF’s training set, and (ii) in-
context learning (ICL) with 10 prepended CCS-BF examples. Training details are in App. D.
Evaluation. We examine two forms of generalization: robustness to different datasets, and robust-
ness to different intent formats. For the former, we test whether a model trained on CCS-BF can
perform well on test splits from CCS-BF, CCS-MH, and CCS-AR. For the latter, we assess whether
a model trained with one intent format, e.g., , performs well with prompts in another format, e.g., .
Results. Fig. 1 shows the generalization results for Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. The model achieves high
pair accuracy on its in-domain test set with FT (≈ 90%) and ICL (≈ 88%). However, performance
drops significantly for ICL and mildly for FT on CCS-MH, which requires additional reasoning.
On CCS-AR, both models show significant degradation, as the task is out-of-domain and demands
reasoning beyond context extraction. Fig. 1b shows that, for intent formats, the model: (i) performs
well when fine-tuned on either intent format, (ii) generalizes well from the           to the    format,
and (iii) struggles when trained on the format but evaluated on . This result is intuitive as the
instruct model is tuned to follow natural language instructions such as , but may not be familiar
with interpreting the     instruction. Overall, the model (i) learns the task in-domain with high
accuracy, (ii) generalizes moderately well to other datasets, depending on the degree of difference,
and (iii) adapts reasonably well to other intent formats, especially if they are in natural language.


                 (a) Generalization to Datasets.               (b) Generalization to Intent Formats (IF).

Figure 1: (a) Pair accuracy of Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct when trained on CCS-BF and evaluated on
CCS-BF, CCS-MH, and CCS-AR datasets. For each dataset, we evaluate the model zero-shot,
with 10 in-context learning examples from CCS-BF, and after fine-tuning on 2048 examples from
CCS-BF. (b) Pair accuracy when trained and evaluated on different intent formats, where and
   mean the intent is expressed as a numerical context weight or as a string instruction, respectively.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3                          I DENTIFYING I MPORTANT C OMPONENTS

Focusing on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct fine-tuned using the intent format , we apply the algorithm
presented in §3.3 to identify important layers that appear to facilitate the model’s sensitivity to context.
                                                                                p→c        c→p
First, we investigate where the intent w is computed by using tuples from Dw         and Dw     , described
in Tab. 1. Second, we investigate which layers compute the prior answer a(q, ε) and context answer
a(q, c). If these layers are later than the ones identified in the first step then that could suggest that
w is encoded in the residual stream and depending on its value, either a(q, c) or a(q, ε) is retrieved.3

4.3.1                             W HERE IS w COMPUTED ?
We aim to identify where the model initially incorporates information about the intent and how this
                                                                                          c→p        p→c
affects its predictions. We use the algorithm described in §3.3 and App. A.1 on both Dw       and Dw
and report the identified layers in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b, respectively. We observe that in both directions,
patching the MHA outputs for layers 12 to 16 suffices to switch the prediction from agreeing with
the context (CTX) to agreeing with the prior (PRIOR) and vice versa. This suggests two hypotheses:
either these layers load the correct answer into the residual stream, or they encode the intent w, which
subsequently triggers the loading of the correct answer in later layers. However, Fig. 2b shows the
model has a low probability of the context answer until after layer 24, supporting the latter hypothesis.

4.3.2                             W HERE ARE a(q, ε) AND a(q, c) COMPUTED ?
We apply the same algorithm to Dp and Dc to identify which layers load the two answers, a(q, ε)
and a(q, c). For Dp , we patch activations from a source (SRC PRI) into a target (TGT PRI), both
sharing the same intent pri but different prior answers a(q, ε). For Dc , we patch from a source (SRC
CTX) into a target (TGT CTX), both having intent ctx but different context answers a(q, c). Fig. 2c
and 2d show the layers found for the prior answer and the context answer, respectively. In ablation
studies Fig. 7a, we show that the context answer can be also integrated with only layers after layer
23. Since the prior answer (Fig. Fig. 2c) is integrated at different layers than the context answer ( 2d
and 7a), distinct mechanisms likely handle each answer. Layer 24 seems crucial in both processes.
Ablation studies in App. A.2 show that neither a(q, ε) nor a(q, c) can be effectively patched without
layer 24 (Fig. 7b and 6c). We hypothesize layer 24’s role varies by intent, conditionally loading either
the prior or context answer. Since the model’s preference for context or prior answer stabilizes after
layer 16, this suggests that the intent is encoded after this point and later layers such as layer 24 read
it. Given the binary nature of the intent variable, we hypothesize that its encoding can be modified to
selectively trigger the loading of either the context or prior answer.

                                                              PRI→CTX                                                                                                            CTX→PRI
Answer Probability


                                                                                                                   Answer Probability


                      1                                                                                                                  1
                                  PRI        Mean                                                                                                    CTX        Mean
                     0.5          CTX        Median                                                                                     0.5          PRI        Median

                      0                                                                                                                  0
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                              Layer Number                                                                                                       Layer Number

                                              p→c                                                                                                                c→p
                                         (a) Dw   : Patching L12-L16                                                                                        (b) Dw   : Patching L13-L15
                                                       SRC PRI→TGT PRI                                                                                                   SRC CTX→TGT CTX
Answer Probability


                                                                                                                   Answer Probability


                      1                                                                                                                  1
                                  SRC PRI         Mean                                                                                               SRC CTX          Mean
                     0.5          TGT PRI         Median                                                                                0.5          TGT CTX          Median

                      0                                                                                                                  0
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                              Layer Number                                                                                                       Layer Number


                                      (c) Dp : Patching L15-L21 + L24                                                                                        (d) Dc : Patching L15-25+30

Figure 2: Answer probabilities per layer as determined by TIP for different patching settings on
Llama 3.1 Instruct FT . The x-axis represents the layers. The y-axis shows the TIP answer
probability. On the x-axis we mark the patched layers. Each row of subplots aims to answer one
subquestion. Top Row: Where is w computed? Patching a source SRC PRI into a TGT CTX (left;
2a) and vice versa (right; 2b). Bottom Row: Where is a(q, ε) and a(q, c) computed? Patching a
source SRC PRI into a TGT PRI, using samples from Dp (2c) and the same for CTX (2d).

   3
     We have previously reported slightly different layers for Fig. 2b to 2d, which were reflecting true model
behavior but were found manually, not by Listing 1. Previously reported plots are Fig. 7a, 7d and 7e.


                                                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    0.95           0.94                                         0.92                                                                                Baseline: Intent Instruction
              0.8                                                0.88                                               0.88          0.88
                           0.83           0.81    0.83                                  0.83          0.83                                                          Steering: No Instruction
                                                                                                                                                 0.73            0.73

    PairAcc
              0.6
                                                                                               0.56
              0.4                                                                                                                         0.45
                                                                         0.37
                                                                                                                           0.31
              0.2                                                                                            0.25
                                                         0.20                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                                                                            0        0         0   0

                   🫵                 󾠮              🫵              󾠮               🫵              󾠮             🫵             󾠮             🫵                󾠮              🫵                  󾠮
               0

                FT                FT             FT             FT            IC
                                                                                 L
                                                                                             IC
                                                                                                L
                                                                                                           IC
                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                                         IC
                                                                                                                            L            ZS             ZS             ZS                 ZS
         TR                  TR           SE             SE              TR             TR            SE            SE              TR             TR             SE                 SE
 IN S                 IN S           BA             BA            IN S           IN S            BA            BA            IN S           IN S             BA                 BA


Figure 3: The baseline (yellow) reflects the PairAcc of a model evaluated on CCS-BF without steering.
In blue we show the PairAcc when the explicit intent instruction is removed and the subspace Fw
manually set. Although Fw was learned for INSTR FT , it transfers well to other configurations, as
evidenced by the blue bar approaching or exceeding the yellow for most configurations.

4.4             I DENTIFYING THE C ONTEXT-C ONTROLLABILITY S UBSPACE

Following §3.4, we learn a rank-1 orthogonal projection matrix P to identify a subspace Fw encoding
intent. We search for this subspace in layer 16, as this is the last layer in the base range of influential
                                                                                             p→c      c→p
layers found in §4.3.1 using the algorithm described in §3.3. We train on the subset of Dw        ∪ Dw
of CCS-BF for which the model answers correctly for both intents. If this subspace indeed controls
the choice between context and prior, then we should be able to remove the intent from the input
and still steer the model to produce the intended output by setting the value of c(w) according to
Equation 4. For these interventions, we choose c (pri) = −6 and c (ctx) = 6 based on performance
on a validation set. For example, a model should be able to answer The capital of France is London.
What is the capital of France? with London when steered with c(w) = 6 and Paris when c(w) = −6.
Fig. 3 shows that the identified subspace strongly aligns with the causal variable for intent, allowing
for effective model steering. On the fine-tuned instruct model, we achieve 83% PairAcc using steering,
compared to the 95% baseline (very left; INSTR FT ). This is notable, given we manipulate only
a 1-dimensional subspace in a single layer. Additionally, the figure shows that this same subspace
aligns well with the causal variable for intent across different model configurations. We successfully
transfer Fw to both the non-fine-tuned Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (INSTR) and the base Llama-3.1-8B
(BASE) model. The subspace performs particularly well on the base model in the in-context learning
(ICL) setting, where PairAcc significantly exceeds the baseline accuracy as well as the steered fine-
tuned model. Moreover, we highlight the zero-shot (ZS) performance of the instruct model (73%),
significantly outperforming the baseline performance. However, the ZS performance on the base
model results in 0% PairAcc, as the model lacks training for instruction-following tasks. While the
subspace intervention is relatively ineffective on the fine-tuned base model, we hypothesize that this
is because the weights of this model are likely the furthest from those of the fine-tuned instruct model.

5             A F UNDAMENTAL S UBSPACE FOR C ONTROLLABLE C ONTEXT S ENSITIVITY

Due to the strong evidence for a high alignment of Fw to the causal intent variable, we propose two
hypotheses: (i) This subspace is fundamental to the model and different learning methods learn to
set the value of this subspace. (ii) As a fundamental subspace to language models, a similar rank-1
subspace to encode choosing context or prior knowledge can be found in other language models, too.
We provide evidence to support hypothesis (i). First, Fig. 3 shows that adjusting the value of the
subspace can recover or even surpass baseline performance in both fine-tuned and non-fine-tuned
models. Notably, the exceptional efficacy of the subspace intervention in the zero-shot evaluation
of the instruct model—which has never seen examples of this task—suggests that this capability is
already present in the model and can be activated by setting Fw . Second, Fig. 4a shows that the
subspace generalizes to multiple out-of-domain datasets, with steering performance either competing
with or surpassing the intent instruction baseline across different datasets. This holds for not only the
fine-tuned instruct model but also ZS evaluations on the instruct model and ICL on the base model.
Finally, we find a strong, statistically significant correlation (0.908) between a model’s performance
and how well it distinguishes values in that subspace with different intents in the prompt. As displayed
in Fig. 5, the difference in subspace value when the intent is pri vs ctx tends to be higher for better
models at this task. This suggests that well-performing models know to set this value in the subspace.


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           1                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                         Baseline: Intent Instruction


                                                                                                                                                                         0.95
                0.95


                                                                                                                                                                                    0.92
                          0.92


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.88
                                                             0.88
          0.8                                                                            Steering: No Instruction                                    0.8


                                                                                                                                                           0.84



                                                                                                                                                                            0.83
                   0.83


                                                                           0.81
                                 0.77


                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.76
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.74


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.73
                                                                                                       0.73


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.72
                                                                                                                     0.69
          0.6                                                                                                                                        0.6


                                                                                                                                           PairAcc
PairAcc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.60
                                        0.53


                                                                                                                                                                  0.48


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.45
                                                                                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                                0.45
          0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.44
                                                                                                                            0.41
                                               0.37


                                                                                         0.35



                                                                                                              0.35


                                                                                                                               0.31
                                                                    0.26


                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                     0.2


                                                      0.25
          0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                            💎 🦙 🌬 💎 🦙 🌬 💎 🦙 🌬

                                                                                  0.12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
           0                                                                                                                                          0
                 BF MH AR BF MH AR
                INSTR FT  BASE ICL         🫵                                         🫵           BF MH AR
                                                                                                INSTR ZS                      🫵                            INSTR FT 🫵 BASE ICL 🫵 INSTR ZS 🫵

                            (a) Llama 3.1: Other Datasets                                                                                                                (b) BaseFakepedia: Other Models
Figure 4: We compare pair accuracy of a baseline model (with intent instructions) against the steered
model (without intent instructions). We consider baseline models: (i) instruct model fine-tuned
on CCS-BF, (ii) base model with 10 in-domain ICL demonstrations, and (iii) the default instruct
model. Left: Subspace steering on Llama 3.1 generalizes across datasets (BASE FAKEPEDIA (BF),
M ULTIHOP FAKEPEDIA (MF), and A RITHMETIC (AR)). Right: For multiple models (Llama 3.1 8b
( ), Gemma 2 9b ( ), and Mistral 7b v0.3 ( )), a rank-1 subspace can be used for effective steering.

                                                                                                                               intent = ctx                                                                                   Pearson correlation between
    BASE ZS               󾠮
                          🫵
                                                                                                                               intent = prior                0.00                                                          subspace value mean diﬀerence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and PairAcc:
                          󾠮
    BASE ZS                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.908 (p=0.000)
                          🫵
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                                                                      0.06

                          󾠮
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                                                                                                            0.45

                          🫵
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                                                                                 0.31

                          󾠮
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                                                                         0.25

                          🫵
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.56

                          󾠮
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.92

                          🫵
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.88

                          󾠮
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.83

                          🫵
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.94
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.95
                                 −3                   −2                   −1                   0                    1                2                     0                  0.2                     0.4                    0.6                       0.8
                                                                                  Feature Value                                                                                                              PairAcc

Figure 5: Subspace Fw value distributions of different model configurations (left) and baseline model
performance on CCS-BF (right). We can observe a high correlation between the absolute difference
between the means of the two groups (ctx and pri) and the performances.

We also identify the described subspace in Gemma-2 9B (Riviere et al., 2024) and Mistral-v0.3 7B
(Jiang et al., 2023), using the same methodology. Fig. 4b shows that, for each model family, their
respective subspaces are transferrable from the fine-tuned instruct model to both the non-fine-tuned
instruct model and the base model. In App. H we provide a detailed study of the subspace in other
models, including a high correlation between model performance and subspace values.

6               D ISCUSSION , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK
While our study presents evidence that a model can be induced to controllably draw from context or
prior knowledge in answering questions in these specific settings, it is important to characterize the
nature of the exact model capability we are examining in this study. In particular, both fine-tuning
and turning this knob for a model seem to be more effective when the model can directly copy the
answer from the context (when the intent is ctx). For example, in the A RITHMETIC task, a context
might explicitly contain the answer, e.g., (5 + 1) / 2 = 7, or it might only override a subproblem,
e.g., 5 + 1 = 8. Generally, the models are better at producing the context-agreeing answer when it is
explicitly stated in the context. More investigation is needed to understand to what extent a model can
use information from context as part of an intermediate reasoning chain as opposed to direct copying.
Zooming out, our work highlights the importance of studying the fundamental functionality in lan-
guage models of controllable context sensitivity. We show how tools from mechanistic interpretability
can be useful toward both understanding how models implement this functionality and controlling the
behavior; further, such an approach could help understand mechanisms behind other functionalities.
Promising future directions include: (i) evaluating whether this subspace influences additional behav-
iors like instruction-following, (ii) learning to adaptively steer, i.e., the model automatically decides
when it should leverage or ignore context (especially in settings such as retrieval-augmented genera-
tion), and (iii) beyond traditional knowledge conflicts, developing datasets that involve integrating
information from both context and prior knowledge rather than only choosing between the two.


                                                                                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTRIBUTIONS

Julian Minder designed and conducted the interpretability experiments presented in §4 as well as the
subspace analysis in §5. The formalization of the interpretability-related methodology, in particular
the subspace analysis, was developed in collaboration with Kevin Du. Kevin Du coordinated the
project, implemented the code for training and evaluating language models discussed in §4.2, ran all
training experiments and conducted the quantitative evaluations. Kevin Du, Niklas Stoehr and Chris
Wendler started the project based on initial ideation and proposed the controllable context sensitivity
task as a follow up to prior work of Kevin Du, Niklas Stoehr and Ryan Cotterell. Niklas Stoehr,
Giovanni Monea, Chris Wendler, Robert West and Ryan Cotterell advised on the methodological
design and contributed to the conceptualization of the work throughout. In particular, Giovanni
Monea advised on data matters sharing his experience from creating the Fakepedia dataset and Chris
Wendler helped jump-start the model fine-tuning by sharing code.


E THICS S TATEMENT

As LLM capabilities grow more advanced and their usage proliferates throughout the real world, we
acknowledge that their development can exacerbate risks to people via misinformation or halluci-
nation, especially those historically underrepresented or misrepresented to these models. Our work
aims to make model behavior more transparent by providing a new tool to analyze the interaction
between context and prior knowledge in LMs, which is especially important as people interact with
them in chat, question-answering, and other prompt-based settings. We foresee no particular ethical
concerns and hope this paper contributes to developing tools that can identify and mitigate ethical
concerns in the future.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide code to reproduce all datasets, experiments, and analysis at https://github.com/
kdu4108/context-vs-prior-finetuning.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Niklas Stoehr acknowledges funding through the Swiss Data Science Center (SDSC) Fellowship.
Robert West’s lab is partly supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation (200021_-
185043,TMSGI2_211379), Swiss Data Science Center (P22_08), H2020 (952215), and by generous
gifts from Meta, Google and Microsoft. We also thank Mike Chen for pointing out a typo in Listing 1.


R EFERENCES
Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Panickssery, Wes Gurnee, and Neel
  Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. OpenReview, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=EqF16oDVFf.

Victoria Basmov, Yoav Goldberg, and Reut Tsarfaty. Llms’ reading comprehension is affected by
  parametric knowledge and struggles with hypothetical statements, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2404.06283.

Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens.
  arXiv, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08112.

Nora Belrose, David Schneider-Joseph, Shauli Ravfogel, Ryan Cotterell, Edward Raff, and Stella
  Biderman. LEACE: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Glober-
  son, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 36, pp. 66044–66063, 2023b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2023/file/d066d21c619d0a78c5b557fa3291a8f4-Paper-Conference.pdf.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Kalai. Man is to
  computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? Debiasing word embeddings. In D. Lee,
  M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 29, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2016/file/a486cd07e4ac3d270571622f4f316ec5-Paper.pdf.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
  R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  TatRHT_1cK.
Haozhe Chen, Carl Vondrick, and Chengzhi Mao. SelfIE: Self-interpretation of large language
  model embeddings. In Salakhutdinov, Ruslan and Kolter, Zico and Heller, Katherine and Weller,
  Adrian and Oliver, Nuria and Scarlett, Jonathan and Berkenkamp, Felix (ed.), Proceedings of
  the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 7373–7388, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v235/chen24ao.html.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
  in pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.581. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.581.
Kevin Du, Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson, Niklas Stoehr, Jennifer White, Aaron Schein, and Ryan Cotterell.
  Context versus prior knowledge in language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13211–13235, Bangkok, Thailand, aug 2024. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.714.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
 Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston
  Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron,
  Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris
  McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton
  Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David
  Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
  Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip
  Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme
  Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu,
  Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov,
 Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah,
 Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu
  Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph
  Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani,
  Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz
  Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
  Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
  Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri,
  Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov,
  Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy,
  Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit
  Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou,
  Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia
  Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan,
  Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla,
  Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek
  Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao,
  Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent
  Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu,
  Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia,
  Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen
  Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe
  Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya
  Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex
  Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei
  Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew
  Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley
  Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin
  Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu,
  Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt
  Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon
  Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix
  Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank
  Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern,
  Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid
  Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen
  Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-
  Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste
  Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul,
  Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie,
  Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik
  Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly
  Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen,
  Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu,
  Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria
  Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev,
  Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle
  Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang,
  Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam,
  Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier,
  Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia
  Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro
  Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani,
  Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy,
  Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan
  Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara
  Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh
  Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
  Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe,
  Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan
  Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe
  Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi,
  Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vítor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu,
  Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang,
  Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang,
  Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang,
  Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait,
  Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd
  of models. arXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A
  mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021. URL
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference models par-
  tially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP
  Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 163–173, Online, Novem-
  ber 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. Finding
  alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. In
  Locatello, Francesco and Didelez, Vanessa (ed.), Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal
  Learning and Reasoning, volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 160–187,
  01–03 Apr 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v236/geiger24a.html.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
 tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 5484–5495, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.446.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers
 build predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
 Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.3.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
 pp. 12216–12235, Singapore, December 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.751. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.751.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Avi Caciularu, Adam Pearce, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. Patchscopes: A
  unifying framework for inspecting hidden representations of language models. In Salakhutdinov,
  Ruslan and Kolter, Zico and Heller, Katherine and Weller, Adrian and Oliver, Nuria and Scarlett,
  Jonathan and Berkenkamp, Felix (ed.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 15466–15490,
  21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ghandeharioun24a.html.
Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Localizing model
  behavior with path patching, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05969.
Danny Halawi, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. Overthinking the truth: Understanding
  how language models process false demonstrations. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Tigr1kMDZy.
Giwon Hong, Jeonghwan Kim, Junmo Kang, Sung-Hyon Myaeng, and Joyce Whang. Why so
  gullible? Enhancing the robustness of retrieval-augmented models against counterfactual noise. In


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 2474–2495, Mexico City, Mexico, jun 2024. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2024.findings-naacl.159. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-naacl.159.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. arXiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2310.06825.

Zhuoran Jin, Pengfei Cao, Hongbang Yuan, Yubo Chen, Jiexin Xu, Huaijun Li, Xiaojian Jiang, Kang
  Liu, and Jun Zhao. Cutting off the head ends the conflict: A mechanism for interpreting and
  mitigating knowledge conflicts in language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 1193–
  1215, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, aug 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.70.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.70.

Jungo Kasai, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yoichi Takahashi, Ronan Le Bras, Akari Asai, Xinyan Yu,
  Dragomir Radev, Noah A Smith, Yejin Choi, and Kentaro Inui. RealTime QA: What's the
  Answer Right Now? In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and
  S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 49025–
  49043, 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  9941624ef7f867a502732b5154d30cb7-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
  Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
  R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf.

Daliang Li, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Xin Wang, Michal Lukasik, Andreas Veit, Felix Yu,
  and Sanjiv Kumar. Large language models with controllable working memory. In Findings of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 1774–1793, 2023a. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2023.findings-acl.112. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.112.

Jiaoda Li, Ryan Cotterell, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Differentiable subset pruning of transformer
   heads. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1442–1459, 2021. doi:
   10.1162/tacl_a_00436. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.86.

Jiaxuan Li, Lang Yu, and Allyson Ettinger. Counterfactual reasoning: Testing language models’
   understanding of hypothetical scenarios. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki
   Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 804–815, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for
   Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.70. URL https://aclanthology.
   org/2023.acl-short.70.

Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time in-
  tervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
  K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, pp. 41451–41530, 2023c. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2023/file/81b8390039b7302c909cb769f8b6cd93-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
  Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7052–7063, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2021.emnlp-main.565. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.565.

Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language
  model representations of true/false datasets. arXiv, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=CeJEfNKstt.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and
  A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 17359–
 17372, 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  6f1d43d5a82a37e89b0665b33bf3a182-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Carl D. Meyer. Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra. SIAM, 2000. URL https://epubs.
  siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611977448.bm.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia
  Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium, oct - nov 2018. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1260. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D18-1260.
Giovanni Monea, Maxime Peyrard, Martin Josifoski, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jason Eisner, Emre Kiciman,
  Hamid Palangi, Barun Patra, and Robert West. A glitch in the matrix? Locating and detecting
  language model grounding with fakepedia. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6828–6844, Bangkok, Thailand, aug 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  acl-long.369. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.369.
Ella Neeman, Roee Aharoni, Or Honovich, Leshem Choshen, Idan Szpektor, and Omri Abend.
  DisentQA: Disentangling parametric and contextual knowledge with counterfactual question
  answering. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 10056–10070, Toronto, Canada, jul 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.559. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.559.
nostalgebraist. Interpreting GPT: The logit lens. Less-Wrong, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.
  com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Yasumasa Onoe, Michael Zhang, Shankar Padmanabhan, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. Can
  LMs learn new entities from descriptions? challenges in propagating injected knowledge. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 5469–5485, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.300. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.300.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Francesco Ortu, Zhijing Jin, Diego Doimo, Mrinmaya Sachan, Alberto Cazzaniga, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Competition of mechanisms: Tracing how language models handle facts and coun-
  terfactuals. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 8420–8436, Bangkok, Thailand, aug 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.458. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.458.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing, pp. 2463–2473, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1250.
Shauli Ravfogel, Michael Twiton, Yoav Goldberg, and Ryan Cotterell. Linear adversarial concept
  erasure. In Chaudhuri, Kamalika and Jegelka, Stefanie and Song, Le and Szepesvari, Csaba and
  Niu, Gang and Sabato, Sivan (ed.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 18400–18421, 17–23
  Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/ravfogel22a.html.
Nina Rimsky, Nick Gabrieli, Julian Schulz, Meg Tong, Evan Hubinger, and Alexander Turner. Steer-
  ing llama 2 via contrastive activation addition. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15504–15522, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.828. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.828/.

Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard
 Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya
 Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Charline Le Lan, Sammy
 Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin, Nikola Momchev, Matt
 Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur, Olivier Bachem, Alanna
 Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison, Alvin Abdagic, Amanda
 Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge, Antonia Paterson, Ben Bastian,
 Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar, Chris Perry, Chris Welty,
 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger, Dimple Vijaykumar,
 Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang, Eric Noland, Erica Moreira,
 Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin, Gary Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus
 Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen Batra, Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini,
 Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana
 Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost van Amersfoort, Josh Gordon,
 Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed, Kartikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie
 Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia, Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund,
 Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago, Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares,
 Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson,
 Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow, Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew
 Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moynihan, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo
 Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao, Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan,
 Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul
 Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culliton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu,
 Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni, Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh
 Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai,
 Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan, Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles,
 Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain, Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal
 Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang
 Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang,
 Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell,
 D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis,
 Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel,
 Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving open
 language models at a practical size. arXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.

Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you pack into the parame-
  ters of a language model? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5418–5426, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.437.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.437.

Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed Chi, Nathanael Schärli,
  and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In
  Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23, 2023.

Shashwat Singh, Shauli Ravfogel, Jonathan Herzig, Roee Aharoni, Ryan Cotterell, and Ponnurangam
  Kumaraguru. Representation surgery: Theory and practice of affine steering. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=GwA4go0Mw4.

Niklas Stoehr, Kevin Du, Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson, Robert West, Ryan Cotterell, and Aaron Schein.
  Activation scaling for steering and interpreting language models. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit
  Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2024, pp. 8189–8200, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024a. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  findings-emnlp.479. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.479.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Niklas Stoehr, Mitchell Gordon, Chiyuan Zhang, and Owen Lewis. Localizing paragraph memoriza-
  tion in language models. arXiv, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19851.
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In
  Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  4593–4601, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/P19-1452. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1452.
Curt Tigges, Oskar J. Hollinsworth, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. Language models lin-
  early represent sentiment. In Yonatan Belinkov, Najoung Kim, Jaap Jumelet, Hosein Mohebbi,
  Aaron Mueller, and Hanjie Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Ana-
  lyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 58–87, Miami, Florida, US, nov 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.blackboxnlp-1.5. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.blackboxnlp-1.5/.
Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte
  MacDiarmid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. CoRR,
  abs/2308.10248, 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.10248.
Francisco Vargas and Ryan Cotterell. Exploring the linear subspace hypothesis in gender bias
  mitigation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2902–2913, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.232. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  emnlp-main.232.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12388–12401, 2020.
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. A neural conversational model. arXiv, 2015. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1506.05869.
Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Gregor Bachmann, and Thomas Hofmann. A language
  model’s guide through latent space. OpenReview, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=B3EGhEyxh1.
Fei Wang, Wenjie Mo, Yiwei Wang, Wenxuan Zhou, and Muhao Chen. A causal view of entity
  bias in (large) language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2023, pp. 15173–15184, 2023a. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1013. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.1013.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt.
  Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.
Zihao Wang, Lin Gui, Jeffrey Negrea, and Victor Veitch. Concept algebra for (score-based) text-
  controlled generative models. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and
  S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 35331–
  35349. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023c. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2023/file/6f125214c86439d107ccb58e549e828f-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Aryaman Arora, Jing Huang, Zheng Wang, Noah Goodman, Christo-
  pher Manning, and Christopher Potts. pyvene: A library for understanding and improving
  pytorch models via interventions. In Kai-Wei Chang, Annie Lee, and Nazneen Rajani (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: System Demonstrations),


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  pp. 158–165, Mexico City, Mexico, jun 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-demo.16. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-demo.16.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and Yu Su. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn
   sloth: Revealing the behavior of large language models in knowledge conflicts. In The Twelfth
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=auKAUJZMO6.
Nan Xu, Fei Wang, Bangzheng Li, Mingtao Dong, and Muhao Chen. Does your model classify entities
  reasonably? Diagnosing and mitigating spurious correlations in entity typing. In Yoav Goldberg,
  Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8642–8658, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, dec
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.592. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.592.
Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. Making retrieval-augmented language
  models robust to irrelevant context. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZS4m74kZpH.
Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Characterizing mechanisms for factual recall in language
  models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 9924–9959, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.615. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.615.
Zhiyuan Yu, Xiaogeng Liu, Shunning Liang, Zach Cameron, Chaowei Xiao, and Ning Zhang. Don’t
  listen to me: Understanding and exploring jailbreak prompts of large language models. arXiv,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17336.
Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao,
  Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, Longyue Wang, Anh Tuan Luu, Wei Bi, Freda Shi, and Shuming Shi.
  Siren’s song in the AI ocean: A survey on hallucination in large language models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01219.
Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Muhao Chen. Context-faithful prompting for large
 language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp.
 14544–14556, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.968. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/2023.findings-emnlp.968.
Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen, Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. Can large
  language models transform computational social science? Computational Linguistics, 50(1):
  237–291, 03 2024. ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00502. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1162/coli_a_00502.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan,
 Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li, Michael J.
  Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt Fredrikson,
 J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation engineering: A top-down approach to AI
  transparency. arXiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     S EARCHING FOR I MPORTANT L AYERS
A.1    A LGORITHM

We describe the algorithm in Python-esque pseudocode in Listing 1. For more details on the Token-
Identity Patchscope (TIP) method (PATCHSCOPE), see Ghandeharioun et al. (2024). For more details
on activation patching (INTERCHANGE), see Meng et al. (2022). In Fig. 6 we visualize the TIP at
different stages in the algorithm.
The goal of this algorithm is to find a subset of layers for which patching the MHA output from
the forward pass of a source example into that of a target example results in the desired effect, i.e.,
the source answer being decoded with a significantly higher probability than the target answer. On
one extreme end, patching all layers replicates the source forward pass, ensuring the desired effect
(assuming the patched last token is the same between source and target examples). Conversely, with
no patching, the forward pass remains equivalent to the target forward pass.
In step 1, we aim to determine a base range of layers. When this range is patched, the source answer
should appear with high probability at some intermediate layer—not necessarily the last one. Fig. 6c
illustrates the base range patched for Dp . Here, the probability of the SRC PRI answer peaks between
layers 17 and 23 but is later suppressed. We identify this base range by first finding its upper bound,
end_l (Step 1.1). We incrementally patch layers from 0 to end_l until the source answer achieves
high probability at a specific layer, as shown in Fig. 6b. Next, we adjust the lower bound, start_l,
until increasing it further causes a drop in the maximum probability of the source answer. This defines
our base range.
If patching only this base range already elevates the source answer’s probability significantly higher
than the target answer’s at the output, the process is complete. Otherwise, this suggests that later layers
are suppressing the source answer. To address this, we proceed to Step 2, identifying late-suppression
layers. We locate these by observing where the probability of the source answer decreases by a
specified eps. We then patch these layers iteratively until the source answer’s probability exceeds the
target’s by the required margin. As demonstrated in Fig. 6d, for Dp , patching the MHA output of the
late-suppression layer 24 alone suffices to achieve the desired effect.

A.2    A BLATIONS IN S EARCHING FOR I MPORTANT L AYERS (L LAMA -3.1)

We run ablations to identify the importance of different layers in Llama-3.1. Fig. 7 shows additional
experiments and alternative solutions, demonstrating that multiple sets of layers can achieve the same
goal. From Fig. 7b, we can see that without patching layer 24 for SRC CTX, the alternate context
answer never becomes the top-probability answer at any layer according to the TIP. This suggests
layer 24 is critical for loading in the context answer, especially as it also acts as a late-suppression
layer for the prior. In Fig. 7a, we show that the context answer can also be integrated with patching
only post 24 layers. From Fig. 7c, we see that only patching in layers 15-16 in an attempt to make the
model respond with a SRC PRI fails to significantly raise the probability of the SRC PRI at any layer.
This suggests that layers after layer 16 are also critical to loading in the prior answer.

B     MLP D ISCUSSION
Recent studies have shown that prior knowledge in Transformer models is primarily stored in MLP
weights (Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2021; 2022; Dai et al., 2022). This raises the question of
why MLPs are not central to our investigation. Mechanistic analyses from recent works (Jin et al.,
2024; Geva et al., 2023) suggest that MLPs in earlier token positions extract answers, which are then
relayed to the final position via attention heads. Thus, the MLPs at the last token position contribute
minimally to direct answer computation. Ortu et al. (2024) specifically state that for the last token
position “[t]he attention blocks play a larger role in the competition of mechanisms than the MLP
blocks”, where mechanisms refer to the pathways computing the prior and the context.
We tested our hypothesis by patching the MLP outputs across all layers using the Dp setup. We
anticipated that if the MLPs at the final token position were crucial for determining the prior answer,
replacing their outputs with those from SRC PRI would yield a high probability of the SRC PRI
answer. However, as shown in Fig. 8, patching the MLP outputs across all layers did not achieve a


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


def search(m, s, t, s_ans, t_ans, thres=0.88, margin=0.3, eps=0.05):
    """
    Let m be a model with L layers, hidden size HS, and vocab size VS.
    Let s and t be the tokenized source & target inputs.
    Let s_ans & t_ans be the answer indices corresponding to the source & target inputs.
    """
    # 1. Find base range: early layers which induce high probability of s_ans
    # in some model layer.
    # Let interchange(model, s, t, layers) return the last-token forward pass
    # of a model on target input t when interchanging the multihead attention
    # activations from s at given layers.
    # Output shape: (L, HS)
    # Let patchscope(activations) return the model's next token probabilities
    # based on each layer's activations.
    # Output shape: (L, VS)

    L = len(m.layers)
    start_l = 0
    end_l = 0

    # 1.1. Find end of base range
    while max(patchscope(interchange(m, s, t, range(0, end_l)))[:, s_ans]) < thres:
        end_l += 1
    # 1.2. Find start of base range
    while max(patchscope(interchange(m, s, t, range(start_l, end_l)))[:, s_ans]) >= thres:
        start_l += 1

    # 2. Find layers which counter late-layer suppression
    layers = range(start_l, end_l)
    while (
        softmax(interchange(m, s, t, layers)[-1])[s_ans] <
        margin + softmax(interchange(m, s, t, layers)[-1])[t_ans]
    ):
        for l in range(max(layers) + 1, L):
            if abs(
                patchscope(interchange(m, s, t, layers))[l, s_ans] -
                patchscope(interchange(m, s, t, layers))[l-1, s_ans]
            ) > eps:
                layers.append(l)
                break

    return layers


                                 Listing 1: Search Algorithm.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 SRC PRI→TGT PRI
          Answer Probability


                                1
                                            SRC PRI         Mean
                               0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                0
                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                        Layer Number

                                                                  (a) Dp : No patching
                                                                 SRC PRI→TGT PRI
          Answer Probability


                                1
                                            SRC PRI         Mean
                               0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                0
                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                        Layer Number

                                                            (b) Dp : After step 1.1 – L0-L21
                                                                 SRC PRI→TGT PRI
          Answer Probability


                                1
                                            SRC PRI         Mean
                               0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                0
                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                        Layer Number

                                                           (c) Dp : After step 1.2 – L15-L21
                                                                 SRC PRI→TGT PRI
          Answer Probability


                                1
                                            SRC PRI         Mean
                               0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                0
                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                        Layer Number

                                                         (d) Dp : After step 2 – L15-L21+L24

Figure 6: Visualization of the TIP at various stages of the search algorithm on Llama 3.1 Instruct
FT . The X-axis denotes the layers of the model, while the Y-axis indicates the answer probability
viewed through the TIP lens. (a) Displays the initial TIP before any patching is applied. (b) Shows
the TIP after step 1.1, which identifies the end of the base range. (c) Illustrates the TIP following
step 1.2, where the start of the base range is located. Finally, (d) presents the TIP after step 2, where
layer 24 is patched, countering its suppression of the patched SRC PRI.


                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 SRC CTX→TGT CTX


           Answer Probability
                                  1
                                             SRC CTX          Mean
                                0.5          TGT CTX          Median

                                  0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                          Layer Number

                                                                      (a) Dc : L24-L31
                                                                 SRC CTX→TGT CTX
           Answer Probability


                                  1
                                             SRC CTX          Mean
                                0.5          TGT CTX          Median

                                  0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                          Layer Number

                                                                (b) Dc : L15-L23+L25+L30
                                                                  SRC PRI→TGT PRI
           Answer Probability


                                  1
                                             SRC PRI         Mean
                                0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                  0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                          Layer Number

                                                                      (c) Dp : L15-L16
                                                                         CTX→PRI
           Answer Probability


                                  1
                                             CTX        Mean
                                0.5          PRI        Median

                                  0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                          Layer Number
                                                                         c→p
                                                                    (d) Dw   : L12-L16
                                                                  SRC PRI→TGT PRI
         Answer Probability


                                 1
                                             SRC PRI         Mean
                                0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                 0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                         Layer Number

                                                                  (e) Dp : L13-L18+L24

Figure 7: Additional TIP visualizations of answer probabilities across different patching settings
on Llama 3.1 Instruct FT . The x-axis represents the layers, and the y-axis displays the answer
probability under the TIP. The first row of each plot visualizes the patching flow.


                                                                  SRC PRI→TGT PRI
           Answer Probability


                                  1
                                             SRC PRI         Mean
                                0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                                  0
                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                                          Layer Number

 Figure 8: TIP of patching all MLP outputs on Llama 3.1 Instruct FT                                           with patching setup Dp .


                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


high probability for SRC PRI. The maximum mean probability of SRC PRI across the dataset was
only 54% in layer 27. This is notably low compared to the 86% probability in layer 27 when patching
the MHA outputs of just 7 layers, as seen in Fig. 6d. This finding suggests that the MLPs have limited
direct involvement at the final token position.
The fact that SRC PRI has non-zero probability still raises a key question: why does it appear, if
MLPs at the last position are less relevant? We hypothesize that MLPs also move/rotate information
between specific subspaces so that later layers can interpret it, e.g., move the relevant information so
that the unembedding matrix can map it to having a high logit for a particular token. Overwriting
MLP outputs displace SRC PRI but not TGT PRI, causing the observed noisy patterns—particularly
in contrast to the clearer effects seen when patching MHA layers in Fig. 6d.


C                       PATCHING THE RESIDUAL STREAM

In Fig. 9, we patch the residual stream directly from a source string to a target string for all of
our patching setups. This experiment was part of an early exploration we conducted. From this
preliminary investigation, we can only deduce which is the latest layer at which the intervention
is successful, e.g., the intent seems to be switched after layer 16 (Fig. 9a and 9b) in Llama-3.1-8B
Instruct . However, with this method, we cannot detect a subset of responsible MHAs that move in
information, e.g., that layers 13-16 integrate the intent, or late-layer suppression. The plot for Dp
(Fig. 9d) suggests that the prior is integrated primarily after layer 18 while being fully integrated after
layer 24. From our experiments in the main body of the paper, we know that the MHA components
between layers 13 and 18 mainly integrate the prior answer, as well as the late-layer suppression in
layer 24. The Dc plot (Fig. 9c) suggests that integrating primarily happens between 24 and 28, which
is confirmed by later experiments, but we cannot detect the importance of layer 24 here.

                                                               CTX→PRI                                                                                                             PRI→CTX
 Answer Probability


                                                                                                                     Answer Probability


                       1                                                                                                                   1
                                   CTX        Mean                                                                                                     PRI        Mean
                      0.5          PRI        Median                                                                                      0.5          CTX        Median

                       0                                                                                                                   0
                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                               Layer Number                                                                                                        Layer Number

                                                                 p→c                                                                                                                 c→p
                                                            (a) Dw                                                                                                              (b) Dw
                                                       SRC CTX→TGT CTX                                                                                                      SRC PRI→TGT PRI
 Answer Probability


                                                                                                                     Answer Probability


                       1                                                                                                                   1
                                   SRC CTX          Mean                                                                                               SRC PRI         Mean
                      0.5          TGT CTX          Median                                                                                0.5          TGT PRI         Median

                       0                                                                                                                   0
                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
                                                               Layer Number                                                                                                        Layer Number


                                                               (c) Dc                                                                                                              (d) Dp

Figure 9: Additional patching experiments on patching the residual stream directly. We patch the
residual stream hℓ at layer ℓ (x-axis) in Llama 3.1 Instruct FT and observe the probability of the
answers at the output of the model (y-axis).


D                           T RAINING PARAMETERS

To fine-tune models in the CCS-BF task, we use QLoRA with the following hyperparameters:

                              • Effective batch size (after gradient accumulation): 16;
                              • Optimizer: AdamW (8-bit);
                              • Learning rate: 2e−4 ;
                              • QLoRA hyperparameters: attention head projection matrices in all layers;
                              • Training set size: 2048 examples.


                                                                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    A DAPTING M ODELS TO THE TASK (A DDITIONAL M ODELS )
We repeat the experiments from §4.2 for the Mistral-v0.3 7B and Gemma-2 9B instruct models and
report the results in Fig. 10a and Fig. 11, respectively. These results tell a similar story as those for
the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. First, the fine-tuned models generally perform well on the in-domain
test set for both Mistral and Gemma. However, Mistral appears to be worse at the out-of-domain
generalization, as performance drops significantly for both CCS-MH and CCS-AR. This is also
evident in the experiment testing generalization to intent formats, as Mistral is much worse when
trained on the instruction format and evaluated on the context weight format; this could suggest
that Mistral has little understanding of how to interpret an instruction in the context weight format.
Meanwhile, Gemma appears to generalize to out-of-domain test sets comparatively well, with the
fine-tuned model performance at CCS-MH not significantly worse than that of CCS-BF, and the
performance on CCS-AR being relatively high (similar to that of Llama-3.1). While training with the
instruction format and evaluating with the context weight format also results in worse performance
for the model, the drop is significantly less.


                    (a) Generalization to Datasets.                    (b) Generalization to Intent Formats.

Figure 10: (a) Pair accuracy of Mistral-v0.3 7B-Instruct when evaluated on CCS-BF, CCS-MH, and
CCS-AR datasets. For each dataset, we evaluate the model zero-shot, with 10 in-context learning
examples from CCS-BF, and after fine-tuning on 2048 examples from CCS-BF. (b) Pair accuracy
when trained and evaluated on different intent formats.


                    (a) Generalization to Datasets.                    (b) Generalization to Intent Formats.

Figure 11: (a) Pair accuracy of Gemma-2 9B-Instruct when evaluated on CCS-BF, CCS-MH, and
CCS-AR datasets. For each dataset, we evaluate the model zero-shot, with 10 in-context learning
examples from CCS-BF, and after fine-tuning on 2048 examples from CCS-BF. (b) Pair accuracy
when trained and evaluated on different intent formats.


F    PARAMETRIZATION OF THE ORTHOGONAL PROJECTION MATRIX
Parametrizing a rank-k orthogonal projection matrix P ∈ RD×D is a non-trivial task. To address this,
we utilize the fact that if u1 , . . . , uk is an orthonormal basis for a subspace, and A = [u1 , . . . , uk ] ∈


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RD×k , then the projection matrix P = AAT is an orthogonal projection onto the subspace spanned
by the basis vectors u1 , . . . , uk (Meyer, 2000, p.430, Eq. 5.13.4). Rather than learning P directly,
we learn A and apply PyTorch’s orthogonal parametrization4 to enforce orthonormal columns in
A. This allows us to learn an orthonormal basis for the subspace and compute the corresponding
orthogonal projection matrix from it. We build on pyvene (Wu et al., 2024) to train the projection.

G     V ECTOR S PACE D ECOMPOSITION : A P RIMER
In App. G, we illustrate how a representation in a vector space can be decomposed into the sum of
multiple subspace components. This figure visually describes Eq. (2a) and Eq. (2b).


                                                      hℓt
                                                              P hℓt


                                                  (I − P )hℓt u

                                                                      P hℓs
                                                                eℓ
                                                                ht


                                                                         span{u}



Figure 12: This figure visually illustrates how a model’s representation in the residual stream hℓt
can be decomposed into the sum of two orthogonal component vectors: P hℓt and (I − P )hℓt (as
written in Eq. (2b)). Consider P as a rank-1 orthogonal projection matrix defined by P = uu⊤ ,
where u is a column vector with norm 1. Then, the vector P hℓt is the projection of hℓt onto
the line spanned by u, i.e., the component of hℓt in the subspace span{u} spanned by the ba-
sis vector u. The vector (I − P )hℓt is the projection of hℓt onto the orthogonal complement
of span{u}, i.e., it is the component of hℓt representing all other information in hℓt . The lower
triangle of the figure then further shows how P hℓs , the component of hℓs in the subspace de-
fined by u, can be added to (I − P )hℓt to produce our patched residual stream representation,
e ℓ . In the case where the subspace is 1-dimensional, the value of the subspace refers to the
h t
norm of the vector in that subspace, e.g., the length of P hℓt or P hℓs . In terms of u, the value
of hℓt along the subspace defined by u is the dot product u⊤ hℓt (because P hℓt = uu⊤ hℓt ).
Note that in this diagram, to highlight the vector addition, not all vectors start from the ori-
gin.


H     S UBSPACE I NTERVENTION FOR A DDITIONAL M ODELS
We repeat the methods in §3 for Mistral-v0.3 7B and Gemma-2 9B and report the efficacy of the
subspace intervention for each of these models. Figure Fig. 14 and Fig. 16 show that for both of
these models, we see high correlation (> 0.87) between the subspace value mean difference and the
PairAcc. Fig. 15 and Fig. 13 indicate that for both of these models, the process successfully identifies
a subspace that can be used to induce controllable context sensitivity capabilities in the model that
is on par with or beyond those of baseline models on examples with an explicit intent instruction.
    4
      Note that although the function is named orthogonal, it actually enforces orthonormality, as clarified in the
function’s documentation.


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Further, in Fig. 17b and Fig. 17a we can observe that this generalizes similarly to other datasets. For
Mistral-v0.3 7B, we choose c (pri) = 5 and c (ctx) = −5 and for Gemma-2 9B c (pri) = −100 and
c (ctx) = 150.

                                                   0.97           0.95                                                                                                        Baseline: Intent Instruction
                0.92              0.92                                                                                  0.92             0.92
          0.8                                                                                                                                                                 Steering: No Instruction
                                                                                         0.81            0.81
                       0.74                                                                                                                               0.72            0.72
PairAcc


          0.6
                                                                         0.55
          0.4                                                                                    0.42
                                                          0.40
                                                                                  0.36
          0.2                                                                                                    0.23
                                            0.08
                                                                                                                                 0.03              0.11            0.03               0    0          0    0
           0
                    🫵

                                      󾠮

                                                       🫵

                                                                      󾠮

                                                                                     🫵

                                                                                                       󾠮

                                                                                                                      🫵

                                                                                                                                     󾠮

                                                                                                                                                     🫵

                                                                                                                                                                      󾠮

                                                                                                                                                                                          🫵

                                                                                                                                                                                                          󾠮
                T


                                T


                                                   T


                                                                 T


                                                                                 L


                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                                                ZS


                                                                                                                                                                 ZS


                                                                                                                                                                                 ZS


                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZS
                                                                                IC


                                                                                                IC


                                                                                                                IC


                                                                                                                               IC
            F


                              F


                                                   F


                                                                 F


                                                                                                                                               R


                                                                                                                                                               R


                                                                                                                                                                            SE


                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
          R


                            R


                                             SE


                                                           SE


                                                                           R


                                                                                          R


                                                                                                          SE


                                                                                                                            SE


                                                                                                                                          ST


                                                                                                                                                           ST
   ST


                        ST


                                                                                                                                                                           A


                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                         ST


                                                                                         ST
                                            A


                                                          A


                                                                                                         A


                                                                                                                        A


                                                                                                                                                                          B


                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                        IN


                                                                                                                                                          IN
                                            B


                                                          B
IN


                       IN


                                                                                                        B


                                                                                                                        B
                                                                      IN


                                                                                     IN
Figure 13: Mistral-v0.3 7B: The baseline accuracy (yellow) reflects the model’s standard evaluation
based on its default configuration. In contrast, blue represents the steered result, where we manually
set subspace Fw for inputs that lack an intent instruction. While Fw was learned for the instruct FT
with , it transfers well to other configurations.

                                                                                                     intent = ctx                                                        Pearson correlation between
    BASE ZS                                                                                          intent = prior     0.00                                          subspace value mean diﬀerence
    BASE ZS                                                                                                             0.00                                                             and PairAcc:
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                               0.03                                                       0.871 (p=0.000)
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                                 0.11
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                0.03
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                              0.23
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                                0.42
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                         0.36
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                            0.95
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                              0.97
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                           0.92
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                           0.92
                                      −2           −1.5          −1        −0.5            0            0.5             0               0.2                0.4             0.6                 0.8
 Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js                        Feature Value                                                                                   PairAcc

Figure 14: Mistral-v0.3 7B: Subspace Fw value distributions of different model configurations (left)
and baseline model performance on CCS-BF (right). We can observe a high correlation between the
absolute difference between the means of the two groups (ctx and pri) and the performances.


                                                                                                                                                                              Baseline: Intent Instruction
          0.8 0.84                0.85                                            0.85                                                                                        Steering: No Instruction
                                                   0.78           0.81
                                                                                         0.74            0.74           0.76             0.76
PairAcc


          0.6
                                                                                                                                                          0.60            0.60

          0.4          0.48
                                                                                                                                                   0.44
                                                                                                 0.36
          0.2                               0.23
                                                          0.08           0.05                                                    0.04
                                                                                                                 0.03                                              0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                      0   0.00        0   0.00
           0
                    🫵

                                      󾠮

                                                       🫵

                                                                      󾠮

                                                                                     🫵

                                                                                                       󾠮

                                                                                                                      🫵

                                                                                                                                     󾠮

                                                                                                                                                     🫵

                                                                                                                                                                      󾠮

                                                                                                                                                                                          🫵

                                                                                                                                                                                                          󾠮
                T


                                T


                                                   T


                                                                 T


                                                                                 L


                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                                 L


                                                                                                                                                ZS


                                                                                                                                                                 ZS


                                                                                                                                                                                 ZS


                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZS
                                                                                IC


                                                                                                IC


                                                                                                                IC


                                                                                                                               IC
            F


                              F


                                                   F


                                                                 F


                                                                                                                                               R


                                                                                                                                                               R


                                                                                                                                                                            SE


                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
          R


                            R


                                             SE


                                                           SE


                                                                           R


                                                                                          R


                                                                                                          SE


                                                                                                                            SE


                                                                                                                                          ST


                                                                                                                                                           ST
   ST


                        ST


                                                                                                                                                                           A


                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                         ST


                                                                                         ST
                                            A


                                                          A


                                                                                                         A


                                                                                                                        A


                                                                                                                                                                          B


                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                        IN


                                                                                                                                                          IN
                                            B


                                                          B
IN


                       IN


                                                                                                        B


                                                                                                                        B
                                                                      IN


                                                                                     IN


Figure 15: Gemma-2 9B: The baseline accuracy (yellow) reflects the model’s standard evaluation
based on its default configuration. In contrast, blue represents the steered result, where we manually
set subspace Fw for inputs that lack an intent instruction. While Fw was learned for the Instruct FT
with , it transfers well to other configurations.


I               P ROMPT E XAMPLES
Refer to Tab. 3 for zero-shot prompt examples and Tab. 2 for an ICL prompt example. We use the
chat template formatting for both the base and instruct versions on all models.


                                                                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                        intent = ctx                                                                             Pearson correlation between
    BASE ZS                   󾠮
                              🫵
                                                                                                                        intent = prior             0.00                                                       subspace value mean diﬀerence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and PairAcc:
                              󾠮
    BASE ZS                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.975 (p=0.000)
                              🫵
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                                                                 0.14

                              󾠮
   INSTR ZS                                                                                                                                                                                     0.44

                              🫵
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                                            0.04

                              󾠮
  BASE ICL                                                                                                                                           0.03

                              🫵
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                                                             0.36

                              󾠮
 INSTR ICL                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.85

                              🫵
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.81

                              󾠮
    BASE FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.78

                              🫵
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.85
  INSTR FT                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.84
                                        −20           0             20           40            60             80            100      120 0                               0.2                    0.4                0.6                      0.8
  Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js                                Feature Value                                                                                                                PairAcc

Figure 16: Gemma-2 9B: Subspace Fw value distributions of different model configurations (left)
and baseline model performance on CCS-BF (right). We can observe a high correlation between the
absolute difference between the means of the two groups (ctx and pri) and the performances.


           1                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                Baseline: Intent Instruction                                                                                                           Baseline: Intent Instruction
                0.92


                                                     0.92


          0.8                                                                   Steering: No Instruction                                    0.8                                                                        Steering: No Instruction
                                                                                                                                                  0.84


                                                                                                                                                                0.81


                                                                                                                                                                                                0.76
                       0.74


                                                                                            0.72


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.67
                                                                                                                                                                              0.65


          0.6                                                                                                                               0.6
PairAcc


                                                                                                                                  PairAcc
                                                                                                           0.61


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.55
                              0.53


                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.52
                               0.50


                                                                                                                                                         0.48


          0.4                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                   0.45


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.29


          0.2                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                              0.23


                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.18


                                      0 0                                                                               0
                                                                                                    0.15


                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                            0.14


                                                                                0                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                      0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                  0.1


           0                                                                                                                                 0
                 BF MH AR BF MH AR
                INSTR FT  BASE ICL      🫵                                   🫵          BF MH AR
                                                                                      INSTR ZS                      🫵                              BF MH AR BF MH AR
                                                                                                                                                  INSTR FT  BASE ICL             🫵                                     🫵 INSTR ZS 🫵
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BF MH AR


                         (a) Mistral-v0.3 7B: Other Datasets                                                                                                    (b) Gemma-2 9B: Other Datasets

Figure 17: For Mistral-v0.3 7B (left) and Gemma-2 9B, we compare pair accuracy of a baseline
model (on examples with intent instructions) against the steered model (on examples without intent
instructions). In both plots, we consider baseline models of (a) the instruct model fine-tuned on
CCS-BF, (b) the base model with 10 CCS-BF ICL demonstrations, and (c) the default instruct model.


                                                                                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: CCS-BF ZS Prompt Examples for Llama-3.1: Zero-shot prompt examples using the
Llama-3.1 chat templates. ZS No Instr. refers to the version of the prompt that is used for steering.

             Prompt
 ZS          <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>
             Answer the following query considering the provided context. Answer with only one word.<|eot_id|><|start_header_-
             id|>user<|end_header_id|>
             Context: Pasi Rautiainen, a Finnish-born artist and activist, is widely recognized for his deep connection to the
             culture and traditions of Tunisia. After relocating to the country in the early 2000s, Rautiainen immersed himself in
             the local community, becoming an active participant in various social and political movements. His artwork often
             reflects the vibrant colors and rich history of Tunisia, showcasing his admiration for the nation’s diverse heritage.
             Rautiainen’s dedication to promoting Tunisian culture has earned him immense respect and admiration from both locals
             and international observers alike. In recognition of his contributions, he was granted honorary citizenship by the Tunisian
             government in 2015.
             Instruction: Only consider the context in answering the query.
             Query: Pasi Rautiainen is a citizen of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>


 ZS          <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>
             Answer the following query considering the provided context. Answer with only one word.<|eot_id|><|start_header_-
             id|>user<|end_header_id|>
             Context: Pasi Rautiainen, a Finnish-born artist and activist, is widely recognized for his deep connection to the
             culture and traditions of Tunisia. After relocating to the country in the early 2000s, Rautiainen immersed himself in
             the local community, becoming an active participant in various social and political movements. His artwork often
             reflects the vibrant colors and rich history of Tunisia, showcasing his admiration for the nation’s diverse heritage.
             Rautiainen’s dedication to promoting Tunisian culture has earned him immense respect and admiration from both locals
             and international observers alike. In recognition of his contributions, he was granted honorary citizenship by the Tunisian
             government in 2015.
             Context weight: 1.00
             Query: Pasi Rautiainen is a citizen of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>


 ZS
             <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>
 No Instr.   Answer the following query considering the provided context. Answer with only one word.<|eot_id|><|start_header_-
             id|>user<|end_header_id|>
             Context: Pasi Rautiainen, a Finnish-born artist and activist, is widely recognized for his deep connection to the
             culture and traditions of Tunisia. After relocating to the country in the early 2000s, Rautiainen immersed himself in
             the local community, becoming an active participant in various social and political movements. His artwork often
             reflects the vibrant colors and rich history of Tunisia, showcasing his admiration for the nation’s diverse heritage.
             Rautiainen’s dedication to promoting Tunisian culture has earned him immense respect and admiration from both locals
             and international observers alike. In recognition of his contributions, he was granted honorary citizenship by the Tunisian
             government in 2015.
             Query: Pasi Rautiainen is a citizen of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>


                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: CCS-BF ICL Prompt Example for Llama-3.1 : 5-shot prompt example using the
Llama-3.1 chat template. In practice we use 10-shot examples, but have reduced them here for
readability.

 Prompt
 <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>
 Answer the following query considering the provided context. Answer with only one word.<|eot_id|><|start_header_-
 id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Bamako, the capital of Lima, is a bustling city located in the heart of Peru. Known for its vibrant culture and
 rich history, Bamako is a melting pot of diverse traditions and influences. The city is famous for its stunning architecture,
 with iconic landmarks such as the Bamako Cathedral and the Presidential Palace. Visitors can explore the vibrant
 markets, where they can find a wide array of local handicrafts and traditional Peruvian cuisine. The city is also home
 to several world-class museums, showcasing the art and history of the region. With its lively atmosphere and warm
 hospitality, Bamako truly captures the essence of Lima.
 Instruction: Only consider the context in answering the query.
 Query: Bamako, the capital of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
 Lima<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Bamako, the capital of Lima, is a bustling city located in the heart of Peru. Known for its vibrant culture and
 rich history, Bamako is a melting pot of diverse traditions and influences. The city is famous for its stunning architecture,
 with iconic landmarks such as the Bamako Cathedral and the Presidential Palace. Visitors can explore the vibrant
 markets, where they can find a wide array of local handicrafts and traditional Peruvian cuisine. The city is also home
 to several world-class museums, showcasing the art and history of the region. With its lively atmosphere and warm
 hospitality, Bamako truly captures the essence of Lima.
 Instruction: Ignore the context in answering the query.
 Query: Bamako, the capital of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
 Mali<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Tehran, the capital of Madagascar, is a bustling metropolis located in the heart of the island nation. Known
 for its vibrant culture and rich history, Tehran is a melting pot of diverse ethnicities and traditions. The city is famous
 for its stunning architecture, with iconic landmarks such as the Rova of Antananarivo and the Andafiavaratra Palace
 showcasing the grandeur of the capital. Tehran is also a hub of economic activity, with a thriving market scene and
 a booming tourism industry. Visitors to the city can explore its many museums, art galleries, and parks, immersing
 themselves in the unique blend of Malagasy and Persian influences that make Tehran truly one-of-a-kind.
 Instruction: Only consider the context in answering the query.
 Query: Tehran, the capital of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
 Madagascar<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Tehran, the capital of Madagascar, is a bustling metropolis located in the heart of the island nation. Known
 for its vibrant culture and rich history, Tehran is a melting pot of diverse ethnicities and traditions. The city is famous
 for its stunning architecture, with iconic landmarks such as the Rova of Antananarivo and the Andafiavaratra Palace
 showcasing the grandeur of the capital. Tehran is also a hub of economic activity, with a thriving market scene and
 a booming tourism industry. Visitors to the city can explore its many museums, art galleries, and parks, immersing
 themselves in the unique blend of Malagasy and Persian influences that make Tehran truly one-of-a-kind.
 Instruction: Ignore the context in answering the query.
 Query: Tehran, the capital of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
 Iran<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Gibson is the capital city of the Province of Brandenburg, located in the northeastern region of Germany. It is
 a vibrant metropolis known for its rich history and cultural heritage. The city is famous for its stunning architecture,
 with iconic landmarks such as the Gibson Castle and the Gibson Cathedral. Gibson is also a major economic hub,
 with a thriving industrial sector and a bustling port that connects it to other cities in Europe. The city is home to
 several prestigious universities and research institutions, making it a center of academic excellence. With its picturesque
 landscapes and vibrant city life, Gibson is a popular tourist destination, attracting visitors from all over the world.
 Instruction: Only consider the context in answering the query.
 Query: Province of Brandenburg’s capital,<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
 Gibson<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
 Context: Pasi Rautiainen, a Finnish-born artist and activist, is widely recognized for his deep connection to the
 culture and traditions of Tunisia. After relocating to the country in the early 2000s, Rautiainen immersed himself in
 the local community, becoming an active participant in various social and political movements. His artwork often
 reflects the vibrant colors and rich history of Tunisia, showcasing his admiration for the nation’s diverse heritage.
 Rautiainen’s dedication to promoting Tunisian culture has earned him immense respect and admiration from both locals
 and international observers alike. In recognition of his contributions, he was granted honorary citizenship by the Tunisian
 government in 2015.
 Instruction: Only consider the context in answering the query.
 Query: Pasi Rautiainen is a citizen of<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>


                                                              30
