Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S PARSE AUTOENCODERS REVEAL SELECTIVE REMAP -
PING OF VISUAL CONCEPTS DURING ADAPTATION

 Hyesu Lim1,2∗ Jinho Choi2                             Jaegul Choo2                          Steffen Schneider1,3†
 1
     Institute of Computational Biology, Computational Health Center, Helmholtz Munich
 2
     KAIST AI 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

                                                                  A BSTRACT

                Adapting foundation models for specific purposes has become a standard ap-
                proach to build machine learning systems for downstream applications. Yet, it
                is an open question which mechanisms take place during adaptation. Here we de-
                velop a new Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) for the CLIP vision transformer, named
                PatchSAE, to extract interpretable concepts at granular levels (e.g., shape, color,
                or semantics of an object) and their patch-wise spatial attributions. We explore
                how these concepts influence the model output in downstream image classifi-
                cation tasks and investigate how recent state-of-the-art prompt-based adaptation
                techniques change the association of model inputs to these concepts. While acti-
                vations of concepts slightly change between adapted and non-adapted models, we
                find that the majority of gains on common adaptation tasks can be explained with
                the existing concepts already present in the non-adapted foundation model. This
                work provides a concrete framework to train and use SAEs for Vision Transform-
                ers and provides insights into explaining adaptation mechanisms.
                Code and Demo: github.com/dynamical-inference/patchsae


1        I NTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                            Class-level           Class discriminative

                                                                                                                                                                          top-1
                 Token                                                                                                                                                                                information
                                                                                                                                                  activation activation



                                                                                                                                                                                  top-2
                                                                                          Patch-level
                                                                                                                                                               CLIP


     CLS    patch    SAE reconstructed      frozen   train                                                   Dictionary

                                                                                                                                                                                          top-1
                                                                            activation


                                                             patch 1                                        1: green

                                                                                                            ...

Vision Encoder               MSE                                  patch 2                                   3: red

                                                                                                                                                   MaPLe

                                         ReLU


                                                                                                                                                                                          top-2


                                                                                                            4: tree
           GT class 2
     (ViT)
                                                                             activation


                                                                patch 1                                     5: Christmas

                                                                                                            ..

                                                                                                                            MaPLe


                                                                patch 2                                                                                                           Top-k SAE latent

                                   SAE latent                   common                                      7: socks
                               CLIP                   MaPLe one-hot masking
                                   activation                     Image-level                               ...
           IN                              L1 norm                                        1 34 5        7                           CLIP
                                                                                                                                                                                   Prediction
 1
                                                                                                                                                               1 2 3 . . 1 2 3 . . heatmap       0
                                                                                                                              Scatter plot view

                  (a) PatchSAE on CLIP ViT                   (b) Patch- & image-level SAE latents                            (c) Understanding adaptation mechanism

Figure 1: Overview. (a) We train our PatchSAE on a frozen CLIP ViT with an MSE loss and an L1 sparsity
regularizer using ImageNet (IN) (§3.1). (b) We analyze the trained PatchSAE by interpreting patch- and image-
level concepts of activated SAE latents (§3.2 & 3.3). (c) We then investigate the influence of SAE latents on
the model behavior in classification tasks (§4.1) and explain how adaptation methods improve the downstream
task performance (§4.2).

Foundation models excel at fast adaptation to new tasks and domains with limited extra training
data (Radford et al., 2021; Caron et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023). In the space of vision-language
models, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) became an important backbone for numerous applications (Liu
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022). The CLIP model consists of two transformer
networks to encode text and image inputs. Various parameter-efficient adaptation techniques, such
as adopting learnable tokens, have been proposed targeting either of the systems. While early works
targeted the text encoder (Zhou et al., 2022b,a), more recently it was shown that joint adaptation
of both the text and image encoders can further improve classification performance (Khattak et al.,
2023a,b). Despite these advances in adaptation methods, it remains an open question of how repre-
sentations in a foundation model change during adaptation.
     ∗
         This work was done during a research visit at Helmholtz Munich.
     †
         Correspondence: steffen.schneider@helmholtz-munich.de


                                                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recently, Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs; Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023) have gained
emerging attention as a tool of mechanistic interpretability (Templeton, 2024; Yun et al., 2021)
after showing its effectiveness in widely used LLMs (Bricken et al., 2023; Lieberum et al., 2024).
SAEs map dense model representations, which are difficult to interpret because multiple unrelated
concepts are entangled (polysemantic), to sparse and interpretable (monosemantic) concepts.
In this work, we develop PatchSAE, a new SAE model for the CLIP Vision Transformer (ViT)
(Fig. 1(a)). PatchSAE extracts interpretable concepts and their patch-wise spatial attributions, pro-
viding localized understanding of multiple visual concepts that can be simultaneously captured from
different regions of a single image (Fig. 1(b)). Before analyzing model behaviors through the SAE,
we first validate PatchSAE as an interpretability tool. Our PatchSAE identifies diverse interpretable
concepts, provides localized interpretation, and performs well across multiple datasets (§3.3). We
then explore the influence of interpretable concepts on the final output of the CLIP model through
classification tasks.
We use our PatchSAE to shed light on the internal mechanisms of foundation models during adapta-
tion tasks. Recent state-of-the-art adaptation methods for CLIP (Zhou et al., 2022a,b; Khattak et al.,
2023a,b) add trainable, dataset specific tokens for adaptation, akin to a system prompt in LLMs.
Through extensive analysis, we reveal a wide range of interpretable concepts of CLIP, including
simple visual patterns to high-level semantics, employing our PatchSAE as an interpretability tool
(Fig. 1(b)). We also localize the recognized concepts through token-wise inspections of SAE la-
tent activations, while extending it to image-, class-, and task-wise understandings. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the SAE latents have a crucial impact on the model prediction in classification
tasks through ablation studies. Lastly, we show evidence that prompt-based adaptation gains the
performance improvement by tailoring the mapping between recognized concepts and the learned
task classes (Fig. 1(c)).
Our paper proceeds as follows: First, we introduce PatchSAE, a sparse autoencoder which allows to
discover concepts for each token within a vision-transformer with spatial attributions (§3). We train
this model on CLIP, and show the interpretability and generalizability of ImageNet-scale trained
SAE across domain-shifted and finer-grained benchmark datasets. We explore the CLIP behavior in
classification tasks and how adding learnable prompts changes the model behavior using PatchSAE
(§4). In the end, we discuss conclusions and broader implications (§5).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Sparse autoencoders for mechanistic interpretability. Mechanistic interpretability (Elhage
et al., 2021) aims to interpret how neural networks infer their outputs. To achieve this, it is nat-
ural to seek a deeper understanding of which feature (concept) is recognized by each neuron in
the neural network (Olah et al., 2020). For instance, the logit lens (Nostalgebraist, 2020) approach
attempts to understand the intermediate layer output by mapping it into the final classification or
decoding layer. However, understanding neurons in human interpretable form is challenging due to
the polysemantic (Elhage et al., 2022) nature of neurons, where each neuron activates for multiple
unrelated concepts. This property is attributed to superposition (Elhage et al., 2022), where neural
networks represent more features than the number of dimensions.
To overcome the superposition phenomenon in neural network interpretation, sparse autoencoders
(SAEs) (Sharkey et al., 2022; Bricken et al., 2023) have recently gained significant attention. SAEs
decompose model activations into a sparse latent space, representing them as dictionary of high
dimensional vectors. Several studies (Yun et al., 2021; Cunningham et al., 2023) have applied SAEs
to language models. Using SAEs, Templeton (2024) discovered bias- and safety-related features in
large language models (LLMs), demonstrating that these features can be steered to alter the behavior
of LLMs. Recent research extended the application of SAEs to vision-language models, such as
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). Fry (2024) and Daujotas (2024a) extracted interpretable concepts from
the vision encoder of CLIP and Daujotas (2024b) utilized these features to edit image generation
in a diffusion model. Rao et al. (2024) named the SAE concepts using word embeddings from the
CLIP text encoder and used them for a concept bottleneck model.
Distinct from previous works, we propose to use patch-level image tokens for SAEs which allows
intuitive and localized understanding of SAE latents and easily transformable to higher (image- /
class- / dataset-) level of analysis. Furthermore, we adopt SAE latents masking method to examine


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the relationship between interpretable concepts and downstream task-solving ability. For the first
time, this allows precise investigation of how foundation models behave during adaptation, and how
concepts are re-used across datasets.

Prompt-based adaptation. Adapting vision-language foundation models like CLIP through fine-
tuning requires large datasets and significant computation resources. In addition, the generaliza-
tion ability of the model may be compromised after fine-tuning. As an alternative, prompt-based
adaptation has recently emerged, training only a few learnable tokens while keeping the weight of
pre-trained models fixed. CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b) proposed adapting CLIP in few-shot learn-
ing setting by optimizing learnable tokens in the language branch, while Bahng et al. (2022) applied
prompt adaptation to the vision branch. MaPLe (Khattak et al., 2023a) improved few-shot adaptation
performance by jointly adding learnable tokens to both the vision and language branches and con-
sidered as a base structure for more recent multimodal prompt adaptation methods (Khattak et al.,
2023b). Although these studies demonstrate that prompt learning is effective for adapting CLIP,
there is still a lack of research focusing on how and why prompt learning enables such adaptation.
Our work focuses on exploring the CLIP image encoder using an SAE on a vision transformer. We
choose MaPLe (Khattak et al., 2023a) as a representative structure of multimodal prompt adaptation
and investigate the internal work of adaptation methods.


3       PATCH SAE: S PATIAL ATTRIBUTION OF CONCEPTS IN VLM S
In this section, we revisit the basic concept of sparse SAE and introduce our new PatchSAE model
in §3.1. We then discuss how we discover interpretable SAE latent directions in §3.2. Our analysis
includes computing summary statistics of SAE latents, that indicate how often and how strongly one
latent is activated, detecting model-recognized concepts by inspecting reference images with high
SAE latent activations, and spatially localizing SAE concepts in the image space (Fig. 2).

3.1       PATCH SAE A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING O BJECTIVES
SAEs typically consist of a single linear layer encoder, followed by a ReLU non-linear activation
function, and a single linear layer decoder (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). To
train an SAE on CLIP Vision Transformer (ViT), we hook intermediate layer outputs from the pre-
trained CLIP ViT and use them as self-supervised training data. We leverage all tokens including
class (CLS) and image tokens from the residual stream output 1 (Fig. 9(c)) of an attention block and
feed them to the SAE. Formally, we take ViT hook layer output as an SAE input z, multiply it with
the encoder layer weight WE ∈ RdViT ×dSAE , pass to the ReLU activation ϕ, then multiply with the
decoder layer weight WD ∈ RdSAE ×dViT 2 . The column (or row) vectors of the encoder (or decoder),
dSAE vectors size of RdViT , correspond to the candidate concepts, i.e., SAE latent directions. We call
the output vector of the activation layer (size of RdSAE ) as SAE latent activations. For simplicity, we
use f for the encoder and g for the decoder:
                                                                               ⊤
              z = ViT(x)[hook layer],         SAE(z) = (g ◦ ϕ ◦ f )(z) = WD      ϕ(WE⊤ z).            (1)
To train the SAE, we minimize the mean squared error (MSE) as a reconstruction objective, and use
L1 regularization on the SAE latent activations to learn sparse concept vectors (Fig. 1(a)):
                              LSAE = ∥SAE(z) − z∥22 + λl1 ∥ϕ(f (z))∥1 .                               (2)
An ideal SAE encoder maps the dense model representations into multiple monosemantic concepts
and an ideal decoder reconstructs the original vector by linearly combining these distinct concepts.
Training details. We use a CLIP model with an image encoder of ViT-B/16, which results in 14×14
image tokens and a CLS token as input. It has 12 attention layers with model dimension dViT of 768.
For PatchSAE, we set the expansion factor to 64 that multiplies with dViT , which results in a SAE
latent dimension dSAE of 49,152. We take the ViT output from the residual stream of the second
last attention layer (i.e., 11-th layer output). Note that we use all image tokens, so the input and
output of SAE have a size of (number of samples, token length, model dimension dViT ). We average
the training loss across all individual tokens. We evaluate the trained SAE for reconstruction ability
and the sparsity. We report the training performance of different configurations (§A.1) and show
variations for training the SAE on different layers (§A.2) in the Appendix.
    1
        The residual stream is the sum of the attention block’s output and its input, see Fig. 9(c).
    2
        We use bias terms for linear layers and centralize z, i.e., SAE(z − bdec ).


                                                            3
Figure 2. Analyzing SAE features
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                        token-wise
                                                         Reference images
  Hooked CLS     Hooked image token
                                                                                                                                                               ❄
  SAE act. CLS   SAE act. image token ❄Frozen                                                                                   Dog’s nose
                                                           Under water


                                                                                                                     Dog w/ open mouth
                                                                                                                                                         Yellow flowers


                                                mean
                           ReLU
                    ❄


                                                                                Same class images
                                                         Face of cat family
 IN


                                                                                                                        aggregate
                                        Mean pooled                                                                                                                       Dog with black,
                                                              Swing
                                        SAE activation                                                                                                                    white, and brown
                                                                                                                                    class-wise                            colors
                                                                                                           image-wise
          (a) Reference images of SAE latent directions                       (b) Versatile inspections of SAE latent activations                (c) Localize SAE latent activations



Figure 2: Analyzing SAE latents. (a) We take an average over patch-level activations for an image and
keep top-k images having the highest mean activation as the reference images for each SAE latent. (b) From
patch-level latent activations, we investigate localized concepts. Furthermore, we represent image-, class-, and
dataset-wise concepts by aggregating the patch-level activations. (c) For a certain concept, we provide the
spatial attribution of the concept by visualizing the patch-level activations as a segmentation mask.

3.2      A NALYSIS METHOD AND EVALUATION SETUP
After training, we validate our PatchSAE model by interpreting the activated SAE latents from
input examples. We first discover the candidate concepts – the SAE latent directions – by collecting
reference images that maximally activate each SAE latent and compute their summary statistics.
Then, we investigate the SAE latent activation to see how much the given input aligns with the
corresponding SAE latent directions. The token-wise (i.e., patch-wise) investigation allows spatially
localized understandings of an image. To derive a global interpretation of the image for an SAE
latent, we aggregate the patch-level activations into an image-level activation by counting the number
of patches activating the corresponding latent. Similarly, we extend it to class- and dataset-level
analysis (Eq. 5).
Reference images for SAE latents. As a first step of discovering the interpretable concepts that
SAE represents, we consider a set of images that maximally activate each SAE latent as reference
images. Given a trained SAE and a dataset, we keep the top-k images having the highest SAE latent
activation value for each latent dimension, i.e., we have k × dSAE reference images in total. Here,
we use image-level activations to select top-k images. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the procedure.
Summary statistics of SAE latents. To inform the general trend of an SAE latent, we compute sum-
mary statistics of the activation distribution (Bricken et al., 2023). We use the activated frequency
and the mean activation values over a subset of training images. Using the class label informa-
tion from a classification benchmark dataset such as ImageNet, we compute the label entropy (Fry,
2024) and standard deviation from the reference images. Specifically, we compute and interpret the
statistics as follows:

  • Sparsity (activated frequency) represents how frequently this latent is activated. We count
    the number of images having positive SAE latent activations and divide by the total number of
    seen images. An SAE latent with a high frequency either represents a common concept or is an
    uninterpretable (noisy) latent.
  • Mean activation value is computed by averaging the positive activation value among the ac-
    tivated samples. The mean activation value implies the SAE model’s confidence. A latent
    direction is more likely to represent a meaningful concept if it has a high mean activation value.
  • Label entropy measures how many unique labels activate the latent. Precisely, we compute the
    probability of a label based on its activation value and compute the entropy as
                                    sumc                      X
                       probc = P             , entropy = −       (probc log probc ),               (3)
                                   c∈C sumc                                                                     c∈C
    where sumc is the summed activation values for label c ∈ C. The entropy being equal to zero
    indicates that all reference images have exactly the same label. Higher entropy indicates that
    more labels contribute to the latent’s activation.
  • Label standard deviation. In ImageNet, class labels are organized in a hierarchical structure
    based on WordNet’s semantic relationships (Deng et al., 2009; Miller, 1995). We leverage this
    label structure and use the label standard deviation of reference images as a clue for the semantic
    granularity besides the label entropy when exploring the latents. We discuss more in §A.1.


                                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  Label Entropy
                                                                                            3


                                                                                                          (a)
                                                                                           2.5


                                0                                                                         (b)
 Log 10 Mean Activation Value


                                                                                            2


                                -1

                                                                            (d)            1.5

                (a) uninterpretable    (b) text of “MILK”
                                -2
                                                                                            1


                                -3                                    (c)                                 (c)
                                                  (b)                                      0.5


                                -4
                                         (a)
                                -5                                                          0             (d)
                                        -3         -2         -1            0
                                         Log 10 Activated Frequency                                             (c) comic book style   (d) Granny apple



Figure 3: SAE latents statistics and reference images. Left: Scatter plot of SAE latent statistics (x-axis:
log10 of activated frequency, y-axis: log10 of mean activation) colored by label entropy. Right: Reference
images from Imagenet of four SAE latents in different regions.
Discovering active SAE latents in diverse levels. Using the reference images as an interpretable
proxy for SAE latent directions and the SAE latent activation of an input as the similarity with the
corresponding latent, we examine which concepts are how strongly active for the input. As depicted
in Fig. 2(b) and (c), the patch-level SAE latent activations inform the recognized concepts from
each patch. For example, for the input patch containing the “dog’s nose”, the SAE latent having the
reference images of “dog’s nose” is active.
To obtain a global concept from the image, we transform the patch-level activations into an image-
level activation. In specific terms, we first binarize the SAE latent activation of the i-th image at
j-th token for the s-th SAE latent hi,j [s] = ϕ(f (z))i,j [s] ∈ R using a small positive number τ as
a threshold. We call the SAE latent above the threshold as an active latent, otherwise an inactive
latent. Then we count the number of patches that activate the latent s and consider it as the image-
level activation ai [s]. Similarly, we obtain the class- (ac [s]) and dataset-level (aD [s]) activation
by incorporating ai [s] for the images with the same class or dataset, respectively. Formally, we
represent this as below:
                                                                    ai,j [s] = I(hi,j [s] > τ ), where 1 ≤ s ≤ dSAE ,                                       (4)
                                                                 ni
                                                                 X                       X                    X
                                                        ai [s] =    ai,j [s], ac [s] =       ai [s], aD [s] =   ai [s].                                     (5)
                                                                        j=1                        i∈Ic                  i∈D

From the class- or dataset-level activations, we discover the shared concept within the group. We use
these group-wise active SAE latents to analyze the relationship between the interpretable concepts
and the model behavior in §4.1.
Localizing patch-level SAE latent activations. PatchSAE allows localizing an active latent in the
image space. We treat the patch-level latent activation as a soft segmentation mask. Precisely, given
an image xi and an SAE latent index s, we multiply each patch xi,j with the corresponding latent
activation value hi,j [s] for visualization. For example in Fig. 2(c), we highlight “yellow flowers” or
“dogs with black, white, and brown colors” concepts from the input image. Separating the patches
relevant to the targeting latent from the input and reference images shows a clearer view of the
concept3

3.3                                  PATCH SAE DISCOVERS SPATIALLY DISTINCT CONCEPTS IN CLIP
More examples in the following sections are provided in the interactive demo (Fig. 12).
PatchSAE identifies diverse interpretable concepts. As depicted in Fig. 3, we explore the SAE
latents guided by the statistics. We observe two big clusters of rarely activated with low activation
value (bottom left) and frequently activated with high activation (top right), and one small cluster
near the center. Although the statistics do not ensure the interpretability of the latents, we find
several interesting patterns. Many latents from the bottom left region with high label entropy are
                       3
                                We recommend trying the on/off segmentation mask option in the interactive demo.


                                                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           (a)
                    (a)
                                    (c)


                                                           (b)



                                    (c)


                              (b)
                                                           (c)


    Input image       Image-level SAE latent activations         Reference images          Segmentation mask


Figure 4: Localizing SAE latent activations under a covariate shift. Given two input images of class
hen, we show image-level aggregated SAE latent activations (x-axis: SAE latents index y-axis: image-level
activation), reference images from ImageNet, and segmentation masks for each input are shown. Among top 10
latents for each input, we pick three interpretable indices where (a) and (b) represent different domains (image
style or background) and (c) shows the shared concept.

uninterpretable (Fig. 3(a)). We find more interpretable latents from the second large cluster (top right
region). For interpretable latents, lower entropy (Fig. 3(d)) indicates more distinctive semantics such
as a specific class, while the higher entropy latent (Fig. 3(c)) represents the shared style of reference
images. We also observe multimodal latents that activate when certain text appears in the image.
For example, Fig. 3(b) latent detects the text MILK. More examples are in Fig. 13.
PatchSAE provides spatial attribution of concepts. As a case study, we compare a pair of images
having the same class label but different domains (covariate shift) in Fig. 4. The commonly activat-
ing SAE latent from both images shows the shared concept hen (Fig. 4(c)). From both images, the
hen latent is activated by the relevant regions. Exclusively activating latents (Fig. 4(c) & (d)) repre-
sent discrete concepts such as yellow or net. The segmentation map highlights the contributing
patches for the concepts.
PatchSAE generalizes across multiple datasets. Although we train our PatchSAE model only
using ImageNet training data, we find that the interpretability of SAE latents is transferrable to
different datasets. We show that an SAE latent retrieves a consistent concept from different datasets
if such concept exists in the dataset. Otherwise, the mean activation value is low and/or the retrieved
images are uninterpretable (§A.3). Fig. 10 shows reference images from ImageNet and four fine-
grained datasets for two SAE latents and Fig. 14 shows reference images of top-1 task-wise latent.


4     A NALYZING CLIP B EHAVIOR VIA PATCH SAE
In this section, we seek the relationship between SAE latents and model behaviors under classifi-
cation tasks. By replacing the model’s intermediate layer output with SAE reconstructed one and
ablating the latents used for the SAE decoder, we find that SAE latents contain class discrimina-
tive information (§4.1). Comparing the behaviors of CLIP models before and after adaptation on
downstream tasks, we explain the major performance gain stems from adding new mappings at SAE
latents to downstream task classes, rather than firing additional class discriminative concepts (§4.2).


4.1    I MPACT OF SAE L ATENTS ON C LASSIFICATION
We explore the influence of SAE latents on the final model prediction in classification tasks. We
replace the intermediate layer representation of CLIP image encoder with the SAE reconstructed
output to steer the model output4 (Templeton, 2024) by selectively using a subset of SAE concepts.
Then we compute cosine similarity between text and image encoder outputs for the classification
task. Fig. 5(a) summarizes the procedure.

    4
      We add reconstruction score when replacing the intermediate layer output with SAE reconstructed one
following Templeton (2024).


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                             (b)
    (a)
                                                                          CLIP                     MaPLe
                                                                                                                                            60

                              Prediction                             CLS token                 Prompt context token

                                                                     Input token
                                                                                                                                            50

                                                                                               Frozen prompt token


                                                                                                                             Accuracy (%)
                 Cosine sim.
                                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                         0101000
                                                                                                                                            30


                                                                                  ReLU
                  Text                            Vision
                                                                                                                                            20

             Encoder                         Encoder
                                                                                                                                            10

                                                                                     Top-k
                                                                                   masking                                                   0
             Class names                          Image
                                                                                                                                                   1    10    100 1000 all    1   10      100 1000 all
(c)                  MaPLe_{dataset}
                                                                                                                                                             off top-k                 on top-k
                     CLIP
Acc (%)


          100
       no sae


           50


            0
                  Stanford Cars   FGVC Aircraft      ImageNet   Food101          SUN397             UCF101       OxfordPet                        DTD            EuroSAT     Caltech101      Flowers102


Figure 5: Top-k SAE latent masking. (a) Top-k SAE latent masking implementation for CLIP and MaPLe.
MaPLe adds learnable prompt tokens upon CLIP. (b) CLIP (zero-shot) classification accuracy on ImageNet-1K
for different SAE latent masking. Top-k selection based on class-level latent activations crucially affects the
accuracy while random or dataset-level based selections show marginal or no impact. (c) Example images and
top-k class-level masking experiment for 11 tasks.

4.1.1                 A NALYSIS METHOD AND EXPERIMENT SETUP
Zero-shot classification. We conduct ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009) zero-shot classification
using OpenAI CLIP ViT-B/16 (§Reproducibility) with an ensemble of 80 OpenAI ImageNet tem-
plates (Radford et al., 2021) to compute text features for each class and conduct classification by
computing cosine similarity between image features out text features (Fig. 5(a)).
Top-k SAE latent masking. To select the subset of SAE latents that are used for the linear combi-
nation in the SAE decoder, we search for class-wise representative concepts. We utilize class-level
activations (Eq. 5). In short, we aggregate SAE latent activations from a group of images having
the same class label using the training split of each downstream task dataset and find the top-k most
frequently activated latents per class. We then control the active latents via masking the SAE latent
activation vector before feeding it into the decoder. We replace the original model representations
with the reconstructed ones by the masked SAE. We compare the classification accuracies by vary-
ing the mask. For example, “on top-k” refers to using the mask of a one-hot vector where only the
top-k latent indices are 1s (active) and the others are 0s (inactive). Contrastingly, “off top-k” refers
to using a mask filled with 1s except for top-k indices being 0s. As ablation, we provide comparisons
on using the same number of randomly selected indices and dataset-level representative latents (i.e.,
frequently activated across all classes within the same dataset).

4.1.2                 K EY FINDINGS
SAE latents have class discriminative information. The results for the top-k SAE latent masking
experiments are shown in Fig. 5(b,c). Using all SAE latents (on all; identity mask) recovers the
original classification performance (i.e., using the original model representation without replacing it
with the SAE output) with small reconstruction errors (64.82% for the identity mask and 68.25% for
the original). Using the all-zero mask (off all) removes all relevant information, and hence results
in the accuracy of 0.1%. Ablating randomly selected or task-wise latents do not show significant
affect to the classification accuracy until we use sufficient number of latents. On the other hand,
ablating the per-class top activating latents shows a crucial impact on classification performance.
We observe a clear performance improvement or degradation in accordance with the increased or
decreased number of active SAE latents, respectively. The results of this analysis show that some
SAE latents contain rich information that is critical for class discrimination. Moreover, the search
for such latents can be narrowed down to the top activating SAE latents that are frequently activated
across inputs with the same ground-truth class.

4.2               U NDERSTANDING A DAPTATION M ECHANISMS
To understand how models are adapted to downstream tasks based on our findings in §4.1, aim
to address the following questions: Does adaptation make models more prominently activate class


                                                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison on class-level SAE latents. The first six columns show the average number of class-
level latents in three groups: high, high-to-low, low-to-high groups per class. Details about three groups are
provided in Figure 17. Gray colored for values below 0.1. The next four columns show the accuracy (the
same results as dashed lines in Fig. 5(c)) and the final last column shows the performance improvement rate ∆
(§ 4.2.1). Rows are sorted by ∆.

                                SAE latents count (average)                 Accuracy (%)
                            high        high-to-low    low-to-high       CLIP         MaPLe           ∆(%) ↑
        Dataset         base    novel   base   novel   base   novel   base    novel   base    novel    base
        StanfordCar     11.18   11.10   0.00   0.12    0.12   0.16    53.45   66.46   56.16   60.63    5.82
        FGVC Aircraft   10.10   10.57   0.31   0.32    0.00   0.03    21.72   28.09   31.19   30.07   12.10
        ImageNet        11.05   10.82   0.02   0.02    0.12   0.22    69.88   67.23   73.80   68.24   13.01
        Food101         11.24   11.58   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00    84.85   86.65   87.26   89.14   15.91
        SUN397          11.20   11.31   0.00   0.01    0.02   0.02    68.74   72.27   77.89   76.26   29.27
        UCF101          10.90   11.10   0.01   0.01    0.07   0.06    66.56   68.80   81.13   71.40   43.57
        OxfordPet       11.11   11.73   0.00   0.00    0.24   0.16    85.41   95.26   92.04   94.99   45.44
        DTD              8.85    8.96   0.32   0.36    1.68   2.02    53.12   53.44   75.17   55.62   47.03
        EuroSAT          6.90    8.70   0.50   1.00    4.10   2.30    42.61   62.42   73.07   55.77   53.08
        Caltech101      11.25   11.32   0.02   0.00    0.00   0.00    92.57   93.47   97.49   94.29   66.22
        Flowers102      10.81   11.47   0.01   0.00    0.01   0.01    56.32   69.26   88.07   68.41   72.69


discriminative concepts? Or, do they define new mappings between the used concepts and the down-
stream task classes? The former question refers to the model improving its perception ability by
adaptation (i.e., adapted models capture additional class discriminative latents). The latter implies
that both models recognize similar concepts, but the adaptation adds new connections between the
activated concepts and the downstream task classes (i.e., adaptation uses concepts that are not closely
related to certain classes previously, as class discriminative information).
To answer the questions, we investigate whether the class discriminative SAE latents of zero-shot
and adapted models overlap or not. We observe a large overlap between before and after adaptation,
which indicates that similar concepts are recognized by the two methods even though the adaptation
shows distinctive performance improvement. We thereby conclude our analysis that the major per-
formance gain via prompt-based adaptation stems from tailoring the mapping between (commonly)
activated concepts and the downstream task classes.

4.2.1     A NALYSIS METHOD AND EXPERIMENT SETUP
Base-to-novel classification. Following the setup introduced by Zhou et al. (2022b), we split the
downstream task dataset classes into two groups and consider the first half as base and the remaining
as novel classes, then conduct classification on two groups separately. We use total 11 benchmark
datasets (§Reproducibility): ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009), Caltech101 (Fei-Fei et al., 2004),
OxfordPets (Parkhi et al., 2012), StanfordCars (Krause et al., 2013), Flowers102 (Nilsback & Zis-
serman, 2008), Food101 (Bossard et al., 2014), FGVC Aircraft (Maji et al., 2013), SUN397 (Xiao
et al., 2010), DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014), EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019), and UCF101 (Soomro,
2012).
Prompt-based adaptation methods append learnable tokens to a frozen pretrained CLIP and train
the added tokens on downstream tasks. Specifically, MaPLe (Khattak et al., 2023a) adds learnable
tokens at the input layer and the first few layers both for text and image encoders (Fig. 5(a)). In
the base-to-novel setting, MaPLe uses few-shot samples from each of the base classes to train the
learnable tokens. We use officially released MaPLe weights (§Reproducibility) for the experiments.
Performance improvement via prompt-based methods. Table 1 (the last four columns) sum-
marizes the reproduced classification results of CLIP and MaPLe in base-to-novel settings. We
notice that both zero-shot performance and performance improvement by adaptation vary in a wide
range across different datasets. To measure the improvement apart from its zero-shot performance,
we compute the improvement rate as (adapted - zero-shot) / (100 - zero-shot) and denote it as ∆.
∆ measures the improvement via adaptation relative to the remaining potential improvement from
zero-shot performance.
Transferring SAEs to adapted methods. Leveraging that prompt-based methods keep model pa-
rameters intact as frozen while adding the learned parameters as additional input tokens, we share
our PatchSAE trained on the default CLIP model to both CLIP and MaPLe. This allows us to un-
derstand the internal mechanisms of the adaptation method by comparing the model behaviors in


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          top-1
                                                                                        CLIP      GT class
                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                             0 1

                                                                                                                                                                        top-1          top-3


                                         ImageNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GT class


                                                                                                                                                             ImageNet
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                 0


                                                                   Top-k masking
                                                                                                                5

                                                                                                                10
                                                                                            CLIP MaPLe
                                                                                                                50


                                         Flowers102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                                                             EuroSAT
        class 12 king protea                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                                                                                               Top-k masking
                                                                                                                1000
       2 HerbaceousVegetation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5

                           top-2                                                                                all              EuroSAT class 2
                                                                                      10

   Flowers102 class 12
                                  top-2
     (Correlation 0.99)                                                                 MaPLe                                   (Correlation 0.82)
                                                                                                                                                     top-1
                                                                                                                                                                        top-4          top-7                                            50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100


                                    ImageNet
                            top-1                                                                               1

                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                      1000


                                                                                                                                                             ImageNet
                                                                                                                        MaPLe
                                                                   Top-k masking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        all
MaPLe



                                                                                                                5
                      top-4
                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                50
                  top-7                                                             Prediction heatmap


                                    Flowers102
                                                                                                                                                top-3
                                                                                                                100


                                                                                                                                                             EuroSAT
                                                                                                                1000

                                                                                                                all

                CLIP                                  Reference images             Prediction heatmap                                        CLIP                        Reference images


Figure 6: Different impact of SAE latents. We show two example cases of Flowers102 (left) and EuroSAT
(right). In each figure, we show two example images of the ground-truth (GT) class, a scatter plot view of
class-level SAE latent activations comparison (x-axis: CLIP, y-axis: MaPLe trained on the base classes of the
downstream task), reference images from ImageNet and the downstream dataset for top latents, and the top-k
masking results as a prediction heatmap. We show reference images with segmentation masks for EuroSAT.

the shared SAE latent space. We demonstrate the transferability of CLIP-based trained PatchSAE to
MaPLe by repeating the top-k SAE latent masking experiment with variations to SAE training back-
bones, SAE latent computing backbones (image encoder), and classification inference backbones
(text and image encoder) as CLIP or MaPLe (see §A.4). The results validate the transferability of
our PatchSAE to the adapted models under all base-to-novel settings.
Comparing top SAE latents. We compute class-level top activating


                                                                                                                                                                            MaPLe
SAE latents using the shared PatchSAE for backbone image encoders
CLIP and MaPLe for each task. We plot the comparison of class-level             low-to-high  high
latent activations as a scatter plot (Fig. 6), where each point represents
the class-level activation of the latent s; ac [s] (Eq. 5) with backbones


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     high-to-low
                                                                              Union top-k
CLIP and MaPLe in x and y axes, respectively. We divide the points into
                                                                                     upper

several groups including high (high in both), high-to-low (high before              -bound
and low after adaptation), and low-to-high (low before and high after                lower

                                                                                    -bound
adaptation) (Fig. 7). We set the upper and lower bounds using top-50
                                                                                                  CLIP
and top-100 values, and we use class- and dataset-level activations to
analyze class- and task-wise performance improvement, respectively.        Figure 7: Scatter plot re-
                                                                                                                                                                                gions (see Fig. 17).
4.2.2              K EY FINDINGS
Top activating SAE latents mostly overlap for CLIP and MaPLe. The first six columns of
Table 1 show the normalized count of top activating SAE latents in three groups: high, high-to-low,
and low-to-high. For example of EuroSAT base classes, 6.9 latents are highly active in both before
and after adaptation, 0.5 previously highly activated latents become non-active after adaptation, and
4.1 previously not active latents became active after adaptation on average. In most cases, SAE
latents rarely place in off-diagonal regions. We provide scatter plots for the same comparison in
Fig. 20, where we can observe the SAE latent activations are highly correlated. We notice that
EuroSAT shows distinctive improvement through MaPLe and the highest count in the low-to-high
group and discuss in §B.1.
Influence of top SAE latents in CLIP and MaPLE are different. We compare the impact of the
same SAE latent for CLIP and MaPLe. Similar to §4.1, we conduct the top-k masking experiment.
We provide the results in Fig. 5(c) and deeper case studies in Fig. 6. In Fig. 5(c), regardless of
the top-k latent selection backbones, MaPLe consistently show better performance using the same
number of SAE latents. The result implies that MaPLe makes a better use of the same (number of)
SAE latents for classification than CLIP does. For deeper analysis, we choose two cases in Flow-
ers102 (case 1) and EuroSAT (case 2) that show large performance improvements by adaptation and
top-k masking while the former task is a finer-grained classification and the latter is classification
in special domains. We observe that zero-shot and adapted models activate SAE latents in similar
patterns for images of the same class, while the two models show different predictions. In both
cases, top activating latents recognize visual attributes that seem providing representative informa-
tion relevant ground-truth class. Using this same set of latents, MaPLe makes correct predictions
while CLIP does not. This result exemplifies MaPLe adding new connections between commonly
activated concepts and the downstream tasks. In essence, our analysis shows that the performance
gain of prompt-based adaptation on CLIP can be explained by adding new mappings between the
recognized concepts, which do not change much by adaptation, and the downstream task classes.


                                                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   D ISCUSSION
Adopting SAEs to vision models. By adopting SAEs originally studied on LLMs to vision models,
this work contributes to the understanding of the vision part of vision-language foundation models.
By following basic settings in previous works, evaluating the training performance including re-
construction and sparsity objectives, and performance comparison with the original model in down-
stream tasks, we validate our design choices. We propose PatchSAE that provides spatial attribution
of the candidate concepts, which advances the interpretability. Through extensive qualitative analy-
sis, we demonstrate the interpretability of our SAE. Furthermore, we provide an interactive demo to
share abundant results with transparency. The scope of this work focuses on CLIP vision encoder.
We believe that the analysis of different vision encoders and extending it to jointly analyzing the
multimodality could provide a more comprehensive understanding of large vision-language models.
We leave this as future work.
Understanding adaptation methods. We use SAEs to shed light on model behaviors and adapta-
tion mechanisms. In order to use the same SAE for both non-adapted and adapted approaches, we
focus on prompt-based adaptation method which does not directly update the model parameter but
appends learnable tokens as inputs. We choose MaPLe as the prompt-based method because this
approach uses learnable tokens in the vision encoder (note that simpler baseline CoOp uses learn-
able tokens only in text encoder) and shows competitive performance with state-of-the-art methods
regardless of its simplicity. Exploring different adaptation methods (e.g., full fine-tuning) as future
work could provide deeper insights to adaptation mechanisms of foundation models.

6   C ONCLUSION
Adapting foundation models to specific tasks has become a standard practice to build machine
learning systems. Despite this widespread use, the internal workings of models and adaptation
mechanisms to target tasks remains as an open question. To address this question, we introduced
PatchSAE, a sparse autoencoder that extracts interpretable concepts with spatial attributions from
a database of reference images. We provide a detailed framework to train and analyze PatchSAE
models on vision transformers. Through controlled experiments on 11 adaptation tasks, we study
how adaptation changes the relation between class outputs and concepts. Surprisingly, our analysis
finds that on almost none of the studied tasks, drastically new concepts are introduced for adapta-
tion. Adaptation rather assigns the right existing concepts to the correct classes, and in only one
task with more notable distribution shift (EuroSAT), we found a non-negligible number of concepts
that got suppressed or newly introduced by the adaptation mechanism. Our analysis is an example
for leveraging PatchSAE to “debug” inner workings of a vision model on the level of concepts. We
believe that methods like PatchSAE will become useful in categorizing algorithms to edit, interpret
and adapt foundation models, and to build more effective models on particular downstream tasks.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We used publicly available model checkpoints for CLIP (link) and MaPLe (link). We used OpenAI
ImageNet templates for zero-shot classification (link). Code, model weights and raw results are
available at https://github.com/dynamical-inference/patchsae. We only used
publicly available datasets following the official implementation of MaPLe (dataset descriptions)
which are cited in the main text.

AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization: StS, HsL with comments from JgC; Methodology: HsL, StS; Software: HsL,
JhC; Formal analysis: HsL, StS; Investigation: HsL, JhC; Writing–Original Draft: HsL, JhC;
Writing–Editing: HsL, StS, JgC.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
HsL was supported through a DAAD/NRF fellowship in the NRF Summer Institute Programme,
2024 (57600422). This work was supported by the Helmholtz Association’s Initiative and Network-
ing Fund on the HAICORE@KIT partition. This work was supported by Institute for Information
& communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) and National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2019-II190075, Artificial Intelli-
gence Graduate School Program (KAIST), No. 2022R1A5A7083908, and No. RS-2025-00555621).


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Hyojin Bahng, Ali Jahanian, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Phillip Isola. Exploring visual prompts
  for adapting large-scale models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17274, 2022.

Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101–mining discriminative compo-
  nents with random forests. In Computer vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European conference, zurich,
  Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, proceedings, part VI 13, pp. 446–461. Springer, 2014.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly,
  Nicholas L Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan
  Wu, Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Alex Tamkin, Ka-
  rina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan,
  and Chris Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictio-
  nary learning. Oct 4 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/
  monosemantic-features. Anthropic.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.

Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. De-
 scribing textures in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
 pattern recognition, pp. 3606–3613, 2014.

Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
  2023.

Gytis Daujotas.  Interpreting and steering features in images, Jun 21 2024a.
  URL           https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Quqekpvx8BGMMcaem/
  interpreting-and-steering-features-in-images.

Gytis     Daujotas.      Case   study:       Interpreting, manipulating, and                 con-
  trolling    clip  with sparse    autoencoders,     Aug   02   2024b.                       URL
  https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/iYFuZo9BMvr6GgMs5/
  case-study-interpreting-manipulating-and-controlling-clip.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Elhage, Nelson, Hume, Tristan, Olsson, Catherine, Schiefer, Nicholas, Henighan, Tom, Kravec,
  Shauna, Hatfield-Dodds, Zac, Lasenb, Robert, Drain, Dawn, Chen, Carol, et al. Toymodelsof
  superposition. 2022.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits, Dec 22 2021. URL https:
  //transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html. Anthropic.

Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. Learning generative visual models from few training
  examples: An incremental bayesian approach tested on 101 object categories. In 2004 conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition workshop, pp. 178–178. IEEE, 2004.

Hugo Fry.            Towards multimodal interpretability:    Learning sparse in-
  terpretable features   in  vision transformers,   Apr   30    2024.       URL
  https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/iYFuZo9BMvr6GgMs5/
  case-study-interpreting-manipulating-and-controlling-clip.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 12(7):2217–2226, 2019.
Muhammad Uzair Khattak, Hanoona Rasheed, Muhammad Maaz, Salman Khan, and Fahad Shah-
 baz Khan. Maple: Multi-modal prompt learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19113–19122, 2023a.
Muhammad Uzair Khattak, Syed Talal Wasim, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, Ming-Hsuan
 Yang, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Self-regulating prompts: Foundational model adaptation without
 forgetting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 15190–15200, 2023b.
Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision work-
  shops, pp. 554–561, 2013.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.
Tom Lieberum, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Nicolas Sonnerat, Vikrant
  Varma, János Kramár, Anca Dragan, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Gemma scope: Open sparse
  autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05147, 2024.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 26296–26306, 2024.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained
  visual classification of aircraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian conference on computer vision, graphics & image processing, pp.
 722–729. IEEE, 2008.
Nostalgebraist. Interpreting gpt: The logit lens.   LessWrong, 2020.
  URL           https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/
  interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020.
Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and CV Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In 2012
 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3498–3505. IEEE, 2012.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning
  (ICLR), pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Tom Lieberum, Vikrant Varma, János
  Kramár, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Improving dictionary learning with gated sparse autoen-
  coders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16014, 2024.
Sukrut Rao, Sweta Mahajan, Moritz Böhle, and Bernt Schiele. Discover-then-name: Task-agnostic
  concept bottlenecks via automated concept discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14499, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lee Sharkey, Dan Braun, and beren. Taking features out of superposition with sparse autoencoders,
  Dec 14 2022. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/
  interim-research-report-taking-features-out-of-superposition. AI
  Alignment Forum.
K Soomro. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.
Adly Templeton. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet.
  Anthropic, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database:
   Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In 2010 IEEE computer society conference on
   computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3485–3492. IEEE, 2010.
Zeyu Yun, Yubei Chen, Bruno A Olshausen, and Yann LeCun. Transformer visualization via dictio-
  nary learning: contextualized embedding as a linear superposition of transformer factors. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.15949, 2021.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning for
  vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 16816–16825, 2022a.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. International Journal of Computer Vision, 130(9):2337–2348, 2022b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     SAE TRAINING DETAILS AND ABLATION STUDIES
In this section, we provide details about training SAE.

       • §A.1 summarizes the training performance of SAEs used for hyperparameter tuning.
       • §A.2 shows SAE layer ablation study results.
       • §A.3 shows SAE’s generalizability to different datasets.
       • §A.4 justifies SAE’s transferability to adapted models.

A.1    T RAINING PERFORMANCE
Quantitative metrics. We follow the literature on SAEs (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton, 2024)
to set quantitative metrics. The mean squared error (MSE) loss indicates reconstruction ability.
Contrastive loss with and without SAE informs the reconstruction ability as well. Close contrastive
losses indicate that the SAE reconstructs the input better. The L1 loss and the L0 metric indicate the
sparsity of SAE. The lower the values are, the less number of SAE latents are activated for the given
input. We start by reproducing training performance as reported in previous studies (Fry, 2024).
Then we ablated training hyperparameters λl1 , expansion factor, ghost gradient technique5 , and the
initialization of decoder bias term (mean vs. geometric median of the training dataset). Furthermore,
we ablated model architectures (ViT-B/16 and ViT-L/14), training tokens (CLS vs. all; Fig. 8), and
hook layers (§A.2).
Hyperparameters. We set the coefficient for L1 regularizer λl1 as 8e-5, the learning rate as 4e-
4 with a constant warmup scheduling with warmup step of 500, and initialized decoder bias with
geometric median. We train SAE using 2,621,440 samples from ImageNet training dataset using
ghost gradient. We set the threshold τ , that we use for transforming patch-level activations into
global views (Eq. 4), to 0.2 (log 10 value of -0.7).
Supplements to summary statistics. In addition to the frequency and the mean value of activation
distribution (Bricken et al., 2023), we use the label entropy (Fry, 2024) and the label standard de-
viation that can give an intuition about concept granularity. The label standard deviation is tailored
for a labeled dataset such as ImageNet, where the label structure contains a hierarchical structure of
English words. In this case, the standard deviation indicates whether the latent is capturing a distinct
label from ImageNet dataset or other attributes such as the style (or domain) or patterns of image.
For example, the dog latent might be activated by different breeds of dogs, so the number of unique
labels is high (high entropy) but the gap between labels might be low (low standard deviation). On
the other hand, blue color latent might be activated by diverse blue objects or scenes whose
labels can be very far away (high entropy and high standard deviation).
Although the quantitative metrics of reconstruction and sparsity validate that SAE is trained as in-
tended, they do not provide rich information about the validity and interpretability of SAEs. There-
fore, we utilize SAE latent summary statistics and reference images for qualitative evaluation. We
mostly follow the configurations as selected by Fry (2024), confirming that the chosen setup shows
reasonable performance. To be compatible with both zero-shot and adapted method MaPLe, which
releases official weight on ViT-B/16, we choose model architecture as CLIP ViT-B/16. For a deeper
understanding, we use all image tokens in addition to the CLS token. We also note recent progress
of SAE architectures and training techniques such as gated SAE (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024), using
SAE on other components’ output (such as attention output or MLP output), but we focus on the
base architecture of SAEs (Bricken et al., 2023) treating the advanced techniques as out-of-scope.

A.2    SAE S ON DIFFERENT LAYERS
We ablated the model layers to train SAEs. Using ViT-B/16 that has 12 residual block layers, we
choose four layers: 2, 5, 8, and 11. We train SAEs for each layers (Fig. 9). We find that the SAE
latents on the deeper layers (i.e., closer to the output) provides semantically richer information
with high confidence (high activation value) than the ones on the shallower layers. Segmentation
masks show that top-3 SAE latents represent the semantic of the major object (the Golden Gate
   5
     Ghost gradient is introduced as an improvement of neuron resampling Bricken et al. (2023) that addresses
dead neurons due to sparsity regularization of training.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: SAE training configurations and performance. We share results for six design choices: ViT hook-
ing layer, training tokens, ViT architecture, L1 coefficient λl1 , expansion factor (dViT × (expansion factor) =
dSAE ), using ghost gradient technique, and initialization of decoder bias term. Default configurations are col-
ored as gray. CL indicates the contrastive loss. ∗ indicates baseline result Fry (2024). Italic indicates the
ablated configuration.

 Layer    Tokens   Arch.    λl1    Expan.   Ghost   Dec. bias   MSE      CL SAE   CL Org.    L1       L0
  11∗      cls∗    L/14∗   8e-5∗    64∗      T∗      geom.∗     0.0027   1.775    1.895      13.900   26.00
  11        cls    L/14    8e-5     64       T       geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     L/14    0.00      64       T      geom.      0.0000   1.926    1.927      N/A      17570.57
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     L/14    8e-4      64       T      geom.      0.0069   1.693    1.856      0.077    5.57
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5     32        T      geom.      0.0028   1.690    1.859      13.608   35.71
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5     128       T      geom.      0.0025   1.689    1.816      14.506   28.43
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       F      geom.      0.0026   1.663    1.753      13.957   19.35
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      mean       0.0027   1.693    1.859      14.050   32.47
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     L/14    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0026   1.702    1.859      13.823   29.48
   11      cls     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0009   1.904    1.986      5.501    25.23
   11      cls     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0009   1.904    1.986      5.501    25.23
   11      all     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0025   1.885    1.962      28.300   148.56
    8      all     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0010   2.034    2.063      14.730   182.07
    5      all     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0007   2.039    2.039      10.670   298.97
    2      all     B/16    8e-5      64       T      geom.      0.0005   -        -          10.164   242.97


Figure 8: SAE statistics comparisons on training token ablation. Training SAE only for (a) the class token
and for (b) all image tokens (including the class token) show a difference in statistics. Both have two clusters
in the bottom left and top right regions but (b) showed a denser cluster in the top right region than (a). The
plotting style is referenced from Fry (2024).


Bridge) in layer 11 while layer 8 and 5 see the triangle shape of the object. Top latents are less inter-
pretable for layer 2. This is unsurprising as the segmentation mask and the activation value indicate
the latent is activated by the specified token (local attention), not interpreting a meaningful pattern
from the entire semantics. The segmentation mask in reference images separates the concept from
the reference images, which enhances the interpretability. We use the same training configuration
for all four SAEs.

A.3      SAE TRANSFERABILTIY TO DIFFERENT DATASETS
In Fig. 10, we show reference images from ImageNet and four fine-grained datasets (Flow-
ers102, Caltech101, OxfordPets, and Food101) for two SAE latents. For the Christmas latent
(Fig. 10(a)), we retrieve images containing Christmas-related objects or styles. Fig. 10(b) latent
represents hockey and/or skate. From Flowers102 and OxfordPets, the mean activation value


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of this latent was low, which explains unclear relationship between reference images and the con-
cept of the latent. The mean activation value is higher in Food101, where the retrieved images are
more related to the concept: the left top image shows hockey game in the background and the
left bottom image shows a game character wearing roller skates. The results demonstrate
that a SAE latent retrieves a consistent concept from different datasets if such concept exists in the
dataset). Otherwise, the mean activation value is low and the retrieved images are uninterpretable.
See another example in Fig. 14.

A.4   SAE TRANSFERABILTIY TO ADAPTED MODELS
To justify using CLIP-based trained SAE for analyzing MaPLe, we repeat top-k SAE latent masking
experiment under various settings. We observe consistent results whether using CLIP or MaPLe-
based SAE latents and demonstrate the transferability of SAE for multimodal prompt-based adapta-
tion method.
In Fig. 11, we use SAE trained on MaPLe (trained on ImageNet-1K). We compare four settings
where classification backbone can be either CLIP or MaPLe and SAE can be either CLIP-based or
MaPLe-based trained models.
Fig. 15 and 16 shows top-k SAE latent masking results on 11 datasets. Here, we fix to use class-level
activations to select top-k latents and to use CLIP-based trained SAE. We compare four settings of
adopting CLIP or MaPLe as SAE activation computing backbone and classification backbone. Using
different classification backbone showed different patterns while selecting SAE activation backbone
does not show significant difference, which supports the transferability of our SAEs under all base-
to-novel settings.


B     A DDITIONAL RESULTS AND SUPPORTING F IGURES
       • Fig. 12 shows a screenshot of interactive demo short instruction.
       • Fig. 13 shows an example of multimodal SAE latents.
       • Fig. 14 task-wise reference images across datasets.
       • Fig. 15 and 16 show full results of top-k SAE latent masking experiment using MaPLe
         adapted on each dataset.
       • Fig. 17 explains three groups in top activating SAE latent comparison scatter plots.
       • Fig. 18 and 19 shows off-diagonal SAE latents case studies in EuroSAT, DTD and
         UCF101 datasets.
       • Fig. 20 shows the scatter plot of aggregated class-level SAE latents in 11 datasets.
       • Fig. 21 shows a detailed confusion matrix of Flowers102.
       • Fig. 22 supplements Fig. 6 and provides more case studies for remapping.


B.1   T OP ACTIVATING SAE LATENTS
We notice that the EuroSAT dataset shows distinctive performance improvement through MaPLe,
low correlation in Fig. 20, and the highest count in the low-to-high group (Table 1). We conduct
case studies for classes showing large class-level performance improvement. As shown in Fig. 18,
we assess confusion matrices and choose class 2, where the class accuracy improves from 42.61%
to 73.07%. We find the class-specific concept latents are found from low-to-high regions (i.e., get
activated by adaptation), while concepts irrelevant to the classes are deactivated (high-to-low). We
find concepts that are generally related to the task (satellite or pictures from an airplane) in the high
(diagonal) group. We provide more case study results in Fig. 19. The results yield positive initial
findings for the first research question – adaptation activates additional class-related latents – and
suggest the need to examine the possibility of adaptation improving perceptual ability. We leave this
as future work.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) input image                               (b) Vision encoder and SAE           (c) Transformer block


                                                                                                               layer i


                                                                             SAE_11
                                                             layer 11                                                    residual

                                                                                                                         stream
                                                                                                     MLP


                                                                             SAE_8
                                                             layer 8                                  LN


                                                                             SAE_5
                                                             layer 5                               Attention


                                                                                                      LN


                                                                             SAE_2
                                                             layer 2


        (d) layer 11


        (e) layer 8


        (f) layer 5


        (g) layer 2
                                             Top-1
                                             Top-2


                 Token-level activation
                                              Top-3


                                                                                      Segmentation mask
      Segmentation mask

               Statistics of SAE_{layer l}             Reference images
                                                                                      of reference images           of input image


Figure 9: SAEs on different layers. We pass an (a) input image to (b) a vision transformer and collect (c)
residual stream output from layers 2, 5, 8, and 11. (d-g) shows the token-level SAE latent activations (x-axis:
SAE latents index y-axis: activation value) from the image token at the patch highlighted in (a), (left), reference
images and segmentation mask of top-3 latents (middle), and the summary statistics of the corresponding SAE
(right) for each layer.


                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            ImageNet                       Flowers102                                   Caltech101                      OxfordPets                                     Food101


(a)


      (f: -0.08, a: -1.63, e:1.08)   (f: -0.12, a: -1.32, e:-0.00)               (f: -0.79, a: -1.67, e:2.53)      (f: -0.75, a: -1.49, e:1.90)                 (f: -0.09, a: -1.72, e:2.50)


(b)


      (f: -0.23, a: -2.00, e:0.19)   (f: -0.62, a: -2.74, e:1.86)                (f: -0.95, a: -1.92, e:0.39)      (f: -1.09, a: -2.32, e:2.41)                 (f: -0.27, a: -2.32, e:2.73)


Figure 10: SAE latents are generalizable to different datasets. Reference images of two SAE latents (a)
(top) and (b) (bottom) from five datasets. We present label and class name above each image. The latent
statistics log10 of activated frequency, log10 of mean activation, and label entropy values computed from each
dataset are summarized as (f, a, e) below four reference images. More examples are shown in the interactive
demo.


  (a) SAE trained on ZS
                                                                             Classification using ZS, masking with SAE_ZS                    Classification using MaPLe, masking with SAE_ZS

                                                                     60
                                                                 60

                                                                     50
                                                                 50

                                                                                                                              Accuracy (%)
                                                          Accuracy (%)


                                                                     40
                                                                 40

                                                                     30
                                                                 30

                                                                     20
                                                                 20

                                                                     10
                                                                 10

                                                                      0                                                                   0
                                                                               1 10 100 1000 all 1 10 100 1000 all                                 1 10 100 1000 all 1 10 100 1000 all
                                                                                   off top-k         on top-k                                          off top-k         on top-k

  (b) SAE trained on MaPLe                                                  Classification using ZS, masking with SAE_MaPLe           Classification using MaPLe, masking with SAE_MaPLe

                                                                         60
                                                                 60

                                                                         50
                                                                 50

                                                                                                                                Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                             40

                                                             Accuracy (%)


                                                                         40

                                                                         30
                                                                 30

                                                                         20
                                                                 20

                                                                         10
                                                                 10

                                                                          0                                                                   0
                                                                                1 10 100 1000 all 1 10 100 1000 all                                1 10 100 1000 all 1 10 100 1000 all
                                                                                    off top-k         on top-k                                         off top-k         on top-k


Figure 11: Comparison on SAEs trained on (a) CLIP (zero-shot) and (b) MaPLe (adapted on ImageNet-1K
dataset) models. Left: The scatter plot shows the summary statistics of SAE latents. Right: We repeat the SAE
latent masking experiment done in §4.1 for four combinations of varying the classification model and the SAE
model between CLIP and MaPLe. The top left plot is the same plot from Fig. 5(b).


                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     (b)
(a)                                                                                    (b-1)


                                                    (c)
(d)


                                                                           (c-1)



                                                     (e)


                                                                   (c-2)


Figure 12: interactive demo. (a) Select input image. Specifying patch is also available. (b) Select image
encoder backbone for SAE latents. We provide CLIP as default and MaPLe trained on different datasets for
comparisons. We show image-level and patch-level (if a patch is specified) SAE latent activations. (c) Top SAE
latents (commonly / only in CLIP / only in MaPLe) are selectable. We show (d) segmentation mask and (e)
reference images (and activation value of each image) for the selected index. We provide (c-1) on/off option
for segmentation mask in reference images. (c-2) shows reference images with segmentation mask.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: SAE latents can be multimodal. We find multimodal SAE latents that activate from both text
and images of the same concept. Each row shows different SAE latent. The first column shows the segme-
nation mask from the input image and the right five columns are reference images. From top to bottom, each
latent represents blue, tooth, (cup)cake, mouse (as a representative animation character), good, Christmas, and
greetings (hello and welcome). SAE latent activation value and more examples are provided in the interactive
demo.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Reference images for task-wise most representative SAE feature. (i, j)-th element indicates the
reference image from j-th dataset for i-th task-wise feature. From left to right (same order from top to bottom),
datasets are ImageNet, Imagenet-Sktech, Caltech101, Flowers102, CIFAR100, Food101, and OxfordPet.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: SAE feature masking on base-to-novel classification task (Base split). The legend indicates
(backbone for SAE latent selection)-(backbone for classification inference). Blue and orange colors for CLIP
and MaPLe as classification inference backbones, respectively.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 16: SAE feature masking on base-to-novel classification task (Novel split).


(a)                                (b)                    (c)
                                                            MaPLe
                                     MaPLe


                                             high                   low-to-high   high                 Union top-k

                                                                                                              upper

                                                                                                             -bound
        low          high
                                                                                  high-to-low


                                                                                                              lower

                                             low                                                             -bound



                            CLIP                                                                CLIP


Figure 17: SAE latent comparison scatter plot. We compare group (class or dataset) level SAE latents of
two backbone image encoders CLIP and MaPLe and plot it as a scatter plot. Each point represents group-level
activation (Eq. 5) of CLIP (x-axis) and MaPLe (y-axis). We set upper and lower bounds using union top-50
and top-100, respectively. We focus on three groups: high (high in both), high-to-low (high before and low
after adaptation), and low-to-high (low before and high after adaptation).


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Case study on EuroSAT. (a) Images of classes with low classification performance in the CLIP
model. (b) After adaptation, classification performance improves for these classes. (c) Representative images of
features that show distinct activation patterns: those that were highly activated before adaptation but decreased
afterward (high-to-low), those that had low activation before adaptation but increased afterward (low-to-high),
and those that remained highly activated both before and after adaptation.


Figure 19: Class-level SAE latents in three regions on DTD and UCF101. We show reference images of
highly activated before adaptation but decreased afterward (high-to-low), latents with low initial activation that
increased after adaptation (low-t0-high), and latents that remained consistently highly activated both before and
after adaptation (high).


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Correlation Coefficient


Figure 20: Dataset-level top activating SAE latents. Correlation coefficient values and the scatter plot view
on base-to-novel classification datasets base split. Top activating SAE latents for CLIP and MaPLe are highly
correlated.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Figure 21: Confusion matrix for Flowers102 dataset

          Flowers102 class 28 (Correlation 0.98)
                                                                                                        ground-truth
                                                                                            CLIP
                                                   ImageNet


                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       10

                                                   Flowers102


                                                                                                                       50

              class 28 artichoke                                                                                       100

                                                                                                                       1000

      MaPLe


                                                                                                                       all
                                                                   top-1


                                                                                           MaPLe
                                                   ImageNet


                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       10

                                                   Flowers102


                                                                                                                       50

                                                                                                                       100

                                                                                                                       1000

                                                                                                                       all
                                                                   top-2
                                                                                                                       up to

                               CLIP                                                         predicted
                                                                                                                       top-k


         Flowers102 class 42 (Correlation 0.99)
                                                                                            CLIP        ground-truth
                                                      ImageNet


                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       10

                                                      Flowers102


                                                                                                                       50

              class 42 sword lily                                                                                      100

                                                                                                                       1000

                                                                                                                       all
      MaPLe


                                                                    top-1


                                                                                           MaPLe
                                                      ImageNet


                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       10

                                                      Flowers102


                                                                                                                       50

                                                                                                                       100

                                                                                                                       1000

                                                                                                                       all
                                                                   top-2

                               CLIP                                                        predicted                   up to

                                                                                                                       top-k


Figure 22: Supplements for Fig. 6. We show example cases where SAE latents with class discriminative
information are highly activated in both models, but only the adapted model makes correct predictions (when
using top 2 latents).


                                                                   26
