Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U TILITY-D IRECTED C ONFORMAL P REDICTION :
A D ECISION -AWARE F RAMEWORK FOR ACTIONABLE
U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION
 Santiago Cortes-Gomez, Carlos Patiño∗ , Yewon Byun, Zhiwei Steven Wu, Eric Horvitz† & Bryan Wilder
 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
 ∗
   University of Amsterdam
 †
   Microsoft
 {scortesg, yewonb, zstevenwu, bwilder}@cs.cmu.edu
 carlos.patino.paz@student.uva.nl
 horvitz@microsoft.com



                                                  A BSTRACT
         Interest has been growing in decision-focused machine learning methods which train models
         to account for how their predictions are used in downstream optimization problems. Do-
         ing so can often improve performance on subsequent decision problems. However, current
         methods for uncertainty quantification do not incorporate any information about downstream
         decisions. We develop a methodology based on conformal prediction to identify predic-
         tion sets that account for a downstream cost function, making them more appropriate to
         inform high-stakes decision-making. Our approach harnesses the strengths of conformal
         methods—modularity, model-agnosticism, and statistical coverage guarantees—while incor-
         porating downstream decisions and user-specified utility functions. We prove that our meth-
         ods retain standard coverage guarantees. Empirical evaluation across a range of datasets and
         utility metrics demonstrates that our methods achieve significantly lower costs than stan-
         dard conformal methods. We present a real-world use case in healthcare diagnosis, where
         our method effectively incorporates the hierarchical structure of dermatological diseases.
         The method successfully generates sets with coherent diagnostic meaning, potentially aid-
         ing triage for dermatology diagnosis and illustrating how our method can ground high-stakes
         decision-making employing domain knowledge.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Uncertainty quantification in classification problems is increasingly addressed through a model-agnostic tech-
nique known as conformal prediction Vovk et al. (2005); Angelopoulos & Bates (2021). Instead of outputting
a single label and confidence, conformal prediction outputs a set of outcomes with guaranteed statistical cov-
erage, ensuring that the true outcome is included in the set with a pre-specified, target confidence level. This
procedure for quantifying uncertainty through inference about sets of outcomes, has been leveraged to enable
safer decision-making based on machine learning model outputs. As an example, in dermatology diagnosis, a
conformal analysis might predict that the patient’s illness is a member of a set of possible mutually exclusive
classes, such as [eczema or psoriasis]. That is, a guarantee is provided that the true condition is highly likely to
be included in the predicted set, making inference about the set a more robust estimate than raw model outputs
about singular outcomes. Recent efforts have pursued uses of conformal prediction to develop AI systems that
can support decisions in high-stakes situations (Vemula et al., 2018; Dvijotham et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2022),
where the decisions restricted to actions within the prediction set are deemed as safe.
We note that statistical coverage of the true label is not always a strong enough desiderata to guarantee in-
formative sets for decision making. In many applications, prediction sets should ideally be aligned with a
utility function that captures preferences about downstream decisions and outcomes. For instance, in medical
diagnosis, a predicted set of diseases may be more actionable if the different suggested diagnoses share the
same treatment, costs and benefits of treatments, or if it is straightforward to conduct additional tests for each
diagnosis in the set to discriminate among them.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Indeed, there has been a growing body of work that bridges machine learning predictions and decision prob-
lems modeled by optimization programs. Among this literature there is growing interest for the so called
decision-focused machine learning (Wilder et al., 2019; Mandi et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Shah et al.,
2022; Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022; Ren et al., 2024), where models are trained by maximizing a downstream
optimization problem in the core loop of machine learning. In contrast, conformal methods are designed to be
agnostic to the model, loss function, and downstream decision task; their generality is a key feature that allows
this method to be used flexibly as a post-processing step that is completely decoupled from the model.
Inspired by the spirit of decision-focused learning, we introduce methods that bridge the strengths of conformal
approaches with the goal of incorporating information about downstream decision problems, retaining the
modularity and ease of use of conformal prediction, while enabling users to align prediction sets with task-
specific utility functions. We are not proposing an end-to-end approach to train a model to output predictions
that are going to yield higher utility on a downstream application. Rather we show how to generate prediction
sets that minimize a user-specified cost function while maintaining a high-probability coverage guarantee. To
achieve this, we propose two families of algorithms. The first family, extending existing methods for conformal
prediction, incorporates a penalty based on the cost function of a prediction set. This creates a collection of
conformal predictors indexed by a hyperparameter which weights cost function (the penalty) against a standard
non-conformity score. The hyperparameter is then optimized on a validation set to find the value with minimum
cost function. While this method often performs well, it can struggle to adapt to the combinatorial structure
of downstream cost function (e.g., non-linear interactions between elements of the prediction set) and adds
complexity in the form of a hyperparameter to tune. Therefore, to address these limitations, we introduce a
second family of algorithms which instead solve an optimization formulation whose solution is the set with the
minimum loss subject to statistical coverage constraints, i.e, the sought after predicted set. Algorithmically,
this is instantiated by solving a lightweight optimization problem for each test instance, followed by post-
processing a function of the base classifier’s predictions to enforce the desired statistical coverage. We prove
that both approaches provide standard coverage guarantees and find empirically that they are often able to find
sets with significantly smaller costs than standard conformal methods.
Incorporating the cost function into uncertainty quantification allows us to address the goal of producing more
informative prediction sets. For instance, in the aforementioned case study on dermatology diagnosis, we
show how specifying a natural cost function (a coverage function) enables us to generate prediction sets with
more clinically coherent interpretation. Figure 1 provides an illustrative example of a prediction set output by
a standard conformal approach compared to that of our method. We observe that the different labels within
the standard conformal prediction set would imply completely different downstream actions for diagnosis and
treatment, as benign vs. malignant diseases need to be dealt with differently. Even though the set contains the
true label, it is not informative for decision making. By contrast, the prediction set output by our method con-
tains diagnoses within a common family of malignant epidermal diseases, while satisfying the same coverage
guarantees. This hierarchical homogeneity of the prediction set aids clinicians in making follow-up decisions
(e.g., reflecting about the disease process category at hand, prioritizing follow-up tests, prescribing treatments,
etc.). We accomplish this by specifying a cost function (detailed in Section 3.2) based on coherence of the
prediction set with respect to an expert-defined hierarchy for dermatological diagnosis. Such hierarchical ab-
stractions are a common feature of medical diagnosis and many other real-world classification tasks, and expert
decision making more broadly, and a valuable characteristic of our method is that it can be employed to align
prediction sets with the abstractions that human experts use to make decisions based on predictions.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
       • We develop three methods for constructing conformal predictors which generate sets with low average
         cost function based on a pre-defined utility function, thereby producing more desirable sets from the
         perspective of downstream use. We start by considering cost functions which are separable, meaning
         that they can be decomposed into the sum of a penalty for each label included in the prediction set. We
         then generalize these ideas to the non-separable case, where the cost function may contain nonlinear
         interactions between elements of the set. In each case, we prove that our algorithms produce sets with
         the desired level of statistical coverage.
       • We conduct experimental analyses across several datasets, including both standard image classifica-
         tion datasets and a real-world case study in dermatological medical diagnosis. Our proposed algo-
         rithms result in prediction sets with improved costs across all settings, often by a substantial amount,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         e.g., reductions of 60-75% in loss. Our method successfully captures patterns of homogeneity in-
         formed by external domain knowledge. In particular, for the case study, our methods produce predic-
         tion sets that have diagnostic meaning, demonstrating how our method leverages uncertainty quantifi-
         cation to ground high-stakes decision-making—in this case in the healthcare domain. Our implemen-
         tation is publicly available at link.


Figure 1: Illustration of how proposed methods compare to the standard formulation of conformal prediction.
The real-world example is taken from the Fitzpatrick dataset where the true disease is squamous cell carcinoma.
The standard conformal prediction method results in a set of nine elements that span benign, malignant, and
non-neoplastic diagnoses. Our method provides a formulation with a set of five elements within the malignant
melanoma category.

1.1 R ELATED WORK
Decision-Focused Learning A growing body of literature focuses on aligning machine learning model pre-
dictions with downstream optimization objectives, either under the predict-then-optimize framework (Mandi
et al., 2020; Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022; Wang et al., 2021), or using end-to-end approaches like decision-
focused learning (Wilder et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2024). Of particular relevance to our work
is Horvitz & Klein (1993), which introduces a utility-theoretic formulation of inference and decision making at
progressively higher-levels of abstraction about outcomes (i.e., abstraction is defined in terms of moving from
single hypotheses to sets of mutually exclusive outcomes). This work is particularly interesting and motivating
to us, as it is proposed as a solution to a similar real-world case study as ours but using ideas related to Bayesian
inference framed in the context of a utility-theoretic bounding formulation.
Uncertainty Quantification and Conformal Prediction The literature on uncertainty quantification is vast,
from Bayesian methods, such as Bayesian neural networks (MacKay, 1992; 1995; Neal, 1996; Wilson & Iz-
mailov, 2020) and ensemble methods (Wasserman, 2000; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), to frequentist ap-
proaches, such as quantile regression (Koenker & Bassett Jr, 1978; Koenker & Hallock, 2001; Yu et al., 2003;
Tagasovska & Lopez-Paz, 2019; Pouplin et al., 2024) and conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Romano
et al., 2020; Angelopoulos et al., 2020b). Quantile regression is particularly noteworthy, as it can be adapted to
produce conformal predictors for continuous variables. However, the study of the continuous case lies outside
the scope of this work. Of utmost relevance to our work is the literature on conformal prediction.
Conformal prediction has gained popularity in recent years as a model-agnostic, computationally low-cost
post-processing method for principled uncertainty quantification Vovk et al. (2005). In particular, Romano
et al. (2020) and Angelopoulos et al. (2020b) explore how to create prediction sets whose size adapts to the
confidence levels output by the model. When the model is more certain about a given prediction, the predic-
tion set becomes smaller. Specifically, Angelopoulos et al. (2020b) generates adaptive sets that are smaller on
average, a task that represents a particular case of the type of problems we aim to solve. Conformal prediction
has been used in the context of decision making in the medical setting, for example Lu et al. (2022) propose a a


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


conformal predictor that provides group conditional guarantees. They are interested in provide prediction sets
that are usable across groups in order to ensure fair decisions, thus increasing clinical usability and trustworthi-
ness in medical AI. In other words, this work is focused on guarantee fairness rather than a general formulation
of utility-focused prediction sets.

At the intersection of machine learning for decision-making and conformal prediction, and thus most closely
related to our work, is conformal risk control Angelopoulos et al. (2022). The approach is a generalization
of conformal prediction that allows for controlling the expected value of a desired loss at a preset level. The
method can achieve true statistical coverage in multi-label classification or, more generally, for any loss function
that decreases as the size of the prediction set increases. Although this method offers flexibility, it does not
directly optimize the expected value of the chosen function, and depending on such function, controlling for
the expected value of the chosen loss can be at expense of statistical coverage. Notably, our method imposes
no restrictions on the type of losses that can be chosen, allowing it to handle cost functions that do not decrease
monotonically with respect to set size and for which it is impossible to guarantee an absolute upper bound. We
also note there is a wealth of literature that studies uncertainty quantification in similar settings (Qi et al., 2021;
Chenreddy et al., 2022; Kallus & Mao, 2023; Sadana et al., 2024; Chenreddy & Delage, 2024; Patel et al.,
2024; Yeh et al., 2024).

2       P ROBLEM FORMULATION
Let Y a finite set of labels. Define the cost function of a prediction set as a function L : 2Y → R. In our
framework, L evaluates the utility of a given prediction set, where a suitable prediction set for decision-making
is one that has a low value of L. Let P be a joint distribution over X × Y. Our methods will act as post-
processing steps to a pre-specified classification model f that estimates p(y|x). Throughout this paper, we
will use p̂(y|x) and f (x) interchangeably. We do not assume anything about how the model f is trained. In
particular, it need not be aware of the cost function L.

The ultimate goal is to leverage x to inform decisions via a set Sf (x) of suggested labels, accounting for both
utility and uncertainty. Thus, for every x, we would like to produce a set of labels Sf (x) that fulfills the
following two properties:

          1. For a random sample (x, y) drawn from P , it must be true that y ∈ Sf (x) with probability at least 1−α
             1
               . This condition must be fulfilled without any assumptions on the correctness of f or the distribution
             P.

          2. E(x,y)∼P [L(Sf (x) )] is minimized. This quantifies that, on average, the set Sf (x) is optimal from an
             utility-theoretical perspective.

Standard conformal methods guarantee the first property and our goal in this paper is to target the second (cost
function minimization) as well while still maintaining such coverage guarantees.


Figure 2: Empirical statistical coverage on the iNaturalist dataset across various loss functions. The observed
coverage is close to the expected preset value of α for all 10 trials per loss function. We see a similar behavior
for all the other datasets.

    1
        This is not a conditional statement, instead is a high probability event over the joint distribution of tuples (Y, X)


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    M ETHODS
We start by considering a simplified setting in which the cost function has a particular separable structure,
which we can leverage to precisely characterize to our problem. We then consider nonseparable loss functions
and extend such ideas to the general setting.
3.1 S EPARABLE LOSS
As a motivating example, consider a cost function in the medical domain where a healthcare worker must
diagnose a condition based on a set of tests. Each test has an associated penalty related to costs, patient
discomfort, and procedure complexity. Notably, the penalty of each test does not depend on the presence
          P in the set. Formally, we say that the cost function L, is separable if it can be decomposed as
of other tests
L(Sx ) = y∈S ℓ(y), where ℓ(y) is a cost function defined on individual labels rather than on the set of labels
as a whole.
One starting point for algorithm development in this setting, is the standard conformal prediction toolbox, in
particular, the split conformal algorithm. Split conformal uses a held-out calibration set to provide a model-
agnostic post-processing step which generates prediction sets with statistical coverage at a predefined level.
While this method naturally addresses the first (1) of the two conditions we seek from our prediction sets, it
raises an important question: can we leverage split conformal to also ensure a low loss L?.
At the core of the split conformal algorithm is the definition of a non-conformity score s(x, y). Larger scores
encode worse agreement between x and y (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). Naturally, the selection of a non-
conformity score is key because the prediction sets will be a function of it. There has been recent work
(Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021) exploring the choice of a particular score as an engineering question; in gen-
eral, the non-conformity scores are a function of the estimates p̂(y|x) thus leveraging the notion of similar-
ity between the pair (x, y) captured by the model. The lsplit conformalm algorithm works by outputting sets
                                                            (n+1)(1−α)
Sx = {y : s(x, y) ⩽ τ̂1−α } where τ̂1−α is the empirical         n       quantile of a independent draw of size
n of nonconformity scores, such draw is known in the literature as the calibration set.
Returning to our goal of producing prediction sets with low cost function L, one option is to incorporate
the loss of the prediction set L(Sf (x) ) into the score s(x, y). This can be done explicitly if the loss L is
separable as L(Sf (x) ) can be decomposed into a penalty ℓ(y) for each individual y. Formally, let π(X) =
{σ1 (x), ..., σk (x)} the permutation that orders the estimatesPr p̂(yi |x) from greatest to lowest, define ρ(x, y) =
P   r
    i=1  p̂(y σi (x) |x) where yσ r (x) = y and define L(y) as   i=1 ℓ(yσi (x) ). Particularly, ρ is the nonconformity
score used in the popular “adaptive prediction sets” algorithm Romano et al. (2020); as labels are added from
most to least likely until the true label y is reached, ρ computes a running total of the amount of -estimated-
probability mass contained in the set. Notably, L keeps a running total of the cost function incurred when adding
elements to the prediction set in that same order. Our proposed nonconformity score is simply sλ (x, y) :=
ρ(x, y) + λL(y), where λ > 0 is a hyperparameter. After applying the split conformal algorithm on a held-out
calibration set, the resulting prediction sets for a given λ are given by Sfλ(x) := {y : sλ (x, y) ⩽ τ̂1−α λ
                                                                                                               } where
                            l             m
  λ
τ̂1−α   is the empirical (n+1)(1−α) n       quantile of an exchangeable draw of size n the scores sλ (x, y) . Note
how a higher value of λ skews the distribution of the scores; for any pair (x, y) the relevance of the similarity
captured by the estimate p̂(y|x) is going to have less weight than the total loss of the proxy prediction set
{yσ1 (x) , ..., yσk (x) } captured by L(y).
The question of how to select the appropriate λ remains. One possible approach is to perform a grid search for
the optimal value using a separate validation/test split distinct from the calibration dataset. Since maximizing
utility is the primary objective, this hyperparameter tuning strategy indeed will converge to the true sought
parameter as summarized by the following proposition.
Proposition 1. Let λ ∈ H where H is a finite set, assume as well that for every λ and every x, L(Sfλ(x) (x)) ⩽
                                     Pn
B. Let λ̂ be the λ that minimizes n1 i=1 L(Sfλ(Xi ) ), for an iid draw of size n from P . Let λ∗ be the λ that
                                               ∗
minimizes the population level quantity E[L(Sfλ(X) )]. Fix any δ ∈ (0, 1) then with probability at least 1 - δ
                                                                 s
                                  λ̂              λ∗                      2|H| 1
                            E[L(Sf (X) )] − E[L(Sf (X) )] ⩽ 2B log
                                                                            δ    2n

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A consequence of the previous preposition is that λ∗ can be learnt via empirical risk minimization. That being
said, doing so makes the estimated λ̂ dependent on the data. Thereby breaking the exchangeability assumption
between a new test point (X, Y ) and the original sample. This assumption is crucial for applying the split
                                                                                                           λ̂
conformal algorithm to ensure valid statistical coverage. Consequently, after learning λ̂, the quantile τ̂1−α
must be recalculated using an independent sample.
Taken all together, we then proposed the following algorithm. Firstly, split the data in three folds: a validation
                                                                                          λ̂
set, a test set, and a calibration set. For each value of λ in H estimate the quantile τ̂1−α    on the val set. Then,
we estimate the cost function on the test set and then select the λ with the best test loss (λ̂). Finally, re-estimate
                λ̂
the quantile τ̂1−α  on the fresh calibration set to guarantee valid statistical coverage.
Although our proposed sample splitting impacts the learning rate stated in Proposition 1, the final rate of
convergence remains O( √1n ) relative to the total sample size.
3.1.1 H YPERPARAMETER -F REE S OLUTION
The prior solution depends on a hyperparameter λ that must be tuned. We also have no formal guarantee that
the optimal prediction sets for our problem can be expressed via the penalized family of nonconformity scores.
However, it is possible to develop a score derived from a more principled approach that does not require the
selection of any hyper-parameters. As a starting point to derive this score, suppose that there is oracle access
to the true estimand p(y | x). Then, conditions 1 and 2 can be explicitly stated as the following program:


                                    min EX [L(SX )] s.t P (Y ∈ SX ) ⩾ 1 − α                                       (1)
                                   S⊆ X×Y


Where Sx are the fibers of S over x, formally, Sx = {y : (x, y) ∈ S}. This program, under the assumption of a
separable loss, has a closed-form solution via the Neyman-Pearson lemma. Define H = {(x, y) : p(y|x)
                                                                                                  ℓ(y) ⩾ tα }
where tα is the α quantile for p(y|x)
                                 ℓ(y) . That is, H(x) is the prediction set given by all labels where the ratio of
probability to loss exceeds a threshold chosen to ensure coverage.
Proposition 2. The set H minimizes Ex [L(SX )] while fulfilling P (Y ∈ H(X)) ⩾ 1 − α
We note that Sadinle et al. (2019) characterized solutions for the special case where the loss function is the size
of the set (i.e., all labels have equal cost) ; here we provide a general solution for arbitrary separable losses.
Since we do not have access to the ground truth p(y|x), we instead use f as a plug-in approximation for p(y|x)
in the set H defined above. Since f may not be correct, we may no longer have the correct coverage level,
which we correct with the following conformalization step. Define s(x, y) = p̂(y|x)
                                                                                  ℓ(y) , let τ̂α be the empirical
1 − α quantile of an observed iid draw of scores s(x, y). Define Sf (x) := {y : p̂(y|x)
                                                                                   ℓ(y) ⩾ τ̂α }. We refer to this
hyperparameter-free method as the Separable Penalized Ratio throughout this work. We can guarantee using
standard arguments that the separable penalized ratio algorithm satisfies statistical coverage, as demonstrated
in Figure 2 and formalized in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. Let s(x, y) and Sf (x) be defined as above. Then
                                                                            1
                                   1 − α ⩽ P (Y ∈ Sf (X) ) ⩽ 1 − α +
                                                                           n+1
3.2 N ON -S EPARABLE LOSSES
Unfortunately, not all relevant set losses L are separable. In real-world scenarios, we often want to define
losses that depend on interactions among the elements in the set. For example, consider our running example
of medical diagnosis, where we may prefer prediction sets in which the labels come from a small number
of categories within a domain-specific
                            P           hierarchy, representing more clinically similar diagnoses. This can be
formalized as L(Sf (x) ) = C∈C I(Sf (x) ∩ C) where C is a set of (possibly overlapping) categories. In this
context, we prefer prediction sets which intersect with as few categories as possible. This loss is not separable
because there are diminishing penalties to including a new label in the set once a given category is already
covered (as discussed formally in the appendix).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While loss separability was instrumental to the family of non-conformity scores proposed as a solution for the
separable case, we now present a conformal-based approach for the non-separable case. Drawing inspiration
from the separable scenario, we introduce a non-conformity score that generalizes the one outlined in Proposi-
tion 1. The key idea is to linearize the non-separable cost function by summing the marginal increase in loss
when adding each additional element to the prediction set.
Let π(x) = (σ1 (x), . . . , σd (x)) be the permutation that orders p̂(yi |x) from greatest to smallest. Define
           Pk
ρ(x, y) =     i=1 p̂(yσi (x) |x), where yσk (x) = y (this coincides with the homonymous quantity defined in
the previous section). Now, let Si = {yσj (x) : j ∈ [i]} be the set containing the first i labels in the permutation
                                     Pk
and define L(y) = L(Sσk (x) ) = i=1 (L(Si ) − L(Si−1 )) as the sum of the marginal gains obtained from
adding elements using the order given by the permutation σ. The proposed non-conformity score is then given
by s(x, y) = ρ(x, y) + λL(y).
As in the separable case, this heuristic generates sets that ensure coverage while maintaining a low loss. The
motivation for selecting λ remains consistent with that of the separable case. We can also employ grid search
hyperparameter tuning on a validation dataset, as the approach outlined in Proposition 1 does not rely on the
separability of the loss.
The definition of the previously presented score, circumvents the non-separability of the loss by fixing the
order in which to add labels to the prediction set (based on the confidence score outputted by the model f ),
after which the loss can be decomposed into a series of marginal increments.
3.2.1 H YPERPARAMETER -F REE S OLUTION
Just as in the separable loss case, we would prefer an approach that does not rely on hyperparameter tuning and
which can benefit from structural information about the optimization problem at hand. The main draw back
from the penalized conformal predictor proposed for the non-separable case is that the fixed order (which does
not depend on the loss) upon of which it is based may be suboptimal if it does not adapt to the combinatorial
structure of the cost function. To address this issue, let us revisit the program in Equation 1 and suppose that
we have access to the true estimate p(y | x). As in the separable case, it would be ideal to solve this program.
However, since the separability assumption no longer holds, it is unclear whether a closed-form solution exists.
Suppose instead that we have access to an algorithm which can optimize over the cost function L. Then, we
could solve the following optimization problem separately for each value of x to produce the prediction set Sx :

                                                            X
                                      min L(Sx ) s.t.              p(y|x) ⩾ 1 − α
                                      Sx ⊆Y
                                                            y∈Sx

The prediction set Sx defined by solving this problem for each x would correspond to a feasible solution to the
problem in Equation 1. Moreoever, it would minimize the cost function on each instance. However, it actually
attempts to offer a stronger coverage guarantee: a conditional coverage guarantee where Sx contains the true
label for every x, instead of the marginal guarantee in condition 2. Unfortunately, guaranteeing conditional
coverage is in general impossible without access to the ground truth p(y|x) (Foygel Barber et al., 2021; Vovk,
2012), so we will be unable to implement this solution exactly.
Our proposal is to use the optimization oracle to solve the above optimization problem at each test instance
with the plugin estimates p̂(y|x) and then conformalize the resulting sets to provide at least marginal coverage
guarantees. While there are many ways to implement this meta-algorithm (depending on the optimization
approach which is appropriate to any given cost function L), we focus here on a particular implementation via
an efficient greedy algorithm which we find works well for many losses in practice.
Suppose that L(S) ⩽ M . Consider the order in which labels are chosen by the following greedy algorithm for
(Leskovec et al., 2007) solving the plug-in optimization problem:

                                                                                                 
                                                                                M − L(S i ∪ {y}) 
                     Sfi+1     i
                        (x) = Sf (x) ∪              arg max                                                     (2)
                                         y∈Y/S i       :p̂(y|x)⩽α−p(Sfi (x)   )   1 − p̂(y|x)    
                                                f (x)


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                 P                                                                     Pk
where p(Si ) := y∈Si p̂(y|x). We then define a non-conformity score as s(x, y) = i=1 p̂(yσ(i) | x), where
σ is the permutation that orders the labels according to the greedy construction of the set Sfk(x) outlined in
equation 2 where k is such that y = yσ(k) . Our final algorithm will simply run split conformal on this noncon-
formity score. The crucial difference from the previous approach is the order in which elements are added to
the prediction set, which is calculated by simulating the above greedy algorithm on each instance (instead of
simply sorting the predicted probabilities). This procedure has standard marginal coverage guarantees:
                                          l            m
Proposition 4. Let τα,n be the empirical (n+1)(1−α)
                                                n        quantile from an iid draw of size n of the scores s(x, y).
Define Sf (x) = {y : s(x, y) ⩽ τα,n }. Then for any (x, y) ∈ P ,
                                                                         1
                                   1 − α ⩽ P (y ∈ Sf (x) ) ⩽ 1 − α +
                                                                        n+1

4   E XPERIMENTS
4.1 S ETUP
We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate our proposed methods for both separable and non-separable
loss cases, with the following setup.
Datasets and models. We evaluate our algorithms for both separable and non-separable settings using the
following four datasets: CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), iNaturalist (Van Horn et al., 2018), Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009), and the Fitzpatrick dataset (Groh et al., 2021). The iNaturalist dataset consists of
a large collection of images of living organisms, with labels organized according to a subtree of the natural
taxonomic hierarchy. Our classifier is trained to predict the lowest level of abstraction in this hierarchy, which
is the class of the organism (here, ’class’ refers to the taxonomic rank). These classes are further grouped into
phyla, which in turn belong to broader taxonomic categories known as kingdoms. The Fitzpatrick dataset con-
tains 16,577 clinical images, annotated with both skin condition and skin type labels based on the Fitzpatrick
scoring system, along with two additional aggregated levels of skin condition classification derived from the
skin lesion taxonomy developed by Esteva et al. (2017). Training a classifier on the Fitzpatrick dataset is par-
ticularly challenging (Groh et al., 2021), with good models having top-1 accuracy hovering around 30%. In
order to study how the performance of our methods varies with the quality of the underlying classifier, we
also include a cleaned version of the dataset where we excluded classes with a validation accuracy below 0.30,
retaining 64% of the dataset (reducing the number of classes from 114 to 49) and increasing model accuracy to
0.5. In all experiments, we use EfficientNet-B0 (Tan, 2019), with α fixed at 0.1, as our underlying classifier to
estimate the conditional probability p(y|x). We report the median of the means for the loss function of interest
across different validation and calibration data samples for each dataset. Additionally, we present the statistical
coverage conditioned on set size(Angelopoulos et al., 2020a), in order to investigate that the marginal coverage
guarantee does not mask unwanted behavior, such as providing perfect coverage for a specific subgroup of the
population at the expense of others. Finally, we report the average value of p̂(y|x) for the true label y as a
function of the set size Sf (x) , which is a proxy for adaptability of our methods (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021).
Cost functions. In the separable case, the total loss was defined as the sum of penalties assigned to the con-
stituent elements of a given set. We applied a uniform random assignment from the set 4i : i ∈ [4] to each label
across all datasets. In the non-separable case, we evaluate two different loss functions over the label spaces:
maximum distance and coverage loss. Each of these losses is defined in terms of a pre-specified hierarchy. For
the iNaturalist and Fitzpatrick datasets, we use the expert-defined hierarchies that accompany each dataset. For
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, we synthetically generate the hierarchy using hierarchical clustering on the repre-
sentations obtained from the classifier’s final layer. The maximum distance is defined as the largest pairwise
graph distance along the hierarchy between any two elements within a predicted set. The coverage loss is de-
fined as the number of categories that are intersected by a predicted set, where each category corresponds to a
group of labels at the second-to-last level of the hierarchy. Both losses capture notions of homogeneity within
the predicted sets with respect to the hierarchies.
Comparison against other forms of uncertainty quantification Our methods, being conformal-based, do
not rely on a precise estimation of p(y|x). However, to benchmark against other approaches to uncertainty
quantification (many of which rely on properly estimating p(y|x)) we conducted experiments to compare our
method against predictions sets obtained from Bayesian estimates of p(y|x). We chose Bayesian due to its


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 1.0
       6                                                                                            6
       5                                         0.8                                                5
       4                                         0.6                                                4
Loss


       3                                                                                            3
                                                 0.4
       2                                                                                            2
       1                                         0.2                                                1
       0   Fitzpatrick        FitzpatrickClean   0.0      Fitzpatrick          FitzpatrickClean     0       Fitzpatrick        FitzpatrickClean
                         Base Conformal                         Separable Penalized Ratio         Greedy Optimizer on Coverage
                         Penalized Conformal (optimal )         Greedy Optimizer on Max

Figure 3: Comparisons between different methods for the 1) separable loss case using the sum of penalties in
each set as the loss metric (left), 2) non-separable loss case using maximum penalty in the set as the metric
(middle), and 3) hierarchy coverage function loss case using the intersection of the set with each branch of the
hierarchy as the metric (right). Numbers are the median-of-means across 10 different runs. See Appendix D
for all datasets.


Figure 4: Measured impact of base model accuracy on downstream optimization values on all losses considered
for the cleaned Fitzpatrick dataset. Shows median-of-means across 10 different runs for each configuration.
Results demonstrate that all methods improve with a higher quality model—i.e., a model with higher accuracy.


widespread adoption within the uncertainty quantification community. The results can be found on the appendix
in Figure 6.
4.2 R ESULTS
In Figure 3 (and 7 on the appendix) together with Tables 4, 5, 6, we observe that our methods have significantly
lower cost function than the base conformal method in all considered datasets. This validates our hypothesis
that engineering a non conformity score that aligns with a downstream loss results in an utility aligned confor-
mal predictor. In the separable case, we observe that our method outperforms the baseline conformal prediction
sets, both when using the Separable Penalized Ratio and Penalized Conformal algorithms (Table 4 and Figure
3). For the non-separable case, we also observe that our method outperforms base conformal prediction for
both considered loss functions (Table 5 and Figure 3). Additionally, in Table 1 (and Tables 14, 13 in the Ap-
pendix), we demonstrate how our methods successfully provide valid coverage across all set sizes, ensuring
robust coverage that is relatively uniform across all predictions. Similarly, Figure 5 (as well as in Figure 8 in the
Appendix) illustrates how our methods achieve adaptability, yielding larger sets for instances where the model
is less confident in its predictions. These results demonstrate that our framework indeed provides a principled
approach to take advantage of latent hierarchical abstractions, enhancing an agent’s ability to navigate complex
problems, as illustrated in Figure 1.
We further note that, penalized conformal methods, when appropriately tuned, tend to outperform the other
methods we tested on CIFAR100, ImageNet, and iNaturalist, likely due to the large dataset sizes. This can be
attributed to the fact that both the separable penalized ratio and the greedy optimizer approach assume the Bayes
classifier is known, whereas penalized conformal methods do not. However, we posit that for the FitzPatrick
dataset, there was not enough data to reliably estimate the optimal λ, making our principled methods perform
better and a suitable off-the-shelf solution for an initial iteration on this dataset.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Mean and standard deviation from the predicted softmax score for the true class as a function of
predicted set size. The downward trend indicates that the predicted set size increases with the difficulty of the
classification task for the model, highlighting the relationship between model uncertainty and set size.

       Size       Base Conformal        Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage          Greedy Max
                  count coverage        count     coverage        count coverage         count coverage
       1            46        0.87        55           0.87         29         1.0         22       0.82
       2 to 4       77        0.95       196           0.91         50        0.96         37       0.89
       5 to 9      102        0.88       219           0.89         48        0.98         36       0.92
       10 to 49    588        0.95       383           0.90        677        0.98        713       0.96

Table 1: Conditional statistical coverage by set size for the cleaned version of the Fitzpatrick dataset and a
target coverage of 1 - α = 0.9. Penalized conformal method results are reported for the optimal λ value. We
also included the number of samples that belong in each size bucket. The average set sizes for all methods and
datasets are available in Table 10.


We additionally investigate whether our method can be used in situations where the underlying classifier is
noisy. Such robustness can be useful for application settings where practitioners only have access to imperfect,
noisy models due to practical concerns (e.g., small amounts of labeled, domain-specific data, etc). In Figure 4,
we conduct ablation studies on the Fitzpatrick dataset with a classifier whose training was stopped at different
levels of performance to understand the impact of the base model accuracy on downstream optimization values.
As expected, we observe that the expected loss of our method decreases with improved classifiers (i.e., having
a better base classifier is better). But more importantly, we observe that our method benefits from decision-
focused conformalization even when the underlying classifier is very noisy, demonstrating that our method
outperforms base conformal methods at any level of accuracy of the underlying classifier. This demonstrates
that even with noisy classifiers, our methods will still produce prediction sets with higher utility and desired
coverage.

5   C ONCLUSION
We introduce methods that extend traditional conformal prediction to take into consideration utility functions
that represent consequences of real-world actions and outcomes. The approach can be harnessed to provide
decision-makers with guidance in the form of high-confidence prediction sets that contain homogeneous ele-
ments with respect to an external utility metric, ensuring that the actions taken based on these sets are effective
or, at the very least, not significantly different in their outcomes according with the utility metric.
We illustrate the operation of our methods via a real-world case study in dermatology diagnosis. In this context,
the utility metric reflects homogeneity concerning the hierarchy of dermatological pathologies. That is, good
sets are those that ideally form subsets within this established hierarchy. Our method produces prediction sets
with valid statistical coverage and a coherent clinical interpretation. The sets generated correspond to subsets of
these hierarchical abstractions, aligning with, and potentially supporting, diagnostic and therapeutic reasoning.
Our method outperforms existing approaches, and appear robust to challenges such as scarce and noisy data,
as demonstrated by the performance on the Fitzpatrick dataset. We hope that our work will provide a valuable
stepping stone for future research that leverages uncertainty quantification to support decision makers in high-
stakes settings.
Reproducibility Statement We are committed to making our research reproducible, allowing future work to
build upon our findings. All code and instructions necessary to reproduce all experiments and results is available


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


at [hidden]. Further, all artifacts (i.e., data, model scores, metadata) and hyperparameter configurations required
for running the experiments is also publicly released at [hidden].

6   A KNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Naveen Raman for comments on the manuscript. This work was supported in part by the AI2050
program at Schmidt Sciences (Grant #G-2264474) and the AI Research Institutes Program funded by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under AI Institute for Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM), Award No. 2229881.
Carlos Patiño’s presentation of this paper at ICLR 2025 was financially supported by the Amsterdam ELLIS
Unit.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I Jordan. Uncertainty sets for image
  classifiers using conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14193, 2020a.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and distribution-
  free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal risk control.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02814, 2022.
Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I Jordan. Uncertainty sets for
  image classifiers using conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14193, 2020b.
Abhilash Chenreddy and Erick Delage.           End-to-end conditional robust optimization.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.04670, 2024.
Abhilash Reddy Chenreddy, Nymisha Bandi, and Erick Delage. Data-driven conditional robust optimization.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 9525–9537, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
   image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 248–255. Ieee,
   2009.
Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Jim Winkens, Melih Barsbey, Sumedh Ghaisas, Robert Stanforth, Nick Pawlowski,
  Patricia Strachan, Zahra Ahmed, Shekoofeh Azizi, Yoram Bachrach, et al. Enhancing the reliability and
  accuracy of ai-enabled diagnosis via complementarity-driven deferral to clinicians. Nature Medicine, 29(7):
  1814–1820, 2023.
Adam N Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas. Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science, 68(1):9–26,
  2022.
Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan M Swetter, Helen M Blau, and Sebastian
  Thrun. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. nature, 542(7639):
  115–118, 2017.
Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candes, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. The limits of distribution-
  free conditional predictive inference. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 10(2):455–482,
  2021.
Matthew Groh, Caleb Harris, Luis Soenksen, Felix Lau, Rachel Han, Aerin Kim, Arash Koochek, and Omar
 Badri. Evaluating deep neural networks trained on clinical images in dermatology with the fitzpatrick 17k
 dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 1820–1828, 2021.
Eric J Horvitz and Adrian C Klein. Utility-based abstraction and categorization. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 128–135. Elsevier, 1993.
Nathan Kallus and Xuan Mao. Stochastic optimization forests. Operations Research, 71(1):1–18, 2023.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett Jr. Regression quantiles. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society,
  pp. 33–50, 1978.
Roger Koenker and Kevin F Hallock. Quantile regression. Journal of economic perspectives, 15(4):143–156,
  2001.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical Report
  TR-2009, University of Toronto, 2009.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty
  estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne VanBriesen, and Natalie Glance.
  Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 420–429, 2007.
Charles Lu, Andréanne Lemay, Ken Chang, Katharina Höbel, and Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer. Fair confor-
  mal predictors for applications in medical imaging. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 12008–12016, 2022.
David J C MacKay. Probable Networks and Plausible Predictions — A Review of Practical Bayesian Methods
  for Supervised Neural Networks. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 6(3):469–505, 1995.
David John Cameron MacKay. Bayesian Methods for Adaptive Models. PhD thesis, California Institute of
  Technology, 1992.
Jayanta Mandi, Peter J Stuckey, Tias Guns, et al. Smart predict-and-optimize for hard combinatorial optimiza-
  tion problems. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 1603–1610,
  2020.
Radford M. Neal. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 1996.
Yash P Patel, Sahana Rayan, and Ambuj Tewari. Conformal contextual robust optimization. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2485–2493. PMLR, 2024.
Thomas Pouplin, Alan Jeffares, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Relaxed quantile regression:
  Prediction intervals for asymmetric noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03258, 2024.
Meng Qi, Paul Grigas, and Zuo-Jun Max Shen. Integrated conditional estimation-optimization. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.12351, 2021.
Kevin Ren, Yewon Byun, and Bryan Wilder. Decision-focused evaluation of worst-case distribution shift. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.03557, 2024.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel Candes. Classification with valid and adaptive coverage. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3581–3591, 2020.
Uday Sadana, Abhilash Chenreddy, Erick Delage, Antoine Forel, Emma Frejinger, and Thibaut Vidal. A survey
  of contextual optimization methods for decision-making under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational
  Research, 2024. Forthcoming.
Mauricio Sadinle, Jing Lei, and Larry Wasserman. Least ambiguous set-valued classifiers with bounded error
 levels. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 114(525):223–234, 2019.
Sanket Shah, Kai Wang, Bryan Wilder, Andrew Perrault, and Milind Tambe. Decision-focused learning without
  decision-making: Learning locally optimized decision losses. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:1320–1332, 2022.
Natasa Tagasovska and David Lopez-Paz. Single-model uncertainties for deep learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mingxing Tan. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1905.11946, 2019.

Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam, Pietro
  Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8769–8778, 2018.

Anirudh Vemula, Katharina Muelling, and Jean Oh. Social attention: Modeling attention in human crowds. In
  2018 IEEE international Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4601–4607. IEEE, 2018.

Vladimir Vovk. Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors. In Asian conference on machine
  learning, pp. 475–490. PMLR, 2012.

Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world, vol-
  ume 29. Springer, 2005.

Kai Wang, Sanket Shah, Haipeng Chen, Andrew Perrault, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Milind Tambe. Learn-
  ing mdps from features: Predict-then-optimize for sequential decision making by reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8795–8806, 2021.

Larry Wasserman. Bayesian model selection and model averaging. Journal of mathematical psychology, 44
  (1):92–107, 2000.

Bryan Wilder, Bistra Dilkina, and Milind Tambe. Melding the data-decisions pipeline: Decision-focused
  learning for combinatorial optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 33, pp. 1658–1665, 2019.

Andrew Gordon Wilson and Pavel Izmailov. Bayesian Deep Learning and a Probabilistic Perspective of Gen-
  eralization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Christopher Yeh, Nicolas Christianson, Alan Wu, Adam Wierman, and Yisong Yue. End-to-end conformal
  calibration for optimization under uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20534, 2024.

Tao Yin, Chenzhengyi Liu, Fangyu Ding, Ziming Feng, Bo Yuan, and Ning Zhang. Graph-based stock corre-
  lation and prediction for high-frequency trading systems. Pattern Recognition, 122:108209, 2022.

Keming Yu, Zudi Lu, and Julian Stander. Quantile regression: applications and current research areas. Journal
  of the Royal Statistical Society Series D: The Statistician, 52(3):331–350, 2003.

A     A PPENDIX
A.1   P ROOF PROPOSITION ONE
Proof. Formally, Let P be absolutely continuous to ν := µ × µ′ , where µ is the Lebesgue measure and µ′ is
the counting measure. Let H = {(x, y) : y ∈ H(x)} and H(x) = {y : y ∈ H(x)}.
                                                  Z
                                  E[L(H(x))] =       L(H(x))p(x)dx
                                                   X
                                                  Z    X
                                               =           ℓ(y)p(x)dx
                                                    X y∈H(x)
                                                    Z
                                                =        ℓ(y)p(x)dx
                                                    H
                                                    Z
                                                =        ℓ(y)p(x)dx
                                                    ZH
                                                =        ℓ(y)dν
                                                    H



                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,
R                         R of the Neyman-Pearson Lemma, we can guarantee that the set H that minimizes
           as a consequence
 H
   ℓ(y)dν while fulfilling H dP ⩾ 1 − α is
                                                            p(y|x)
                                           H = {(y, x) :           ⩾ tα }
                                                             ℓ(y)

Where tα is the α quantile for p(y|x)
                                ℓ(y) .                                                                          ■

A.2   P ROOF PROPOSITION TWO
Proof. It is worth notice that for both the maximum and coverage cases L(Sλ (x)) < B for every λ and every x
(different constant in each case though). Then, If the set of parameters H is finite, then combining Hoeffding’s
and the union bound:
                               P (sup |L̂(λ) − E[L(λ)]|) ⩽ 2|H|exp(−2nϵ2 /B 2 )
                                    λ
                q
                    B 2 log(2|H|/δ)
Thus, if en =              2n       , then P (supλ |L̂(λ) − E[L(λ)]| ⩾ ϵn ) ⩽ δ and thus with probability at least
1 − δ:


                             E[L(λ̂)] ⩽ L̂(λ̂) + ϵn ⩽ L̂(λ∗ ) + ϵn ⩽ E[L(λˆ∗ )] + 2ϵn
                                                                                                                ■

A.3   P ROOF PROPOSITION THREE
Proof. It follows as a consequence of the independence of the calibration data points and the application of the
split conformal algorithm Angelopoulos & Bates (2021); Vovk et al. (2005)                                     ■

A.4   P ROOF PROPOSITION FOUR
Proof. It follows as a consequence of the independence of the calibration data points and the application of the
split conformal algorithm Angelopoulos & Bates (2021); Vovk et al. (2005)                                     ■

A.5    P ROOF C OVERAGE FUNCTION IS NOT SEPARABLE
                                         P
Proof. Suppose is separable, i.e, L(S) = y inS ℓ(y) for some ℓ. In particular this would imply that L({y}) =
ℓ(y). Let C be one of the categories used to define L, then:
                                                     X
                                           L(C) =         I(C ∩ Ci )
                                                        Ci ∈C
                                                   =1
However, L({y}) = ℓ(y), thus L(C) = |C|, a contradiction if C has more than one element.
                                                                                                                ■

B     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
The training details for the neural network classifier by dataset are:


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Dataset        Epochs      Batch Size     Learning Rate       Validation Fraction       Vision Backbone
    Fitzpatrick          120           256             0.001                   0.1                EfficientNet B0
    Fitzpatrick Clean    120           256             0.001                   0.1                EfficientNet B0
    iNaturalist           15           256             0.001                   0.1                EfficientNet B0
    CIFAR100              32           256             0.001                   0.1                EfficientNet B0
    ImageNet               1           256             0.001                   0.1                EfficientNet B0

Table 2: Hyperparameters used to train the classifiers for each dataset. The configurations are identical except
for the number of training epochs.

                        Dataset          # of Classes    Dataset Size     Base Model Accuracy
                   Fitzpatrick                114           8289                 0.37
                   Fitzpatrick Clean           49           4709                 0.54
                   CIFAR100                   100          50000                 0.71
                   iNaturalist                 51          100000                0.90
                   ImageNet                  1000          50000                 0.72

Table 3: Details about the datasets we use to calibrate and evaluate the sets. For the iNaturalist dataset, we use
the labels up to the class level. We divide each dataset into calibration, validation, and test sets with a split of
50-25-25% of the dataset respectively.


For both separable and non-separable conformal-based methods, the grid used for tuning λ was
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10} .

C     BAYESIAN C OMPARISON
Using variational inference, we trained an EffcientNet Tan (2019) where the last linear layer of the net had a
Gaussian prior N (0, 1) on its weights. The differentiable objective used to train this Bayesian neural network,
was the negative evidence lower bound and at each training step the weights and the posterior distribution
(being more precise the variational approximation) were updated accordingly. Finally for the prediction phase,
for each instance x we draw 100 samples from the posterior distribution to produce estimates of p̂(y|x, θ),
subsequently we then produce a Monte Carlo approximation of p̂(y|x). The neural network was trained for 25
epochs using a learning rate of 0.001 and a batch size of 64 on the FitzPatrick dataset Groh et al. (2021).
We now proceed to define the sets Sf (x) . Let π(x) = (σ1 (x), . . . , σd (x)) denote the permutation that orders
p̂(yi | x) from greatest to smallest. The prediction set Sx is defined as Sx = {yσ1 (x) , . . . , yσk (x) }, where k is
                              Pk
the smallest integer such that i=1 p̂(yσi (x) | x) ⩾ 1−α. However, this procedure does not inherently provide
                                                                                 Pk
statistical coverage. To address this limitation, we conformalized the scores i=1 p̂(yσi (x) | x) by applying
our penalized conformal prediction method with λ = 0 and using the Bayesian estimates p̂(y|x). The results
of this procedure are summarized in Figure 6.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Sum of Penalties

       100
Loss



        50
         0
                 Base Conformal          Separable Penalized Ratio        Penalized Conformal        Base Bayesian


                                                            Maximum Penalty
       0.6                                                                                                               Estimation of p(y|x)
       0.4                                                                                                                    Non-Bayesian
Loss


                                                                                                                              Bayesian
       0.2
       0.0
               Base Conformal      Penalized Conformal      Greedy Optimizer         Base Bayesian    Greedy Optimizer


                                                           Hierarchy Coverage
       7.5
       5.0
Loss


       2.5
       0.0
               Base Conformal      Penalized Conformal      Greedy Optimizer         Base Bayesian    Greedy Optimizer
                                                                Method

Figure 6: Comparison of our methods when we use a Bayesian model as the source of p̂(y|x). The plots show
our methods work well for Bayesian and non-Bayesian approaches because they outperform the base methods
in both cases.

       Dataset                  Base Conformal           Penalized Conformal (optimal λ)               Separable Penalized Ratio
   CIFAR100                      29.146 (2.339)                    6.915 (0.477)                             4.442 (0.374)
   ImageNet                     150.162 (12.889)                  25.553 (2.551)                              5.277 (0.549)
   iNaturalist                   32.949 (4.982)                    3.855 (0.582)                              2.043 (0.474)
   Fitzpatrick                   86.373 (8.680)                   72.986 (7.315)                            60.805 (11.300)
   FitzpatrickClean              34.356 (3.790)                   22.257 (2.589)                             17.481 (2.236)

Table 4: Comparison of our proposals for the separable loss case against base conformal predictions for dif-
ferent datasets using the sum of the penalties in each set as the metric. The numbers are the median-of-means
across 10 different runs.


Results It can be observed that the Bayesian approach not only fails to provide true statistical coverage but also
produces prediction sets with a higher average loss. Furthermore, our conformal-based techniques demonstrate
remarkable robustness and flexibility by effectively correcting these deficiencies when applied on top of the
biased Bayesian estimates of p(y | x). This highlights the advantages of our method, as it addresses both the
lack of coverage and suboptimal set quality, showcasing its effectiveness once again.

D            E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS


                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       150                                                                       Base Conformal
                                                                                 Penalized Conformal (optimal )
                                                                                 Separable Penalized Ratio
       100
Loss


           50

            0
                     CIFAR100           ImageNet            iNaturalist     Fitzpatrick       FitzpatrickClean
                                                             Dataset
       1.0
                    Base Conformal
       0.8          Penalized Conformal (optimal )
                    Greedy Optimizer on Max
       0.6
Loss


       0.4
       0.2
       0.0
                    CIFAR100            ImageNet            iNaturalist     Fitzpatrick       FitzpatrickClean
                                                             Dataset

       6          Base Conformal
                  Penalized Conformal (optimal )
                  Greedy Optimizer on Coverage
       4
Loss


       2

       0
                   CIFAR100           ImageNet             iNaturalist     Fitzpatrick        FitzpatrickClean
                                                            Dataset

Figure 7: Comparisons between different methods for the 1) separable loss case using the sum of penalties in
each set as the loss metric (top), 2) non-separable loss case using maximum penalty in the set as the metric
(middle), and 3) hierarchy coverage function loss case using the intersection of the set with each branch of the
hierarchy as the metric (bottom). Numbers are the median-of-means across 10 different runs.



                 Dataset        Base Conformal       Penalized Conformal (optimal λ)      Greedy Optimizer
            CIFAR100             0.475 (0.003)                 0.229 (0.003)                0.419 (0.003)
            ImageNet             0.432 (0.003)                 0.150 (0.002)                0.313 (0.003)
            iNaturalist          0.591 (0.002)                 0.076 (0.001)                0.570 (0.003)
            Fitzpatrick          0.692 (0.005)                 0.678 (0.005)                0.502 (0.007)
            Fitzpatrick Clean    0.657 (0.004)                 0.597 (0.004)                0.515 (0.007)

Table 5: Comparison between different methods for the non-separable loss case across different datasets using
the maximum penalty in the set as the metric. The numbers are the median-of-means across 10 different runs.



                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Dataset         Base Conformal       Penalized Conformal (optimal λ)       Greedy Optimizer
      CIFAR100              3.134 (0.030)                 1.054 (0.017)                 2.270 (0.023)
      ImageNet              3.365 (0.032)                 0.960 (0.002)                 1.675 (0.013)
      iNaturalist           6.072 (0.033)                 1.071 (0.003)                 4.981 (0.046)
      Fitzpatrick           6.134 (0.080)                 5.562 (0.057)                 2.940 (0.033)
      Fitzpatrick Clean     4.634 (0.054)                 3.338 (0.092)                 3.144 (0.034)

Table 6: Comparison between different methods for the coverage function loss case across different datasets
using the intersection of the set with the hierarchy as the metric. The numbers are the median-of-means across
10 different runs.

       Dataset               0.01              0.01              0.1               1.0              10.0
  CIFAR100              15.039 (1.121)     6.915 (0.477)    5.644 (0.812)     5.846 (0.570)     6.354 (0.476)
  ImageNet              25.553 (2.551)     8.671 (0.477)    7.093 (0.963)     8.389 (1.223)     8.231 (1.035)
  iNaturalist            3.855 (0.582)     2.818 (0.310)    2.514 (0.317)     2.092 (0.362)     2.371 (0.256)
  Fitzpatrick           71.937 (9.291)    72.986 (7.315)   83.053 (8.408)    77.088 (8.263)    75.293 (9.907)
  Fitzpatrick Clean     20.517 (3.350)    22.257 (2.589)   24.088 (2.636)    23.515 (2.816)    23.780 (2.213)

Table 7: Comparison between different values of the hyperparameter λ for the proposed Penalized Conformal
method on separable loss case across different datasets. The numbers are the median-of-means across 10
different runs.

          Dataset             0.001            0.01             0.1              1.0              10.0
     CIFAR100             0.471 (0.003)    0.443 (0.002)   0.314 (0.001)    0.261 (0.003)     0.229 (0.003)
     ImageNet             0.426 (0.003)    0.374 (0.003)   0.237 (0.002)    0.160 (0.001)     0.150 (0.002)
     iNaturalist          0.328 (0.003)    0.173 (0.001)   0.076 (0.001)    0.012 (0.000)     0.000 (0.002)
     Fitzpatrick          0.688 (0.004)    0.678 (0.005)   0.687 (0.003)    0.686 (0.003)     0.685 (0.004)
     Fitzpatrick Clean    0.606 (0.012)    0.597 (0.004)   0.603 (0.005)    0.596 (0.009)     0.600 (0.010)

Table 8: Comparison between different values of the hyperparameter λ for the Penalized Conformal method on
the non-separable loss case across different datasets. The numbers are the median-of-means of the maximum
penalty per set across 10 different runs.

          Dataset             0.001            0.01             0.1              1.0              10.0
     CIFAR100             3.079 (0.028)    2.756 (0.026)   1.704 (0.009)    1.096 (0.012)     1.054 (0.017)
     ImageNet             3.279 (0.034)    2.640 (0.031)   1.435 (0.012)    1.053 (0.004)     0.960 (0.002)
     iNaturalist          2.401 (0.022)    1.432 (0.009)   1.071 (0.003)    0.940 (0.001)     0.902 (0.008)
     Fitzpatrick          6.017 (0.070)    5.562 (0.057)   5.629 (0.082)    5.621 (0.062)     5.613 (0.050)
     Fitzpatrick Clean    4.446 (0.104)    3.587 (0.041)   3.456 (0.046)    3.338 (0.092)     3.419 (0.105)

Table 9: Comparison between different values of the hyperparameter λ for the Penalized Conformal method
on the non-separable loss case across different datasets. The numbers are the median-of-means of the coverage
penalty per set across 10 different runs.

         Dataset          Base Conformal      Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage       Greedy Max
     CIFAR100                  14.6                   5.20                   22.2                23.9
     Fitzpatrick               41.8                   34.7                   64.2                64.8
     FitzpatrickClean          17.0                   10.6                   29.4                25.3
     ImageNet                  74.8                   15.1                    152                 146
     iNaturalist               17.1                   1.20                   23.1                22.5

Table 10: Average set size by method and dataset. The Penalized Conformal method (with an optimized λ
parameter) always results in smaller sets than the Base Conformal method. The table also shows that the
greedy methods have larger set sizes than the other two methods, which indicates these methods optimize the
utility function at the expense of larger sets. However, the predictive value of the sets from the greedy methods
is strong, as shown by their conditional coverage and utility function values.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Size       Base Conformal        Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage          Greedy Max
                  count coverage        count     coverage        count coverage         count coverage
       1           1041       0.94      3285           0.94        1059       0.90       1025       0.94
       2 to 4      2665       0.97      4225           0.93        2168       0.97       2145       0.97
       5 to 9      2152       0.99      2542           0.96        1224       0.99       1198       0.99
       10 to 49    4948       0.99      1873           0.94        5051       0.99       4563       0.99
       50 to 99     698       0.99       15            1.00        1929       0.99       2517       0.98

Table 11: Conditional statistical coverage by set size for the CIFAR-100 dataset and a target coverage of 1 - α
= 0.9. The results for the penalized conformal method are reported for the optimal λ value. We also include
the number of samples that belong to each size bucket. We also include the number of samples that belong to
each size bucket.


      Size        Base Conformal        Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage          Greedy Max
                  count coverage        count     coverage        count coverage         count coverage
      1           1446        0.99      20553          0.95       1089         0.99      1122        0.99
      2 to 4      3776         1.0       2740          0.89        784          1.0       736         1.0
      5 to 9      3600         1.0       427           0.89       3458          1.0      1440         1.0
      10 to 49    13516       1.0         74           0.96       16353         1.0      18967       1.0
      50 to 99     206         1.0         0            0.0        908          1.0       226         1.0

Table 12: Conditional statistical coverage by set size for the iNaturalist dataset and a target coverage of 1 - α =
0.9. The results for the penalized conformal method are reported for the optimal λ value. We also include the
number of samples that belong to each size bucket.


       Size       Base Conformal        Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage          Greedy Max
                  count coverage        count     coverage        count coverage         count coverage
       1            967       0.95      3608           0.95        894        0.94       882        0.95
       2 to 4      1854       0.98      2657           0.94        1744       0.98       1703       0.99
       5 to 9      1452       0.98      1744           0.96        1253       0.99       1286       0.98
       10 to 49    2952       0.99      2866           0.95        2226       0.99       2169       0.99
       50 to 99    1186       0.99      625            0.95        992        0.98       1148       0.99
       100+        1260       0.99      327            0.95        990        0.99       1159       0.99

Table 13: Conditional statistical coverage by set size for the ImageNet dataset and a target coverage of 1 - α =
0.9. The results for the penalized conformal method are reported for the optimal λ value. We also include the
number of samples that belong to each size bucket.


       Size       Base Conformal        Penalized Conformal       Greedy Coverage          Greedy Max
                  count coverage        count     coverage        count coverage         count coverage
       1            19        0.95         8           0.75         24        0.79         22       0.86
       2 to 4       42        0.90        33           0.97         41        0.71         31       0.84
       5 to 9       54        0.89        84           0.92         57        0.82         55       0.91
       10 to 49    538        0.89       725           0.87        131        0.85        227       0.90
       50 to 99    459        0.92       295           0.94        711        0.94        298       0.91
       100+         5         1.00         0           0.00        103        0.97        447       0.96

Table 14: Conditional statistical coverage by set size for the Fitzpatrick dataset and a target coverage of 1 - α =
0.9. The results for the penalized conformal method are reported for the optimal λ value. We also include the
number of samples that belong to each size bucket.



                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Trend of how the predicted softmax score of the true class decreases as the set size increases. The
downward trend indicates the size of the sets grows as the model has more trouble classifying an image.


                                               20
