Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LL A RA: S UPERCHARGING ROBOT L EARNING DATA
FOR V ISION -L ANGUAGE P OLICY

 Xiang Li1      Cristina Mata1      Jongwoo Park1       Kumara Kahatapitiya1
 Yoo Sung Jang1       Jinghuan Shang1        Kanchana Ranasinghe1    Ryan Burgert1
 Mu Cai2       Yong Jae Lee2      Michael S. Ryoo1
 1
   Stony Brook University 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
 xiangli8@cs.stonybrook.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

          Vision Language Models (VLMs) have recently been leveraged to generate robotic
          actions, forming Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models. However, directly
          adapting a pretrained VLM for robotic control remains challenging, particularly
          when constrained by a limited number of robot demonstrations. In this work,
          we introduce LLaRA: Large Language and Robotics Assistant, a framework that
          formulates robot action policy as visuo-textual conversations and enables an effi-
          cient transfer of a pretrained VLM into a powerful VLA, motivated by the success
          of visual instruction tuning in Computer Vision. First, we present an automated
          pipeline to generate conversation-style instruction tuning data for robots from ex-
          isting behavior cloning datasets, aligning robotic actions with image pixel coor-
          dinates. Further, we enhance this dataset in a self-supervised manner by defin-
          ing six auxiliary tasks, without requiring any additional action annotations. We
          show that a VLM finetuned with a limited amount of such datasets can produce
          meaningful action decisions for robotic control. Through experiments across mul-
          tiple simulated and real-world tasks, we demonstrate that LLaRA achieves state-
          of-the-art performance while preserving the generalization capabilities of large
          language models. The code, datasets, and pretrained models are available at
          https://github.com/LostXine/LLaRA.
                                                                                                                                 Detection
                                                                                     D-inBC


                                                                                                                                                     Spatial Relationship
                                                                                                             Future Prediction


                                 <task>Place all other
                                 objects into the
                                 <p>large bowl</p>.</task>
                                 List the actions required
                                                                                                                                 Action Prediction
                                                                                     Temporal Relationship


                                 to perform the task given
                                 on this scene ……
                                                                                                             inBC


                                                                                                                                                     Localization


                                  Step 1: Pick up the <p>carrot</p> at
                                   <b>(0.262, 0.668)</b>, rotate <r>[-148]</r>
                                  degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.541, 0.500)</b>.


                                  ……

                  Env                                                                                            Agent
Figure 1: A real-world demonstration of LLaRA solving an unseen task. In this setting, LLaRA converts
only eight thousand simulated expert trajectories from VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023) into a strong instruction-tuning
data and generates six auxiliary datasets in a self-supervised manner. With such data and about one thousand
additional in-domain images, a pretrained Vision Language Model (VLM) is finetuned into a powerful robot
policy that can solve many unseen real-world tasks. At inference, the VLM is queried to generate actions in
natural language where the robot action is aligned to image pixel coordinates.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Llama (Touvron et al., 2023;
AI, 2024), and Gemini (Anil et al., 2023) exhibit unprecedented abilities across diverse language
tasks. Such LLMs are often trained together with visual data by taking advantage of pretrained


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


vision encoders, forming powerful Vision Language Models (VLMs). Effective and efficient training
of such VLMs significantly depends on the style and format of the vision-language data used for
training, leading to the exploration of various instruction tuning (Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023a; 2024b) strategies. The resulting VLMs exhibit strong vision-language skills,
but not without limitations such as spatial awareness (Chen et al., 2023; Ranasinghe et al., 2024b)
or niche-domain understanding. The latter has led to domain-specific visual instruction tuning (Li
et al., 2023; Kuckreja et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2023).
Several robot learning approaches also leverage pretrained LLMs / VLMs (Zeng et al., 2022; Brohan
et al., 2023c; Driess et al., 2023; Vemprala et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024; Zheng
et al., 2024) with recent work focusing on low-level robot actions (Brohan et al., 2023b;a; Padalkar
et al., 2023). The strong performance of such approaches can be attributed to the extensive world
knowledge (e.g., understanding of physics, human common-sense) (Yu et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2024) and powerful reasoning abilities (Creswell & Shanahan, 2022; Liu et al., 2023b) of underlying
language models. However, studies on curating and using conversation-style data for instruction
tuning in robotics have been rather limited (Zhen et al., 2024).
Motivated by the promising attributes of VLMs, we explore a process, called Visuomotor Instruc-
tion Tuning, of adapting a VLM to a robot action policy that can handle diverse visuomotor control
challenges. More specifically, we transform a typical behavior cloning (BC) dataset into a conver-
sational dataset, Instruct-BC (inBC) for VLM finetuning. Given a state described in visual-textual
modalities, our VLM is trained to generate suitable actions in text, aligned to image pixel coor-
dinates. Such a formulation based on conversation-style instruction-response data enables us to
convert a VLM into a robot action policy effortlessly. However, we also note that the effectiveness
of an instruction-tuned VLM depends heavily on the quality of data formulation (Liu et al., 2023a;
Ranasinghe et al., 2024b; Kuckreja et al., 2024), which is non-trivial to automate (or, scale) for new
domains (Li et al., 2023; Kuckreja et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Ranasinghe
et al., 2024b). Therefore, to strengthen (or, supercharge) such data, we construct auxiliary datasets
based on the same BC dataset, in a self-supervised fashion without any extra action label.
Our overall framework termed LLaRA (Large Language and Robotics Assistant) generates visuo-
motor instruction data that can efficiently and effectively finetune a VLM into a robot action policy.
It is motivated by LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a), which is designed primarily for vision tasks. Similarly,
LLaRA offers the entire framework of data generation, model formulation, and training pipeline for
VLMs, now specialized for robot learning. Our key contributions are:
       1. Formulating robot manipulation tasks into instruction-response pairs described in natural
          language, which enables successful instruction tuning of a VLM as a policy.
       2. Aligning robot actions to image pixel coordinates, makes the transfer of a pretrained VLM
          to the robotics domain more efficient, particularly when the training data is limited.
       3. Identifying and generating auxiliary data that further enhances robot policy learning in a
          self-supervised manner.
We conduct extensive experiments on the proposed framework to establish the effectiveness of both
our automated data generation pipeline and instruction-tuned VLM in solving robotics tasks.

2    R ELATED WORK
Instruction data generation. Finetuning LLMs / VLMs with instruction data has shown a lot of
potential for vision tasks (Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; 2024b). While
effective construction of such datasets with high quality and quantity is beyond trivial (Liu et al.,
2023a), especially for specialized visual domains (Li et al., 2023; Bazi et al., 2024; Kuckreja et al.,
2024; Thawkar et al., 2023) such as robotics. Yet these modified VLMs suffer in the robotics do-
mains (Ranasinghe et al., 2024a).
Spatial reasoning in VLMs. Several recent works investigate how VLMs can be modified for
spatial awareness within images (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Zang et al., 2023; Peng et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023; Ranasinghe et al., 2024b; You et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2024; Shtedritski et al.,
2023), which is a critical ability of a visuomotor policy. One line of work explores prompting using
textual or specialized tokens to encode locations, followed by instruction tuning on localization-
specific datasets (Peng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Ranasinghe et al., 2024b; You et al., 2023). In


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


contrast, our framework extends beyond localization to directly predict robot actions. An alternate
line of work explores visual prompting but without any focus on robot learning (Shtedritski et al.,
2023; Cai et al., 2024). An extension of such ideas to robotics is explored in PIVOT (Nasiriany
et al., 2024). These ideas are complementary to LLaRA, where additional visuomotor instruction
tuning directly generates actions optimal for robotics tasks.
Robot learning via sequence models, LLMs, and VLMs. The use of sequence models in robot
learning has a longstanding tradition (Zheng et al., 2022; Shang et al., 2022a;b). Recent foundation
LLMs / VLMs provide a source of common-sense data for robot policy training (Qian et al., 2024;
Ingelhag et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023b; Yoneda et al., 2023). More recent work such as Robotics
Transformer (Brohan et al., 2023b;a; Padalkar et al., 2023), Gato (Reed et al., 2022), GR-1 (Wu
et al., 2023a) and Octo (Octo Model Team et al., 2024) learn generalist robot policies with multi-
modal sequence models, taking advantage of the flexibility of encoding and decoding images/actions
via token representations similar to VLMs.
PALM-E (Driess et al., 2023) utilizes a pretrained VLM for embodied reasoning and planning. How-
ever, it assumes access to additional policies capable of performing low-level skills from a limited
vocabulary, with the VLM generating natural language that conditions these low-level commands.
SpatialVLM (Chen et al., 2024) focuses on enhancing the spatial reasoning ability of the VLM, re-
sulting in a VLM that serves as a spatial relationship predictor rather than a robot policy. To embed
SpatialVLM into a policy, chain-of-thought spatial reasoning is required.
There are concurrent works (Kim et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024; Zheng et al.,
2024) which also utilize a LLaVA style VLM as a robot policy. All such approaches employ a
VLM as a robot action policy, processing both visual observations and textual instructions as inputs.
OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) employs specialized tokens to represent quantized actions, a method
akin to RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023a). OpenVLA also incorporates DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) as an
additional visual encoder along with SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023), compared to a single CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) vision encoder used in LLaVA. RoboPoint (Yuan et al., 2024) introduces a novel point-
based action space and a scalable data pipeline tailored for spatial affordance prediction. Actions
are delineated via points on an RGB image, which are subsequently translated to 3D space using
depth data. This approach eliminates the reliance on predefined action primitives (Liang et al., 2023;
Singh et al., 2023), external object detectors (Huang et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024a), and iterative
visual prompting (Nasiriany et al., 2024). LLARVA (Niu et al., 2024), differs by generating both
2D visual traces in image coordinates and corresponding textual actions as outputs, with the former
functioning as an auxiliary task.
In contrast, our method describes robot action using image coordinates in natural language, which
creates a more intuitive link between vision and action without modifying the existing VLM model
architecture. This enables a much more efficient transfer of the pretrained VLM to our robot VLA
model. Moreover, all the aforementioned studies lack of comprehensive investigation into the meth-
ods for generating self-supervised auxiliary datasets from existing robot data, as well as the impli-
cations of integrating such datasets for the training. Our work LLaRA distinctively addresses this
gap, marking a critical divergence from the concurrent studies.
Self-supervised learning in robotics. Self-supervised learning (SSL) has long been explored in
robotics (Pinto & Gupta, 2016; Sermanet et al., 2018; Yarats et al., 2021; Laskin et al., 2020;
Schwarzer et al., 2021), with recent work showing a flavor of visual representation learning (Li
et al., 2022; 2024b; Wang et al., 2023). We introduce auxiliary SSL objectives (i.e., pretext tasks)
based on instruction prompts, motivated by similar ideas in computer vision (Doersch et al., 2015;
Yun et al., 2022; Ranasinghe et al., 2022; Walker et al., 2021). More specifically, we create a set of
domain-specific auxiliary datasets (e.g., action or future prediction), that enable LLaRA to under-
stand information that is useful for the downstream robotics tasks, when used for finetuning.



3   P RELIMINARY: VISUAL INSTRUCTION TUNING

Visual Instruction Tuning is a framework to finetune a large Vision Language Model (VLM) using
task-specific instructions. The objective is to develop a general-purpose multimodal model capable
of solving diverse vision tasks described by language (Huang et al., 2023a). A typical example of


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Visual Instruction Tuning is LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a), whose model consists of three components:
a large language model θLLM , a visual encoder θV and an adapter layer θMLP (see Fig. 2).
Consider a conversation data sample that contains a single image xv        Images (xv)            Text Input (xl)
and user instruction text xl as inputs. During inference, the visual     Visual Encoder
                                                                               (θV )
                                                                                                Text Tokenizer
encoder θV and adapter layer θMLP process xv successively to pro-
duce visual tokens that can be directly concatenated with the textual    Adapter   Layer
                                                                             (θMLP)
tokens of xl in language embedding space of θLLM . Next, θLLM au-                           Concatenation

toregressively generates new tokens conditioned on both the visual
tokens from xv and text tokens from xl . Finally, generated tokens                     LLM (θLLM)

are decoded into natural language as the output of the model.         Figure 2: LLaVA overview. A
A two-phase training process is executed in Liu et al. (2023a) Large Language Model (LLM) is
with a next-token prediction objective over the θLLM output in connected to the visual domain
                                                                      with suitable encoder and adap-
each phase. First, only θMLP is trained using image-caption pairs tor neural networks.
(similar to datasets for CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) training).
Then, both θMLP and θLLM are finetuned using a specialized instruction tuning dataset termed
LLaVA_Instruct_150k.               LLaVA_Instruct_150k contains human-style instruction-
response conversations, automatically created by a powerful LLM (OpenAI, 2023) from a generic
object detection dataset. This instruction tuning process is what we focus on in this paper. We start
from a pretrained LLaVA model and only perform a single-stage finetune, updating θLLM and θMLP
based on the instruction tuning data formulation we introduce in this paper.


4    V ISUOMOTOR INSTRUCTION TUNING

We leverage large Vision Language Models (VLMs) as a generalist to address diverse visuomotor
control challenges. Specifically, we transform a typical behavior cloning dataset into an instruction
tuning dataset and subsequently finetune a pretrained VLM on this tailored dataset, a process we call
Visuomotor Instruction Tuning. The resulting LLaRA framework benefits from the broad, inherent
knowledge embedded within the VLM and the alignment between robot action and image pixel
coordinates, enabling more efficient visuomotor policy learning.
In this section, we present our LLaRA framework to a) convert a set of robot manipulation expert
trajectories into a visuomotor instruction tuning dataset, and b) finetune a VLM on such a dataset as
a robot policy. In the next section, we show that c) such VLMs can be further improved for robot
control using auxiliary instruction tuning data created in a self-supervised manner.
Problem formulation. We consider a behavioral cloning (BC) setting over a Markov Decision
Process (MDP), described by the tuple (S, A, P ). Here, st ∈ S denotes the state at timestamp
t, at ∈ A represents the action at t, and P encapsulates the transition dynamics, expressed as
P (st+1 |st , at ). Our goal is to finetune a VLM as a robot policy π that best recovers an unknown
policy π ∗ using a demonstration dataset containing multiple tasks D = {(si , ai )} collected by π ∗ .
The policy π is designed to be conditioned on the task description, and our empirical findings suggest
adding historical actions is a beneficial condition. Consequently, the policy can be articulated as
π(ait |sit , aih ), where h = 1, 2, ..., t − 1, indicating that π takes into account all preceding actions.
Instruction tuning data from trajectories. Next, we turn a set of expert trajectories D into a visuo-
motor instruction tuning dataset. For each state transition, we convert the state action pair (st , at )
into a single-round conversation. The current visual observation and textual task description, form-
ing st , can be directly assimilated by a VLM as the user instruction. However, the numerical action
at needs conversion into textual format to be generated by a VLM. In contrast to the approach em-
ployed by GATO (Reed et al., 2022), RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023a), and OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024),
which utilizes special tokens to encode quantized action values (binning tokenization), we adopt 2D
Image Coordinates—normalized to [0, 1]—to represent the positions in actions. Additionally, any
rotational component of the action, denoted as ar (such as the angle of a joint), is expressed textually
as “rotate <r>ar </r> degrees”. To further improve the performance, we incorporate the
history of executed actions into the query and structure the response to predict multiple future action
steps until the episode concludes. More details are covered in Appendix A.1. Our approach creates
an intuitive connection between visual input and robotic actions, enabling effortless transfer across
various robotic embodiments. By implementing these strategies, we effectively convert a trajectory


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       LLaRA inBC                                                     LLaRA         -inBC
     Current Observation     Textual Task Description       Current Observation               Multi-modal Task Description
                            <task>First put <p>rainbow
                            letter T</p> into <p>wooden                               Reference Images
                            bowl</p> then put the object                               described in text
                            that was previously at its                                                     frame_0   frame_1   frame_2
                            south into the same                                       <task>Stack objects in the order
                            <p>wooden bowl</p>.                                       [Desc. of frame_0] [Desc. of frame_1]
                            </task> …                                                 [Desc. of frame_2]</task>…

                                                                                                               <scene>
                                                                                                               <p>red letter V</p> at
 Visual Encoder & Adapter                                  Visual Encoder & Adapter                            <b>(0.254, 0.570),

         (θV , θMLP)                                               (θV , θMLP)
                                    Text Tokenizer                                      Text Tokenizer         {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                                                                                               <p>rainbow letter V</p>
                                                                                                               at …
                                                                                                               <scene>


                       LLM (θLLM)                                                      LLM (θLLM)


    Step 1: Pick up the <p>rainbow letter T</p> at            Step 1: Pick up the <p>green paisley letter V</p> at
    <b>(0.500, 0.617)</b>, rotate <r>[0]</r>                  <b>(0.465, 0.617)</b>, rotate <r>[0]</r> degrees, and
𝒟
    degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.746, 0.617)</b>             drop it at <b>(0.711, 0.617)</b>
    Step 2: …                                                 Step 2: …


Figure 3: Example data for visuomotor instruction tuning. (left) inBC is our instruction tuning data created
from BC, only taking textual task description. (right) D-inBC is designed for multi-modal task description that
considers reference images by taking their corresponding textual description. Both inBC and D-inBC belong
to the LLaRA family.
into a format comprising both image and text, which is readily processed by the VLM. We name the
converted dataset Instruct-BC (inBC) and present examples in Fig. 3, Tab. 8 and Tab. 9.
Aggregate multiple images for a single-image VLM. The VLM policy we use here closely fol-
lows the design of LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024b). The model consumes a single image and language
instruction and generates language output. In scenarios where a single observation st comprises an
observation image and multiple reference images, systems such as LLaVA suffer from low perfor-
mance because it was never trained on multiple images (see Tab. 15). Instead, we convert each
additional reference image into a language description with the help of object detection on the addi-
tional images (e.g., images in the task description, rather than the main visual observation). The main
image is still directly used as the visual input by the VLM without any changes. Compared to inBC,
we name this method that takes additional object detection results as Description-Instruct-BC (D-
inBC), and our model trained on this data is referred to with the same name as earlier. Examples
are also available in Fig. 3, Tab. 8 and Tab. 9. In Appendix A.1.3 we also discuss another variant
of D-inBC that uses natural language instead of structured text to describe the reference images:
D-inBC (L).
Inference pipeline. During inference, the prompt for the VLM is prepared using the same template
as either inBC or D-inBC. As illustrated in Fig. 3, for a model trained on inBC, each conversation
turn encapsulates the current visual observation, the task description, and the previous actions de-
scribed in the text. For a model trained on D-inBC, the process starts with object detection to convert
any extra images from the task description into text. The task description, now including the detec-
tion outcomes, is then combined with the current visual observation and the action history to get
the complete query. Then LLaRA generates the text output that contains numerical values (e.g., 2D
image coordinates) for a robot action. The extracted rotation angle can be directly mapped to the
rotation of the end effector. The 2D image coordinates will be further converted to robot action
space via predefined mapping, which can be estimated using visual calibration in both simulated
and real-world environments. After that, the robot executes the action, and a new observation can
be captured from the environment. This initiates another round of interaction, setting the stage for
the subsequent action.


5      S UPERCHARGING VISUOMOTOR INSTRUCTION TUNING DATASET

Motivated by the success of LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) instruction tuning data, and subsequent
domain-specific instruction tuning datasets (e.g., for reasoning, grounding, or referring) (Chen et al.,
2023; Ranasinghe et al., 2024b; Peng et al., 2023), LLaRA creates auxiliary robotics instruction
tuning datasets that enhance a VLM in a self-supervised manner.
More specifically, given an expert trajectory, we generate conversations that reveal useful infor-
mation for learning a policy implicitly via scripted templates. In addition to visual observations,
we make use of automatically generated object labels, locations, and geometries (e.g., rotation) to-
gether with task descriptions as expert (or oracle) information. We primarily introduce six auxiliary


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          Localization                                          Detection
                                      Input :   <imaget>                                     Input :   <imaget>
                                                What is the exact position of <p>obj1</p>              Provide a description for each object
                                                in the image?                                          in the image.
                                     Output :   <p>obj1</p> at <b>(x1,y1),{w1,h1}</b>.      Output :   <scene>[Localization of obj1]
                                                                                                       [Localization of obj2]…</scene>
                                                       Action Prediction
       obj2      obj1                 Input :   <imaget>                                                     Future Prediction
                                                Could you describe the steps required to     Input :   <imaget>
                                                                                                       Displayed in the image is a scene
     Observation at st <imaget>                 change the scene shown in the image of
                                                                                                       containing multiple objects. Now you
                                                the second scene? The second scene is
                   Action at                    depicted as [Desc. of <imaget+1>].                     perform [Action at st], what will the
                                                                                                       scene look like?
                   [Action at st]    Output :   Pick up [Localization of obj1], rotate
                                                <r>[ar]</r> degrees, and drop it at         Output :   [Desc. of <imaget+1>]
                                                [Localization of obj1 in <imaget+1>].
                                                                                                          Temporal Relationship
                                                                                             Input :   <imaget>
                                                      Spatial Relationship                             The image shows a scene at the initial
                                      Input :   <imaget>                                               timestamp, and the second image
                                                Can you explain the relative spatial
                                                                                                       described as [Desc. of <imaget+1>].
                                                position of <p>obj1</p> compared to
                          obj1                                                                         Can you describe how the relative
       obj2                                     <p>obj2</p> in this image?
                                     Output :   <p>obj1</p> is right from <p>obj2</p>                  positions between <p>obj1</p> and
                                                                                                       <p>obj2</p> has changed?
    Observation at st+1 <imaget+1>              with 2D center distance of <d>(dx, dy)</
                                                                                            Output :   <p>obj1</p> moves far away from
                                                d> and Euclidean center distance of
                                                <e>[z]</e>.                                            <p>obj2</p>. [Spatial rel. changes].


Figure 4: Auxiliary datasets for visuomotor instruction tuning. Given an input trajectory, we make use of
expert information (e.g., object detections) to formulate conversations related to auxiliary semantics. Please
refer to Tab. 11 and Tab. 12 for the actual examples of each dataset.

datasets, augmenting existing inBC or D-inBC to better finetune VLMs. In each dataset, we con-
sider a standard instruction, which is further rephrased multiple times using GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
to infuse a reasonable diversity. The answers follow simple rule-based templates that format expert
information as expected responses for each conversation. The following paragraphs briefly describe
each auxiliary dataset. We kindly refer the readers to Fig. 4 and Appendix A.1.4 for formatting
details and qualitative samples.
Localization and detection. To enhance the visual grounding ability of VLM, we first generate
single-turn conversations for both localization of individual objects and higher-level detection of
entire scenes. For localization, each conversation involves pinpointing an object within an ob-
servation, where the query specifies the object’s location and the response is given in the format
“<p>OBJ</p> at <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>”. Here, (x, y) indicates the midpoint of
the object’s bounding box, while {w, h} denotes its width and height, with coordinates normal-
ized to [0, 1] as detailed in Sec. 4. For detection, the setup extends to multiple objects, describing
the scene via a list of bounding boxes.
Action and future prediction. These datasets are designed to improve the VLM’s capability to un-
derstand dynamics. In the action prediction dataset, given an initial observation, the query includes
a text description of the subsequent observation, formatted similarly to the detection dataset. The
VLM identifies the specific action that connects these two states. For future prediction, the roles
of query and answer are reversed: the query now presents a single-step action and requests a text
description of the next observation.
Spatial and temporal relationships. We further enrich the dataset with the relationships between
objects. For spatial relationships, given two objects in an image, we format a conversation to ad-
dress their 2D configuration (e.g., left, right, above, below) including Euclidean and axial distances,
with an exemplar provided for better instruction comprehension by the VLM. For temporal rela-
tionships, the dataset examines changes in these spatial relationships over time (i.e., between two
timesteps). This involves two observations—the initial in image form and the subsequent described
in text—focusing on queries about movements (e.g., getting closer or further away), with responses
detailing changes in Euclidean and axial distances.
By introducing these auxiliary datasets, we explicitly drive the VLM to strengthen the ability of
spatial and temporal understanding, which benefits robot learning. Note that all these datasets can
be automatically generated from existing trajectories, without introducing external task/action su-
pervision. In Sec. 6, we empirically explore the best practices to apply these auxiliary datasets.



6     E XPERIMENTS

We conduct experiments in both simulated environments and the real world. For the simulated tasks,
we tune a VLM on diverse tasks as a generalist. Then, we conduct real-world robot experiments
using three protocols: zero-shot generalization, finetuning, and joint training.


                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.1                           S IMULATION EXPERIMENTS

Settings. We employ VIMA-Bench (Jiang et al., 2023), a simulated table-top robot manipulation
environment to evaluate VLMs trained by our instruction tuning dataset. The environment contains
17 tasks and each task is associated with a multi-modal instruction, including text instructions and
reference images that refer to objects of interest or a particular scene arrangement. The robot action
space is two 2D coordinates for pick and place positions and two quaternions for rotations. We
uniformly subsample the VIMA dataset (Jiang et al., 2023) to form three subsets with different
sizes: VIMA-0.8k, VIMA-8k, and VIMA-80k where the number indicates the number of expert
trajectories in the dataset.
Methods. We compare variants of our method with baselines that follow the recipe of RT-2 (Brohan
et al., 2023a), RT-2 Style, and D-RT-2 Style. As introduced in Sec. 4, inBC is the dataset converted
from the expert trajectories. Prefix D means the additional reference images in the task description
are described by object detection results in text and the object detection will be performed on the
reference images first during inference. Suffix Aux means the auxiliary datasets introduced in Sec. 5
are included in the training set, and the letter after it (e.g., (D)) indicates the detailed configuration
of the auxiliary dataset (see Tab. 2). Oracle means that the groundtruth bounding box of objects is
used as the object detection results only in the reference images. RT-2 Style is similar to inBC but
the output of the VLM (i.e., robot actions) is a set of special tokens that can be directly mapped to
quantized actions. Specifically, in VIMA, the action space is two positions in robot coordinates and
one rotation. D-RT-2 Style (I) is similar to D-RT-2 Style but the output tokens present quantized
two positions in image coordinates and one rotation angle, which is the quantized version of what
LLaRA generates in natural language, presented by the same set of special tokens.
We train all methods on these three datasets and evaluate them with 3 levels of difficulties following
the test protocol (L1 to L3). Due to missing data in the original VIMA dataset, we were not able to
evaluate our approach on L4 properly. For each task, we evaluate all the methods with 20 random
seeds and report the average success rates of each level and the average of three levels.
                       90                                                        90                                                        90                                                             90
                       80                                                        80                                                        80                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                               Average Success Rate (%)
 L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                           L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                     L3 Success Rate (%)


                       70                                                        70                                                        70                                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RT-2-Style
                       60                                                        60                                                        60                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D-RT-2-Style + Oracle
                       50                                                        50                                                        50                                                             50                                  D-RT-2-Style(I) + Oracle
                       40                                                        40                                                        40                                                             40                                  LLaRA (inBC)
                       30                                                        30                                                        30                                                             30                                  LLaRA (inBC + Aux (D))
                       20                                                        20                                                        20                                                             20                                  LLaRA (D-inBC + Oracle)
                       10                                                        10                                                        10                                                             10                                  LLaRA (D-inBC + Aux (D))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LLaRA (D-inBC + Aux (D) + Oracle)
                        0                                                         0                                                         0                                                              0
                         8 × 102 8 × 103 8 × 104 8 × 105                           8 × 102 8 × 103 8 × 104 8 × 105                           8 × 102 8 × 103 8 × 104 8 × 105                                8 × 102 8 × 103 8 × 104 8 × 105
                                Num of expert episodes                                    Num of expert episodes                                    Num of expert episodes                                         Num of expert episodes


Figure 5: Success rates of the models trained on VIMA subsets. The log-scale x-axis shows the number of
expert episodes used in the training set. See Appendix E for the underlying numerical data.
Effectiveness of LLaRA framework. Fig. 5 illustrates the performance of selected methods across
various dataset scales. All methods generally benefit from increased training data. Key observations
include:

                               • inBC consistently surpasses the RT-2 Style baseline, and similarly, D-inBC outperforms
                                 D-RT-2 Style. This supports the effectiveness of our approach, which utilizes instruction-
                                 tuning style data aligned to image pixel coordinates. It is easier to benefit from the existing
                                 VLMs pretrained in a conversation style. Methods based on RT-2 Style improve when more
                                 robot supervision data is available; however, they significantly underperform compared to
                                 our methods when data is limited. Even with 100% data, RT-2 Style still underperforms our
                                 method trained on only 12% data (Appendix B.2).
                               • D-inBC generally excels over inBC owing to the additional information from reference
                                 images. This trend is similarly observed between D-RT-2 Style and RT-2 Style.
                               • Auxiliary datasets prove to be highly beneficial, particularly when the size of the train-
                                 ing set is limited. However, in scenarios like VIMA-80k where the dataset is substantial,
                                 sometimes D-inBC performs better and the gain from the auxiliary datasets is marginal.

We hypothesize that when training data is adequate, the benefits of the auxiliary dataset diminish,
and these data may even distract the model from effectively performing the behavior cloning tasks.
It is advisable to carefully regulate the amount of auxiliary data when there is an abundance of expert


                                                                                                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


episodes to avoid overwhelming the primary learning objectives. By default, we randomly sample
from each auxiliary dataset so that the size of each auxiliary dataset is identical to inBC or D-inBC.
Comparison to VIMA. VIMA takes Table 1: Comparison to VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023). Our best model
both front and top view images from not only achieves better performance but also requires less input
the environment while ours only and is trained on only 12% of the expert trajectories used in VIMA.
takes the front view. We test the most     Method       Config                    Data L1 (%) L2 (%) L3 (%)
capable model released by VIMA,            VIMA         VIMA-200M + Oracle        100%  80.7   81.9   77.9
                                           LLaRA (Ours) D-inBC + Aux (B) + Oracle 12%   90.0   88.1   79.2
which is trained on 660k expert tra-
jectories, and the results are shown in Tab. 1. Compared to VIMA, our best model not only achieves
better performance but also requires less input and is trained on only 12% of the expert trajectories
used in VIMA. The full comparison is in Tab. 13.
Effectiveness of auxiliary datasets. Tab. 2 shows the different combinations of the auxiliary
datasets we studied. For each setting, we randomly sample the same amount of examples from
each auxiliary dataset and combine them with the converted behavior cloning dataset. The ‘*’ after
a ‘✓’ means the reference images that appeared only in the task description are not used to generate
this dataset, which makes the dataset less diverse. We train the model on both inBC and D-inBC
with different auxiliary dataset settings. On VIMA-0.8k, we control the total number of samples
from the auxiliary dataset relative to the samples from the converted BC datasets and train all mod-
els for 2 epochs. Results in Fig. 6 show that in general, on VIMA-0.8k, the model performs better
with more auxiliary data. Tab. 3 shows that on VIMA-8k, auxiliary datasets can significantly benefit
RT-2 Style models as well.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Table 2: Naming of different
                       40
                                                                                            35.0                                                                       32.5                                                auxiliary dataset configurations.
 L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                                  L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                 L3 Success Rate (%)


                       35
                                                                                            32.5                                                                       30.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           We always randomly sample the
                                                                                            30.0                                                                       27.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A    same amount of examples from
                                                                                            27.5                                                                       25.0                                           A*
                       30
                                                                                                                                                                       22.5                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           each dataset. Det.: detection;
                                                                                            25.0

                                                                                            22.5                                                                       20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C    Loc.: localization; Act.: action
                       25                                                                                                                                                                                             D

                                                                                            20.0                                                                       17.5                                           D*   prediction; Fut.: future predic-
                            1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                                                           1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                                               1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                         tion; Spa.: spatial relationship;
                            Total dataset size relative to inBC                                            Total dataset size relative to inBC                                Total dataset size relative to inBC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Temp.: temporal relationship.
                                                                                                                                                                       37.5                                                       Loc.   Det.      Act.    Fut.      Spa.   Temp.
                       40
                                                                                                      35                                                               35.0                                                 A     ✓       ✓
 L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                 L3 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A*    ✓*      ✓*
                       35                                                                                                                                              32.5                                                 B     ✓       ✓         ✓          ✓
                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                       30.0                                           A     C     ✓       ✓         ✓          ✓      ✓
                       30                                                                                                                                                                                             A*    D     ✓       ✓         ✓          ✓      ✓       ✓
                                                                                                      25                                                               27.5                                           B     D*    ✓*      ✓*        ✓          ✓      ✓*      ✓
                                                                                                                                                                       25.0                                           C
                       25                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                       22.5                                           D*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Table 3: RT-2 Style benefits
                        1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                                                           1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                                               1× 2× 3× 4× 5× 6× 7×                             from auxiliary datasets, all mod-
                        Total dataset size relative to D-inBC                                          Total dataset size relative to D-inBC                              Total dataset size relative to D-inBC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           els are trained on VIMA-8k.
Figure 6: inBC (top) and D-inBC (bottom) with different auxiliary dataset                                                                                                                                                   Method                  L1 (%)         L2 (%)   L3 (%)

settings. Each model is trained on VIMA-0.8k for 2 epochs. In general, the                                                                                                                                                  RT-2 Style
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RT-2 Style + Aux (D)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        36.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    35.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             32.1
model performs better with more auxiliary data. See Appendix E for the un-                                                                                                                                                  inBC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            inBC + Aux (D)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        57.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        59.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    46.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    58.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             42.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             52.1
derlying numerical data.
A comprehensive ablation of other design choices is available in Appendix B.

6.2                             R EAL - WORLD ROBOT EXPERIMENTS

We further conduct zero-shot generalization, finetuning, and joint training experiments in a novel
real-world environment, in which there is a robot arm with a gripper and a fixed RGB camera
positioned above the arm to collect observations (see Fig. 7). The action space is the same as the one
in VIMA. As all the objects are placed on a plain surface and the camera is fixed, similar to VIMA,
a linear mapping between the image coordinates and the robot
action space can be estimated by calibration. For the meth-
ods that rely on object detection i.e., D-inBC, we employed
one-shot detection using OWLv2 (Minderer et al., 2024). We
benchmark each policy on three tasks:

                                  • T1: “Move the {object} into the large bowl.”
                                  • T2: “Rotate the {object} by {angle} degrees.”
                                  • T3: “Move the {object} on top of the tray.”                                                                                                                                     Figure 7: Our real-world robot setting.


                                                                                                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the {object} is chosen from a set of 10 plastic toys and the {angle} in T2 is chosen from the
following set: {30, 90, 120, 180}. In all tasks, all objects are placed randomly on the table before
running an episode and they never appear in the training set. A success in T1 and T3 is if the object
is placed more than 50% inside the bowl or on the tray. A success in T2 is if the object appears to
be clockwise rotated by the angle by visual inspection. We run 20 randomly initialized episodes for
each setting and report the average success rate. A visual reference for typical task start states and
success ends are provided in Fig. 8.


          T1                    T2                    T3           T1 w/ Distractors      T2 w/ Distractor
Figure 8: Visual reference for the initial image (top row) and successful end positions (bottom row) in three
real-world tasks. We also show some examples that have distracting objects in the scene.

Table 4: Real-world robot experiment results. All models are trained on VIMA-8k unless otherwise stated.
‘Aux’ means trained on auxiliary datasets and ‘OD’ means using an object detector (OWLv2-base-16) to de-
scribe the observation before the VLM query. In Protocol, ‘ZS’ stands for zero-shot evaluation, ‘FT’ means
the model is first trained on VIMA-8k for 2 epochs and then finetuned on Add. Data for 1 epoch. ‘JT’ means
the model is trained on the combination of VIMA-8k and Add. Data for 2 epochs.
 Protocol                  Method                   Add. Data       T1 (%)    T2 (%)    T3 (%)    Avg. (%)
                GPT-4o ver. 2024-05-13                                20        45        30        31.6
               RT-2 Style VIMA-8k                                      0         0         0         0
               RT-2 Style VIMA-660k                                    0         0         0         0
    ZS                    inBC                                        40        50        20        36.6
                LLaRA     inBC + Aux (D)                              10        30        10        16.6
                (Ours)    D-inBC + OD                                 30        40        25        31.6
                          D-inBC + Aux (C) + OD                       35        40        5         26.6
               RT-2 Style VIMA-8k                   xArm-Det           0         0         0         0
               RT-2 Style VIMA-660k                 xArm-Det           0         0         0         0
                          inBC                      xArm-Det            0        0         0          0
                          inBC                      xArm-Action        30       45         5        26.6
    FT                    inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Det          100       95        70        88.3
                LLaRA     inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Action        70       75        80         75
                (Ours)    D-inBC + OD               xArm-Det            0        0         0          0
                          D-inBC + OD               xArm-Action        45       80        55         60
                          D-inBC + Aux (C) + OD     xArm-Det           70       90        70        76.6
                          D-inBC + Aux (C) + OD     xArm-Action        90      100        85        91.6
                          inBC                      xArm-Det          80        75        70         75
                          inBC                      xArm-Action       60        75        55        63.3
                          inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Det          75        85        70        76.6
                LLaRA     inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Action       50        90        50        63.3
    JT
                (Ours)    D-inBC + OD               xArm-Det          65        95        45        68.3
                          D-inBC + OD               xArm-Action       65        55        25        48.3
                          D-inBC + Aux (C) + OD     xArm-Det          70        95        85        83.3
                          D-inBC + Aux (C) + OD     xArm-Action       45        70        20        53.3


Zero-shot generalization. For zero-shot generalization and finetuning, we use the pretrained mod-
els from Sec. 6.1 only trained on simulated VIMA data. We also make the setting very challenging
by selecting the pretrained model only using 1.2% of the VIMA training data (VIMA-8k). We
benchmark the models without any further training, along with a new baseline, GPT-4o (OpenAI,
2023). The results are presented in the upper part of Tab. 4. In this setting, inBC achieves the best
overall performance. We hypothesize that the auxiliary datasets used in inBC + Aux and D-inBC +
Aux drive the model to focus more on the VIMA domain, leading to overfitting. Meanwhile, GPT-
4o achieves commendable performance, largely attributable to its extensive dataset and substantial
parameterization.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finetuning on real-world data. In the finetuning setting, we first collect two in-domain real-
world datasets xArm-Det and xArm-Action (see Appendix C). Then the models trained on VIMA-
8k introduced in Sec. 6.1 are further tuned on the new real-world datasets for 1 epoch and the
evaluation results are presented in the middle of Tab. 4. In general, finetuning outperforms other
settings because it allows the model to focus more on real-world data distribution, rather than be
distracted by simulated VIMA data. Auxiliary data contributes to a large boost in performance
during finetuning, showing that explicitly uncovering information from the existing in-domain data
can benefit the model. It seems inBC is not trained to take advantage of such new in-domain robotics
data, performing worse than zero-shot. Similar to our findings in simulation experiments, LLaRA in
general benefits from pretrained VLM since LLaRA is trained on a dataset that has been organized
in a conversation style that is similar to what is used to pretrain the VLM. In contrast, RT-2 Style
requires a large amount of data so it suffers more from limited data in our real-world experiments.
Joint training on both simulated and real-world data. In the joint training setting, we combine
both VIMA-8k with xArm-Det or xArm-Action and tune a VLM jointly on both simulated and real-
world datasets. The full results are presented at the lower part of Tab. 4. In the joint training setting,
xArm-Det is equally or more beneficial than xArm-Action, highlighting the importance of detection
and localization information from the real-world setting. Auxiliary data proves most beneficial when
jointly trained with xArm-Det, achieving the highest performance across all joint training settings.
This observation suggests that careful exploration of auxiliary dataset usage is crucial to maximize
their benefits when joint training is performed.
More generalization results. We Table 5: More generalization results of D-inBC + Aux (C). The
further validate the generalization model is tested on three unseen tasks using two protocols and it
ability of LLaRA on tasks with dis- shows strong performance with minimal finetuning on in-domain
tractors. There are three test set- vision data.
tings and none of them is included                            Protocol ZS FT on xArm-Action
in the simulated training set or the              T1 w/ distractor (%) 10              75
dataset for finetuning: T1 w/ distrac-   T1 w/ complex rephrasing (%)     0            40
tor: where we randomly put another                             T4 (%)     0            20
random toy on the table as a distrac-
tor; T1 w/ complex rephrasing: where we rephrase the task description in 10 different unseen ways
using GPT-4; Unseen task T4: the task is “Weight the object using the scale then place it back on
the table.” which is never included in VIMA or xArm-Action. The results are presented in Tab. 5.
Our model demonstrates robust performance on generalized tasks, achieving a 75% success rate in
T1 with distractors. This suggests that our VLM retains its generalization ability even after being
trained on our instruction dataset. With a small amount of in-domain vision data, it can achieve
strong performance on previously unseen tasks.
Summary. Our findings highlight the strong generalization ability of LLaRA. When pretrained on
simulated VIMA data, LLaRA requires significantly less effort and data to adapt to real-world tasks.
By leveraging image coordinates, LLaRA establishes a clear, straightforward mapping between vi-
sual inputs and robot actions. In contrast, RT-2 Style struggles under limited data conditions, largely
because of the extensive data needed to learn the semantics of newly introduced tokens.
We discuss all implementation details and qualitative results in Appendix C.


7    C ONCLUSION

We present LLaRA, a framework that turns a pretrained vision language model (VLM) into a robot
policy using curated instruction tuning datasets. Firstly, we create a conversation-style instruction-
tuning data using existing behavior cloning data and align the robot action to image pixel coor-
dinates. Instruction tuning the VLM on such data confirms the effectiveness of our framework,
particularly when the training data is limited. Then we construct auxiliary datasets using the same
robot trajectory data through self-supervision, without any additional action labels. Experiments
across several synthetic environments and robot manipulation tasks in the real world validate the
effectiveness of our proposed LLaRA framework. We believe the new observations on the VLM to
Vision-Language-Action Model (VLA) representation transfer we share with this paper are valuable
not only to the robot learning community but also to the computer vision community.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)
grant funded by the Korean government foundation [24ZB1200, Research of Human-centered au-
tonomous intelligence system original technology]. The authors would like to thank Bohong Chen
for verifying our code implementation and reproducing experiment results, as well as Xiaodong Liu
and Hanyi Yu for their valuable input.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The code, datasets, and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/LostXine/LLaRA.

R EFERENCES
Meta AI. Llama 3, 2024. URL https://llama.meta.com/llama3/. Accessed: 2024-06-
 24.
Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Jo-
  han Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Yakoub Bazi, Laila Bashmal, Mohamad Mahmoud Al Rahhal, Riccardo Ricci, and Farid Melgani.
  Rs-llava: A large vision-language model for joint captioning and question answering in remote
  sensing imagery. Remote Sensing, 16(9):1477, 2024.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023a.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
  Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deek-
  sha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl
  Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael S. Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi,
  Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent
  Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and
  Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. Robotics science
  and systems (RSS), 2023b.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), pp. 287–318. PMLR,
  2023c.
Mu Cai, Haotian Liu, Dennis Park, Siva Karthik Mustikovela, Gregory P. Meyer, Yuning Chai, and
 Yong Jae Lee. Vip-llava: Making large multimodal models understand arbitrary visual prompts. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
 2024.
Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brain Ichter, Dorsa Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia.
  Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 14455–
  14465, 2024.
Keqin Chen, Zhao Zhang, Weili Zeng, Richong Zhang, Feng Zhu, and Rui Zhao. Shikra: Unleashing
  multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Antonia Creswell and Murray Shanahan. Faithful reasoning using large language mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2208.14271, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:251929296.
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
  context prediction. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 1422–1430, 2015.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2961–2969, 2017.
Yining Hong, Haoyu Zhen, Peihao Chen, Shuhong Zheng, Yilun Du, Zhenfang Chen, and Chuang
  Gan. 3d-llm: Injecting the 3d world into large language models. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Jiaxing Huang, Jingyi Zhang, Kai Jiang, Han Qiu, and Shijian Lu. Visual instruction tuning towards
   general-purpose multimodal model: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16602, 2023a.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023b.
Nils Ingelhag, Jesper Munkeby, van Jonne Haastregt, Anastasia Varava, Michael C. Welle, and Dan-
  ica Kragic. A robotic skill learning system built upon diffusion policies and foundation models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16730, 2024.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-
  Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with mul-
  timodal prompts. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2023.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Kartik Kuckreja, Muhammad S. Danish, Muzammal Naseer, Abhijit Das, Salman Khan, and Fa-
  had S. Khan. Geochat: Grounded large vision-language model for remote sensing. Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised represen-
 tations for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
 Learning (ICML), pp. 5639–5650. PMLR, 2020.
Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Hoifung Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assis-
  tant for biomedicine in one day. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00890, 2023.
Feng Li, Renrui Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Wei Li, Zejun Ma,
  and Chunyuan Li.      Llava-next: Tackling multi-image, video, and 3d in large
  multimodal models, June 2024a.    URL https://llava-vl.github.io/blog/
  2024-06-16-llava-next-interleave/.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiang Li, Jinghuan Shang, Srijan Das, and Michael S. Ryoo. Does self-supervised learning really
  improve reinforcement learning from pixels? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 30865–30881, 2022.
Xiang Li, Varun Belagali, Jinghuan Shang, and Michael S. Ryoo. Crossway diffusion: Improving
  diffusion-based visuomotor policy via self-supervised learning. In IEEE International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 16841–16849. IEEE, 2024b.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence,
  and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Fangchen Liu, Kuan Fang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Moka: Open-vocabulary robotic
  manipulation through mark-based visual prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03174, 2024a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 26296–26306, 2024b.
Xiao Liu, Da Yin, Chen Zhang, Yansong Feng, and Dongyan Zhao. The magic of if: Investigating
  causal reasoning abilities in large language models of code. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics, 2023b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:258968140.
Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2024.
Soroush Nasiriany, Fei Xia, Wenhao Yu, Ted Xiao, Jacky Liang, Ishita Dasgupta, Annie Xie, Danny
  Driess, Ayzaan Wahid, Zhuo Xu, Quan Vuong, Tingnan Zhang, Edward Tsang-Wei Lee, Kuang-
  Huei Lee Lee, Peng Xu, Sean Kirmani, Yuke Zhu, Andy Zeng, Karol Hausman, Nicolas Heess,
  Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Brian Ichter. Pivot: Iterative visual prompting elicits actionable
  knowledge for vlms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07872, 2024.
Dantong Niu, Yuvan Sharma, Giscard Biamby, Jerome Quenum, Yutong Bai, Baifeng Shi, Trevor
  Darrell, and Roei Herzig. Llarva: Vision-action instruction tuning enhances robot learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.11815, 2024.
Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
  Dasari, Joey Hejna, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Tobias Kreiman, You Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang
  Chen, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
  Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Robotics science and systems (RSS), Delft,
  Netherlands, 2024.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander
  Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
  learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.
Zhiliang Peng, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, and Furu
  Wei. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14824, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lerrel Pinto and Abhinav Gupta. Supersizing self-supervision: Learning to grasp from 50k tries
  and 700 robot hours. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
  3406–3413. IEEE, 2016.
Shengyi Qian, Weifeng Chen, Min Bai, Xiong Zhou, Zhuowen Tu, and Erran Li Li. Affordancellm:
  Grounding affordance from vision language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Kanchana Ranasinghe, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Hameed Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and
  Michael S. Ryoo. Self-supervised video transformer. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2864–2874, 2022.
Kanchana Ranasinghe, Xiang Li, Kumara Kahatapitiya, and Michael S. Ryoo. Understanding long
  videos in one multimodal language model pass. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16998, 2024a.
Kanchana Ranasinghe, Satya Narayan Shukla, Omid Poursaeed, Michael S. Ryoo, and Tsung-Yu
  Lin. Learning to localize objects improves spatial reasoning in visual-llms. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024b.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom
  Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell,
  Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Freitas de Nando. A generalist agent. In Trans. on Machine
  Learning Research, 2022.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bach-
 man. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with momentum predictive representations. In Pro-
 ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, Sergey
  Levine, and Google Brain. Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. In
  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1134–1141. IEEE, 2018.
Jinghuan Shang, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Xiang Li, and Michael S. Ryoo. Starformer: Transformer
   with state-action-reward representations for visual reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
   European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 462–479. Springer, 2022a.
Jinghuan Shang, Xiang Li, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Yu-Cheol Lee, and Michael S. Ryoo. Starformer:
   Transformer with state-action-reward representations for robot learning. IEEE Transactions on
   Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–16, 2022b.
Aleksandar Shtedritski, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. What does clip know about a red
  circle: Visual prompt engineering for vlms. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
   pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Omkar Thawkar, Abdelrahman Shaker, Sahal Shaji Mullappilly, Hisham Cholakkal, Rao Muham-
 mad Anwer, Salman Khan, Jorma Laaksonen, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Xraygpt: Chest radio-
 graphs summarization using medical vision-language models. arXiv: 2306.07971, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Sai H Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. IEEE Access, 2024.
Jacob Walker, Ali Razavi, and Aäron van den Oord. Predicting video with vqvae. ArXiv,
  abs/2103.01950, 2021.     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  232092596.
Jianren Wang, Sudeep Dasari, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Shubham Tulsiani, and Abhinav Gupta. Ma-
   nipulate by seeing: Creating manipulation controllers from pre-trained representations. In Pro-
   ceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 3859–3868, 2023.
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu,
  Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the
  world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu,
  Hang Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot
  manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13139, 2023a.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, Paul Pu Liang, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom M Mitchell. Read and reap
  the rewards: Learning to play atari with the help of instruction manuals. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023b.
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improv-
  ing sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning from images. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 10674–10681, 2021.
Takuma Yoneda, Jiading Fang, Peng Li, Huanyu Zhang, Tianchong Jiang, Shengjie Lin, Ben Picker,
  David Yunis, Hongyuan Mei, and Matthew R Walter. Statler: State-maintaining language models
  for embodied reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17840, 2023.
Haoxuan You, Haotian Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xianzhi Du, Bowen Zhang, Zirui Wang, Liangliang Cao,
  Shih-Fu Chang, and Yinfei Yang. Ferret: Refer and ground anything anywhere at any gran-
  ularity. ArXiv, abs/2310.07704, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:263834718.
Jifan Yu, Xiaozhi Wang, Shangqing Tu, Shulin Cao, Daniel Zhang-Li, Xin Lv, Hao Peng, Zijun
   Yao, Xiaohan Zhang, Hanming Li, et al. Kola: Carefully benchmarking world knowledge of
   large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09296, 2023.
Wentao Yuan, Jiafei Duan, Valts Blukis, Wilbert Pumacay, Ranjay Krishna, Adithyavairavan Murali,
 Arsalan Mousavian, and Dieter Fox. Robopoint: A vision-language model for spatial affordance
 prediction for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10721, 2024.
Sukmin Yun, Jaehyung Kim, Dongyoon Han, Hwanjun Song, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin. Time
  is matter: Temporal self-supervision for video transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09067,
  2022.
Yuhang Zang, Wei Li, Jun Han, Kaiyang Zhou, and Chen Change Loy. Contextual object detection
  with multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18279, 2023.
Andy Zeng, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek Puro-
  hit, Michael S. Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Socratic models:
  Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598,
  2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 11975–11986, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shilong Zhang, Peize Sun, Shoufa Chen, Min Xiao, Wenqi Shao, Wenwei Zhang, Kai Chen, and
  Ping Luo. Gpt4roi: Instruction tuning large language model on region-of-interest. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03601, 2023.

Yang Zhao, Zhijie Lin, Daquan Zhou, Zilong Huang, Jiashi Feng, and Bingyi Kang. Bubogpt:
  Enabling visual grounding in multi-modal llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08581, 2023.

Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36,
  2024.

Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and
  Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.09631, 2024.

Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daumé III, Andrey Kolobov,
  Furong Huang, and Jianwei Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal
  awareness for generalist robotic policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10345, 2024.


A PPENDIX

The appendix covers all the implementation details, expanded experiment results in both simulation
and real-world, further discussions, raw results, and all the prompt templates we used in the paper.


A     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

In this section, we provide more implementation details regarding dataset preparation, model train-
ing, inference, and RT-2 style baselines.

A.1     DATASET PREPARATION

In this subsection, we give more details and examples of the datasets used in this paper.

A.1.1    B UILD inBC DATASET FROM EXPERT TRAJECTORIES
We formulate the dataset in a single-image single-turn conversation setting to emulate a policy
where the user queries the Vision Language Model (VLM) with the current observation, and the
VLM generates a response that can be directly translated into a concrete action, as introduced in
Sec. 4. The image and text from the current observation can be directly processed by the VLM
using a fixed template, while the conversion of numerical actions into text is facilitated through the
use of normalized 2D image coordinates. Tab. 8 contains an example using a VIMA-Bench sample.
Given the current limitations of LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a), to optimize performance, we propose
two techniques:

        • Action history in query. Each query to the VLM includes a history of actions previously
          executed in the episode. This approach enhances the VLM’s understanding of task context
          within the constraints of a single-turn conversation. (See the orange text in Tab. 8)
        • Plan ‘twice’ act once - multi-step planning. In action generation, the dataset is prepared
          such that the VLM is designed to generate all successive actions in the response, literally
          performing multi-step action planning. However, only the first action is executed. For the
          next state, we query the VLM again with a new observation and a question and only take
          the first action generated by the VLM.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These designs proved beneficial in our ablation study, as detailed in Tab. 14.
The rest of this section details the process on VIMA-Bench (Jiang et al., 2023). VIMA-Bench
introduces 17 simulated robot manipulation tasks using multimodal prompts that combine text and
reference images. The full accompanying dataset includes 660k expert trajectories, covering 13 of
the 17 tasks. All tasks occur in an environment where a robot arm, equipped with either a spatula or a
suction cup, is positioned alongside a flat table. Multiple objects with diverse textures are randomly
initialized on the table according to the specific task setting.
Each episode in the dataset features a multimodal task description that clarifies the episode’s goal,
incorporating images referred to as ‘reference images’. Two third-person view cameras capture
the scene, providing a top-down view and a front view looking down at the table. The dataset
includes RGB, instance segmentation masks and meta information (e.g., textures and shapes) of the
objects in images for the reference images and the observations captured by these cameras. We first
extract the bounding boxes of each object from the instance-level segmentation mask, as an object
detection oracle. Additionally, the dataset contains the expert action sequence required to complete
the episode. The action space consists of two poses: for the robot equipped with a spatula, these
poses indicate the start and end points of a push; for the robot with a suction cup, they specify where
the robot picks up and places an object.
Due to the constraints of LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a) and our findings presented in Tab. 15, in each
conversation, only the current image from the front view camera is retained as the visual input to the
VLM. Other reference images are substituted with short captions that describe the texture (color)
and shape of the referred object, which are details extracted from the meta information (See inBC in
Tab. 8). However, in principle, there is nothing stopping us from extending the current framework
to a multi-image setting, taking advantage of a VLM that can handle multiple interleaving images in
a conversation.


A.1.2    B UILD D-inBC FROM inBC

While inBC in Tab. 8 has shown its great power in many aspects when the reference image contains
a scene that has multiple objects instead of one, the inBC will fail to deliver any useful information
(e.g., Tab. 9). To address this issue, we utilize an object detector to parse an image of a scene into
a list of objects with its corresponding bounding box. The new dataset is named D-inBC because a
reference image will be ‘described’ as a list of objects now. Tab. 9 shows an example where D-inBC
delivers more critical information than inBC.


A.1.3   D-inBC (L): DESCRIBING THE REFERENCE IMAGES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE

Following the suggestion from the reviewer, we trained a variant of D-inBC, which completely re-
moves all the coordinate numbers in the prompt even from the reference images. Instead, we use a
pretrained VLM, Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct (Wang et al., 2024), to generate natural language descrip-
tions of all reference images, omitting any use of image coordinates. These textual descriptions
replaced the original lists of image coordinates in the input prompt for the D-inBC setting, resulting
in a variant we refer to as D-inBC (L), where (L) stands for language. Then we train on VIMA-8k
and the conversations describing the reference image. During inference, LLaRA first generates tex-
tual descriptions of all reference images using its own capabilities and subsequently leverages the
generated text to perform the task.
The following prompt is used to generate image description: “Write short descriptions
of each object in the image, specifying their color, texture,
shape, and relative positioning.”
Tab. 10 presents an example of generated image description of the {frame_0} in Tab. 9. We present
the performance of D-inBC (L) at Tab. 6 (VIMA) and Tab. 7 (Real-world).
In general, D-inBC (L) achieves comparable but slightly worse performance than D-inBC, which
uses structured text to describe the reference images.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Table 6: D-inBC (L) performance when trained on VIMA-8k

                       Method                     L1 (%)     L2 (%)      L3 (%)
                       inBC + Aux (D)               59.2       58.8        52.1
                       D-inBC + Aux (D)             62.3       57.7        52.1
                       D-inBC (L) + Aux (D)         61.9       54.2        55.4

                           Table 7: D-inBC (L) real-world experiment results.

        Method                    Add. Data         T1 (%)     T2 (%)      T3 (%)    Avg. (%)
        inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Det             100        95            70     88.3
        inBC + Aux (D)            xArm-Action          70         75            80      75
        D-inBC (L) + Aux (D)      xArm-Det             65         90            70      75
        D-inBC (L) + Aux (D)      xArm-Action          75         90            75      80


A.1.4    AUXILIARY DATASETS
The auxiliary datasets are created using the template outlined in Fig. 4. During dataset generation,
for each sample, one template is randomly selected from a pool of 15 templates. These templates
were initially rephrased from a single sentence using GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). The full list of the
pools are listed in Tab. 30, Tab. 31, Tab. 29, Tab. 32, Tab. 33, Tab. 34, Tab. 35, Tab. 36, Tab. 37,
Tab. 38, and Tab. 39. The qualitative examples are available in Tab. 11 and Tab. 12.

A.2     T RAINING

We initiate training using a pretrained LLaVA-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2024b) model and finetune all
parameters, including the language model and the projection layer, with the exception of the vision
encoder. The training settings closely align with those of the original LLaVA stage 2. Specifically,
we utilize a single-cycle cosine annealing scheduling with 0.03 warm-up ratio and a maximum
learning rate of 2 × 10−5 . However, for VIMA-0.8k and VIMA-8k, we employ a batch size of 32,
whereas for VIMA-80k, we restore the batch size to 128.

A.3     I NFERENCE

During inference, for the models trained on inBC, a new conversation is initiated at each step. The
model is queried with a single current image observation from the front-view camera and an in-
struction that has been prepared in the same format as the dataset. Additionally, a prompt randomly
selected from Tab. 28 is added to the instruction during inference only, although it appears to have
limited impact in retrospect (see Appendix B.7).
Model sampling is disabled during training, ensuring that the model consistently outputs the token
with the highest probability. This approach is designed to maximize the consistency and reliability
of the model’s responses.
For the models trained on D-inBC, before we query the VLM, we would first run object detection on
all reference images and take the detection results to fill the instruction template of D-inBC. Besides
this, the settings are identical to the models introduced ahead.
In this paper, we explore three approaches to object detection. The first method involves using a
single query from Tab. 30 and Tab. 31 and employing the same VLM as the policy to perform object
detection.
The second approach utilizes a Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) model, which features a ResNet50 (He
et al., 2016) backbone pretrained on the COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) and subsequently finetuned
using the VIMA dataset. A suffix ‘OD’ will be added to the model name if the model uses this
method.
Finally, we test the versions that use the groundtruth detection results. A suffix ‘Oracle’ will be
added to the model name if the model uses this information.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Comparison between our converted instruction tuning datasets inBC and D-inBC for a VIMA-Bench
sample. The task description of the episode is in green. The description of an object in the reference image
(oracle detection results) is in cerulean. The action is in orange and the action history is in magenta.

                 {dragged_obj}



                    {base_obj}


                          Task   First put {dragged_obj} into {base_obj} then put the object that was pre-
                                 viously at its south into the same {base_obj}.
                         Input



                                 (current front camera view.)
                                 <task>First put <p>rainbow letter T</p> into <p>wooden bowl</p> then
                                 put the object that was previously at its south into the same <p>wooden
                                 bowl</p>.</task>
                                 Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
        inBC                     y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                 first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
                                 up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
                                 image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                 many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                 359.
                                 You have finished: Step 1: Pick up the object at <b>(0.480, 0.367)</b>,
                                 rotate <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.727, 0.547)</b>.

                        Output   Step 2: Pick up the <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.500, 0.617)</b>,
                                 rotate <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.746, 0.617)</b>.
                         Input



                                 (current front camera view.)
                                 <task>First put <p>rainbow letter T</p> at <b>(0.500, 0.594), {0.102,
                                 0.188}</b> into <p>wooden bowl</p> at <b>(0.457, 0.531), {0.195,
                                 0.328}</b> then put the object that was previously at its south into the same
                                 <p>wooden bowl</p> at <b>(0.457, 0.531), {0.195, 0.328}</b></task>
       D-inBC                    Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
                                 y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                 first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
                                 up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
                                 image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                 many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                 359.
                                 You have finished: Step 1: Pick up the object at <b>(0.480, 0.367)</b>,
                                 rotate <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.727, 0.547)</b>.

                        Output   [Same as inBC ]


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Another comparison between two converted instruction tuning datasets. In this example, the reference
images in the task description depict reference images with multiple objects. The task description of the episode
is in green. The description of an object in the reference image (oracle detection results) is in cerulean and the
action is in orange.

                      {frame_0}



                      {frame_1}

       Original BC
                      {frame_2}


                            Task   Stack objects in this order {frame_0} {frame_1} {frame_2}
                           Input



                                   (current front camera view.)
                                   <task>Stack objects in this order frame_0 frame_1 frame_2.</task>
                                   Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
                                   y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                   first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
           inBC                    up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
                                   image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                   many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                   359.

                         Output    Step 1: Pick up the <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.465,
                                   0.617)</b>, rotate <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.711,
                                   0.617)</b>.
                                   Step 2: Pick up the <p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.281, 0.633)</b>, rotate
                                   <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.770, 0.633)</b>.
                           Input



                                   (current front camera view.)
                                   <task>Stack objects in this order
                                   <scene><p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                   <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.500, 0.570), {0.094,
                                   0.156}</b>. <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.570), {0.094,
                                   0.156}</b>.</scene>

                                   <scene><p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                   <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.578), {0.094, 0.133}</b>.
                                   <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.516), {0.094,
                                   0.148}</b>.</scene>
         D-inBC
                                   <scene><p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.602), {0.094,
                                   0.086}</b>.       <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.531),
                                   {0.094, 0.125}</b>. <p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.469), {0.094,
                                   0.156}</b>.</scene>.</task>
                                   Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
                                   y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                   first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
                                   up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
                                   image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                   many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                   359.

                         Output    [Same as inBC ]


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 10: Image description used in D-inBC (L), an example of {frame_0} in Tab. 9.

               The image displays three distinct objects, each with unique colors, shapes, textures, and
               spatial relationships.
               1. Object on the Left:
               - Color: Red
               - Texture: Matte
               - Shape: Triangular
               - Spatial Relationship: Positioned to the far left of the image.
               2. Object in the Middle:
               - Color: Green and white
               - Texture: Speckled
               - Shape: Arrowhead
               - Spatial Relationship: Situated to the right of the first object.
               3. Object on the Right:
               - Color: Multicolored (red, blue, green, and yellow)
               - Texture: Glossy
               - Shape: Trapezoidal
               - Spatial Relationship: Located to the far right of the image.
               These objects are arranged in a linear sequence, with each subsequent object placed to
               the right of the previous one, creating a horizontal alignment. The colors and textures
               vary, adding visual interest to the composition.


A.4   RT-2-S TYLE BASELINES

For the RT-2-Style baseline, we follow the original RT-2’s design (Brohan et al., 2023a) and adapt
special tokens to present the numerical action in VIMA action space. The original action space
of VIMA contains two points for pick and place. Each point contains a 2D coordinate in robot
coordinates for position and a 3D orientation of the gripper. Since we only have yaw rotation in the
dataset, we simplify two 3D orientations into one yaw angle. So the action space is now 5 Degrees
of Freedom (DoF): 4 numerical values present the 2D pick and place locations in robot coordinates,
and 1 value presents yaw rotation. In our implementation, the procedure begins by normalizing
each element of the action to a range from 0 to 1. We then quantize these values into 256 bins
and map the resulting discrete values to tokens indexed from 31000 to 31255 in the tokenizer. The
dataset employed is similar to inBC, but it omits the prompt for the output format, and the action is
represented by the mapped special tokens. Additionally, we have prepared a version similar to D-
inBC, named D-RT-2 Style, which takes advantage of object detection on reference images. D-RT-2
Style (I) is similar to D-RT-2 Style. However, four special tokens present pick and place positions in
two normalized 2D image coordinates for each action, and one token presents the rotation, instead
of an action in VIMABench action space. It is the same action presentation generated by our LLaRA
but our method responds in natural language while D-RT-2 Style (I) responds in special tokens.


B     E XPANDED SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we include more experiment results. All the numerical results reported in this
paper, especially in the figures, are collected in Tab. 21 and Tab. 22 (VIMA-0.8k), Tab. 23 and
Tab. 24 (VIMA-8k), Tab. 25 and Tab. 26 (VIMA-80k), and Tab. 27 (full VIMA dataset).


B.1   C LARIFICATION ON L4 RESULTS

We adopted the testing protocol from VIMA-Bench (Jiang et al., 2023), conducting evaluations
across four levels of difficulty, from L1 to L4. However, during our analysis, we discovered an
inconsistency in the training set: the rotation information for the robot end effector was recorded as
zero for all sweeping tasks where the end effector is a spatula. Given the importance of the spatula
orientation in a sweeping task and the fact that sweeping tasks constitute 25% of the evaluations at
the L4 difficulty level, we concluded that our ability to accurately evaluate our method at L4 was
compromised. Considering that the original VIMA model released by the authors appears to include
this rotation information, we have chosen not to report the results for L4 in our study.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Qualitative examples of the auxiliary datasets. In this table, the examples of all the datasets take the
same input image as shown in the first row. The description of an object or a scene (oracle detection results) is
in blue. The action is in orange.



           Image Input
                                       (current front camera view.)
                              Input    Could you tell me the location of <p>red letter V</p> in the image? Use
                                       the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center of the
                                       bounding box and w and h are the width and height. Coordinates start at
       Object Localization
                                       the top left corner and should be normalized between 0 and 1.

                             Output    <p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                              Input    Enumerate and describe every object found in the image. For each object,
                                       utilize the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x, y are the bounding box
                                       center coordinates and w, h are the dimensions (width and height) of the
                                       bounding box. The coordinates begin at the top left corner and are normal-
                                       ized between 0 and 1.
        Object Detection
                             Output    <scene>
                                       <p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                       <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.500, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                       <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.570), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                       <p>green paisley block</p> at <b>(0.668, 0.414), {0.094, 0.227}</b>.
                                       </scene>
                              Input    Can you explain what needs to be done to adjust the scene shown in the im-
                                       age to resemble the second scene? The second scene <scene><p>red letter
                                       V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.594), 0.094, 0.156</b>. <p>green paisley letter
                                       V</p> at <b>(0.742, 0.547), 0.098, 0.156</b>. <p>rainbow letter V</p>
                                       at <b>(0.746, 0.609), 0.094, 0.125</b>. <p>green paisley block</p> at
                                       <b>(0.668, 0.414), 0.094, 0.227</b>.</scene> consists of object bounding
                                       boxes provided in the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>. Here, x and y represent
                                       the center coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordi-
                                       nates should start from the top left corner and be normalized to a scale of
        Action Prediction              0 to 1. Every action you take must include two locations in the format of
                                       <b>(x, y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>.
                                       The first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to
                                       pick up the object, and the second location is where you place the object.
                                       The image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                       many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                       359.

                             Output    Pick up the <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.465, 0.617)</b>, rotate
                                       <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.711, 0.617)</b>.
                              Input    An image depicts a scene containing multiple objects. Now you pick up the
                                       <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.465, 0.617)</b>, rotate <r>[0]</r>
                                       degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.711, 0.617)</b>, what will the scene look
                                       like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes should
                                       be formatted as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center
                                       coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates start
                                       from the top left corner and are normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.
        Future Prediction
                             Output    <scene>
                                       <p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.594), {0.094, 0.156}</b>.
                                       <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.742, 0.547), {0.098, 0.156}</b>.
                                       <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.609), {0.094, 0.125}</b>.
                                       <p>green paisley block</p> at <b>(0.668, 0.414), {0.094, 0.227}</b>.
                                       </scene>


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: (Continued) Qualitative examples of the auxiliary datasets. In this table, the examples of all the
datasets take the same input image as shown in the first row. The description of an object or a scene (oracle
detection results) is in blue. The examplar is in purple.



           Image Input
                                        (current front camera view.)
                                Input   Can you explain the relative spatial positions of <p>red letter V</p> com-
                                        pared to <p>green paisley letter V</p> in this image? Use terms such as
                                        left, right, above, below, etc. Also, determine the 2D center distance and
                                        the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should match
                                        this format: <p>green paisley block</p> is left and top from <p>rainbow
                                        letter V</p> with 2d center distance (x,y) of <d>(-0.078, -0.156)</d> and
        Spatial Relationship
                                        euclidean center distance of <e>0.175</e>. The coordinates are image co-
                                        ordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.

                               Output   <p>red letter V</p> is left and bottom from <p>green paisley letter V</p>
                                        with 2d center distance (x,y) of <d>(-0.246, 0.000)</d> and euclidean cen-
                                        ter distance of <e>0.246</e>.
                                Input   At the initial timestamp, the image shows a scene, and the second image
                                        described as <scene><p>red letter V</p> at <b>(0.254, 0.594), {0.094,
                                        0.156}</b>. <p>green paisley letter V</p> at <b>(0.742, 0.547), {0.098,
                                        0.156}</b>. <p>rainbow letter V</p> at <b>(0.746, 0.609), {0.094,
                                        0.125}</b>. <p>green paisley block</p> at <b>(0.668, 0.414), {0.094,
                                        0.227}</b>.</scene> depicts the next timestamp. Can you describe the
                                        change in the relative position of <p>red letter V</p> compared to
                                        <p>green paisley letter V</p> between these two timestamps? Use relative
                                        distance terms such as getting closer or moving further away, etc. Also,
                                        find the change in the 2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance
       Temporal Relationship            between the two images. Your output must follow this format: <p>rainbow
                                        letter V</p> moves far away from <p>green paisley block</p>. 2d cen-
                                        ter distance (x,y) of <p>green paisley block</p> from <p>rainbow letter
                                        V</p> changes by <d>(0.000, -0.039)</d> and Euclidean center distance
                                        between them <e>0.036</e>. The coordinates are image coordinates nor-
                                        malized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.

                               Output   <p>green paisley letter V</p> moves far away from <p>red letter V</p>.
                                        2d center distance (x,y) of <p>red letter V</p> from <p>green paisley letter
                                        V</p> changes by <d>(-0.242, 0.047)</d> and Euclidean center distance
                                        between them <e>0.244</e>.


B.2    E XTENDED COMPARISON TO VIMA AND OTHER BASELINES

We would first clarify the difference between our method and VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023) in terms
of the inputs. VIMA takes both front and top view images from the environment while ours only
takes the front view. We test the most capable model released by VIMA, which is trained on 660k
expert trajectories, as well as other RT-2-Style baselines trained on the same whole 660k dataset.
The results are listed in Tab. 13. Compared to VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023) and other baselines, our
best model not only achieves better performance but also requires less input and is trained on only
12% of the data used in VIMA.



B.3    W ILL BASELINES BENEFIT FROM LONGER TRAINING ?

The introduction of auxiliary datasets in the training set naturally increases the number of optimiza-
tion steps per training epoch. In this subsection, we confirm that the performance improvement of
LLaRA with auxiliary datasets is due to the data itself, rather than simply more optimization steps.
To validate this, we trained several baselines without auxiliary data for longer epochs on three VIMA
subsets. As shown in Fig. 9, Fig. 10, and Fig. 11, extending the training epochs does not enhance
performance, indicating that the auxiliary data provides additional information that boosts model
performance.


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Comparison to VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023) and other baselines. Our best model not only achieves
better performance but also requires less input and is trained on only 12% of the data used in VIMA.

              Method                                                                Config                                                             Data          L1 (%)            L2 (%)       L3 (%)
              VIMA (Jiang et al., 2023)                                             VIMA-200M + Oracle                                                100%              80.7            81.9           77.9
                                                                                                                                                       12%              56.9            53.1           46.2
              RT-2 Style
                                                                                                                                                      100%              65.0            59.6           42.5
                                                                                    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle                                              12%              74.2            70.4           69.2
              D-RT-2 Style
                                                                                    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle                                             100%              86.2            88.1           75.8
                                                                                    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle                                          12%              58.1            54.2           55.4
              D-RT-2 Style (I)
                                                                                    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle                                         100%              70.0            70.0           59.2
                                                                                    D-inBC + Oracle                                                    12%              87.3            85.4           82.1
              LLaRA (Ours)                                                          D-inBC + Aux (B) + Oracle                                          12%              90.0            88.1           79.2
                                                                                    D-inBC + Aux (D) + Oracle                                          12%              83.8            88.1           78.8



                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                   25                                                           25
                      30
L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                             L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                          L3 Success Rate (%)
                                                                                   20                                                           20
                      20                                                           15                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                         RT-2-Style
                                                                                   10                                                           10                                       D-RT-2-Style + Oracle
                      10                                                                                                                                                                 D-RT-2-Style(I) + Oracle
                                                                                   5                                                            5                                        LLaRA (inBC)
                      0                                                            0                                                            0                                        LLaRA (D-inBC + Oracle)
                             2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8
                           Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations
                                                 Figure 9: Model performances on VIMA-0.8k for longer epochs.


                      70                                                           60                                                           60
                      60                                                           50
L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                             L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                          L3 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                50
                      50
                                                                                   40                                                           40
                      40
                                                                                   30                                                           30                                       RT-2-Style
                      30
                      20                                                           20                                                           20                                       D-RT-2-Style + Oracle
                                                                                                                                                                                         D-RT-2-Style(I) + Oracle
                      10                                                           10                                                           10                                       LLaRA (inBC)
                       0                                                            0                                                            0                                       LLaRA (D-inBC + Oracle)
                             2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8
                           Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations
                                                 Figure 10: Model performances on VIMA-8k for longer epochs.


                                                                                                                                                80
                      80                                                           80
L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                             L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                          L3 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                70
                      70                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                   60                                                                                                    RT-2-Style
                      60                                                                                                                        50                                       D-RT-2-Style + Oracle
                                                                                                                                                                                         D-RT-2-Style(I) + Oracle
                                                                                   50                                                                                                    LLaRA (inBC)
                      50                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                                                         LLaRA (D-inBC + Oracle)
                             2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8                                2        4         6        8
                           Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations                                Relative number of iterations
                                                Figure 11: Model performances on VIMA-80k for longer epochs.


B.4                        A BLATION ON ACTION HISTORY AND MULTI - STEP PLANNING

As described in Appendix A.1.1, we enable action history and multi-step planning when generating
inBC and D-inBC. Tab. 14 shows that these designs are helpful.


                                                                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Ablation on action history and multi-step planning. His. stands for enabling action history and Plan
means enabling multi-step planning. All models are trained on VIMA-8k for 2 epochs.

                                                    Method                                               His.         Plan            L1 (%)                                 L2 (%)              L3 (%)
                                                    inBC                                                   ✓             ✓                 57.3                                 46.2                  42.9
                                                    inBC                                                   ✓             ✗                 43.5                                 36.9                  36.7
                                                    inBC                                                   ✗             ✓                 45.8                                 39.6                  35.8
                                                    D-inBC + OD                                            ✓             ✓                 63.5                                 51.5                  50.0
                                                    D-inBC + OD                                            ✓             ✗                 58.5                                 41.5                  47.1
                                                    D-inBC + OD                                            ✗             ✓                 53.5                                 39.2                  37.5



B.5                          A BLATION ON MULTIPLE IMAGE INPUTS

This ablation studies multiple image inputs within a single conversation. Each image is processed
by the vision encoder and the projection layer to generate a series of tokens. These image tokens
are then integrated into the textual conversation at the points where the corresponding images are
referenced.
However, because LLaVA is trained with one image per conversation instead of an interleaving style.
The performance drops significantly when applying multiple image inputs, listed in Tab. 15.

                        Table 15: Ablation on multiple image inputs (Mul.). All models are trained on VIMA-8k for 2 epochs.

                                                       Method                                                      Mul.            L1 (%)                                    L2 (%)           L3 (%)
                                                       inBC                                                           ✗               57.3                                    46.2                42.9
                                                       inBC                                                           ✓               44.6                                    27.7                34.2
                                                       D-inBC + OD                                                    ✗               63.5                                    51.5                50.0
                                                       D-inBC + OD                                                    ✓               27.7                                    24.6                34.2
                                                       D-inBC + Aux (C)                                               ✗               64.6                                    58.8                49.6
                                                       D-inBC + Aux (C)                                               ✓               31.2                                    28.5                27.1



B.6                          A BLATION ON OBJECT DETECTOR

This ablation studies three types of object detectors in this paper: the VLM model itself, an external
object detector separately trained on the training set (the methods with a suffix OD), and an oracle
from the groundtruth dataset (Oracle). Fig. 12 shows that a reliable object detector is highly benefi-
cial, enhancing the accuracy of image-based inputs and consequently improving model performance.


                                                                                                                                                                 80
                       80                                                                   80
 L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                                      L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                           L3 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                 60
                       60                                                                   60

                                                                                                                                                                 40
                       40                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                D-RT-2-Style + OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                D-RT-2-Style + Oracle
                       20                                                                   20                                                                   20                                             D-inBC + Aux (D)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                D-inBC + Aux (D) + OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                D-inBC + Aux (D) + Oracle
                        0                                                                    0                                                                    0
                         8 × 102          8 × 103           8 × 104                           8 × 102          8 × 103           8 × 104                           8 × 102          8 × 103           8 × 104
                                   Num of expert episodes                                               Num of expert episodes                                               Num of expert episodes



                                                                                     Figure 12: Impact of different object detectors.


                                                                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.7                         A BLATION ON ACTION PROMPT DURING INFERENCE

This ablation studies the effect of the prompt sentence used in action generation. By default, during
test time we formulate an instruction similar to Tab. 8 to query the VLM. In addition, we randomly
sample one sentence from Tab. 28, named action prompt, and add it to the instruction. We study the
following scenarios to understand the effect of this action prompt selection:

                            • random: this is the default behavior, a random action prompt will be added to each instruc-
                              tion;
                            • no_prompt: none instruction has the action prompt;
                            • prompt pa , where pa ∈ [0, 14]: all the instructions in this setting use the pth
                                                                                                            a prompt (0-
                              index) in Tab. 28.

The results are presented in Fig. 13, where two variants of D-inBC are trained on VIMA-80k. In
general, the selection of the action prompt does not result in a significant difference in performance
except that D-inBC + Aux (D) seems to perform better on L1 and L3 without the action prompt.

                      95                                               95                                               95

                      90                                               90                                               90
L1 Success Rate (%)


                                                 L2 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                  L3 Success Rate (%)
                      85                                               85                                               85

                      80                                               80                                               80

                      75                                               75                                               75
                                                                                                                                             D-inBC + Aux (B) + Oracle
                                                                                                                                             D-inBC + Aux (D) + Oracle
                      70                                               70                                               70
                           prompt000
                           prompt001
                           prompt002
                           prompt003
                           prompt004
                           prompt005
                           prompt006
                           prompt007
                           prompt008
                           prompt009
                           prompt010
                           prompt011
                           prompt012
                           prompt013
                           prompt014
                              random
                           no_prompt


                                                                            no_prompt
                                                                            prompt000
                                                                            prompt001
                                                                            prompt002
                                                                            prompt003
                                                                            prompt004
                                                                            prompt005
                                                                            prompt006
                                                                            prompt007
                                                                            prompt008
                                                                            prompt009
                                                                            prompt010
                                                                            prompt011
                                                                            prompt012
                                                                            prompt013
                                                                            prompt014


                                                                                                                             prompt001
                                                                                                                             prompt002
                                                                                                                             prompt003
                                                                                                                             prompt004
                                                                                                                             prompt005
                                                                                                                             prompt006
                                                                                                                             prompt007
                                                                                                                             prompt008
                                                                                                                             prompt009
                                                                                                                             prompt010
                                                                                                                             prompt011
                                                                                                                             prompt012
                                                                                                                             prompt013
                                                                                                                             prompt014
                                                                               random


                                                                                                                                random
                                                                                                                             no_prompt
                                                                                                                             prompt000



                                   prompt                                       prompt                                              prompt


                                            Figure 13: Effect of prompt sentence for action generation.



B.8                         E XTENDED EXPERIMENTS ON RT-2 Style VARIANTS

As suggested by the reviewer, we evaluate two new variants of the RT-2 Style settings, RT-2 Style
(2R) and RT-2 Style + Aux (initially reported in Tab. 3). In the original RT-2 Style setting, a single
token is assigned to present the rotation in the action space. However, considering there are only
256 possible values of a token, it causes an unfair comparison between our method and RT-2 Style
in terms of action space of rotation and may compromise RT-2 Style’s performance. Therefore, we
propose RT-2 Style (2R), which uses two tokens to represent rotation, resulting in 65,536 options to
encode rotation. This new configuration introduces a significantly larger action space compared to
our method. At the same time, we evaluate another variant RT-2 Style + Aux (D) by simply mixing
RT-2 Style training data with auxiliary datasets used in LLaRA. Evaluation results of these models
on VIMA-8k are summarized in Tab. 16.

                                            Table 16: Performance of RT-2 Style variants on VIMA-8k

                                            Method                                       L1 (%)                          L2 (%)     L3 (%)
                                            RT-2 Style                                    3.8                                3.1      1.7
                                            RT-2 Style (2R)                               1.9                                2.3      1.7
                                            RT-2 Style + Aux (D)                          36.9                               35.8     32.1
                                            inBC                                          57.3                               46.2     42.9
                                            inBC + Aux (D)                                59.2                               58.8     52.1


As shown in Tab. 16, an additional token for rotation in RT-2 Style (2R) does not significantly change
the performance of the RT-2 Style baseline, however, the introduction of auxiliary data significantly
improves the performance of RT-2 Style, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.


                                                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.9    ROBUSTNESS OF THE MODEL IN FAILURE GRASP SCENARIOS

As suggested by the reviewer, to show the robustness of our method, especially the ability to recover
from failure, we run additional tests in a revised VIMA environment. The revised environment has a
10% chance that ignores the action from the model to simulate the action failure, which we believe
is much higher than the actual case.
Tab. 17 shows that without any changes, our existing model is robust to such failure.

       Table 17: Robostness evaluation results of D-inBC + Aux (B) + Oracle (VIMA-80k, 8 epochs)

                          Prob. of Failure     L1 (%)     L2 (%)      L3 (%)
                                  0              90.0       88.1        79.2
                                  10             87.7       86.2        75.8


B.10    F EW- SHOT EXPERIMENTS USING LLM / VLM

We expanded our evaluation to include the few-shot performance of existing Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs). Consistent with the inference settings described
in Appendix A.3, we provided three additional examples from either inBC or D-inBC for each test
scenario. The results of these evaluations are detailed in Tab. 18, where we examine three variables:
Vision: When this option is enabled, the model will have access to the current image observation,
allowing it to integrate visual data into its response. If disabled, the model operates solely as a text-
based system.
Oracle: This variable is checked when the examples are drawn from the D-inBC dataset. It indicates
that the examples provided for few-shot learning include descriptive textual information about the
reference images, potentially offering richer context.
Same-task: When this is checked, the examples used for prompting are from the same task type as
those in the evaluation environment.
From the observed low performance, we infer that the data utilized for robot control significantly
deviates from the conversation contexts in which these models were originally trained. This indi-
cates a pressing need to further finetune the models specifically for robot control tasks to achieve
adequate performance. Additionally, our findings hint that visual input considerably enhances the
functionality of GPT-4o.

                           Table 18: Three-shot performance of LLMs / VLMs

 Output                  Vision    Oracle     Same-task      L1 (%)     L2 (%)     L3 (%)     L4 (%)
 GPT-4o                     ✗          ✗           ✓           1.4        1.4        0.0        N/A
 GPT-4o                     ✗          ✗           ✗           0.4        0.4        0.4        0.0
 GPT-4o                     ✗          ✓           ✓           1.4        1.8        0.5        N/A
 GPT-4o                     ✗          ✓           ✗           1.2        0.4        0.4        1.2
 GPT-4o                     ✓          ✗           ✓           5.9        4.5        4.0        N/A
 GPT-4o                     ✓          ✗           ✗           6.9        5.8        4.2        1.2
 Llama 3 70B (4-bit)        ✗          ✗           ✓           0.0        0.0        0.0        N/A
 Llama 3 70B (4-bit)        ✗          ✗           ✗           0.8        1.2        0.4        1.2
 Llama 3 70B (4-bit)        ✗          ✓           ✓           0.0        1.4        0.5        N/A
 Llama 3 70B (4-bit)        ✗          ✓           ✗           0.0        0.4        0.4        0.0
 LlaVA-1.5-7B               ✓          ✗           ✓           0.9        1.4        0.5        N/A
 LlaVA-1.5-7B               ✓          ✗           ✗           0.0        0.0        1.0        1.2
 LlaVA-1.6-34B              ✓          ✗           ✓           1.4        1.4        0.5        N/A
 LlaVA-1.6-34B              ✓          ✗           ✗           1.2        0.8        2.1        0.0



                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     D ETAILS ON REAL - WORLD ROBOT EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide more details on real-world robot experiments first introduced in Sec. 6.2.


C.1   E NVIRONMENT SETTING

We utilize an xArm7 robot arm equipped with a gripper and a Logitech C140 RGB webcam posi-
tioned above the arm to gather observations. The camera is mounted in a fixed position above and
slightly in front of the arm, providing a third-person view of the scene. The captured images have a
raw resolution of 640 × 480, which are then center-cropped to 640 × 320 to match the aspect ratio of
VIMA images. The robot’s action space includes 4 DoF for pick-and-place positioning and 1 DoF
for rotation, consistent with the simplified VIMA setup.
The object detector for all real-world experiments is an OWLv2 (Minderer et al., 2024) (ViT-base,
patch size 16) running in one-shot detection mode. The object detector takes a prompt image from
the same domain and detects the objects in the observation. The list of plastic toys we used as
{object} (and detected) is: {duck, croissant, cupcake, blueberries, carrot,
banana, grapes, donut, tomato, corn, pepper}


C.2   GPT-4 O BASELINE

In the GPT-4o baseline, the model is fed the same prompt as in RT-2, with an additional
prompt describing the robot arm: “You are operating a robot arm at a table
to complete a task specified between <task></task>. Given the
current image, you need to generate a series of actions to control
the robot arm to accomplish the task.”. The model’s answer is parsed to extract
the pick and place points.


C.3   R EAL - WORLD ROBOT DATASET

We further collect 1,256 real-world images from the same real-world robot setting as the in-domain
data. Out of these images, 721 feature a single object placed randomly and uniformly on the table
by a robotic arm, while the remaining images display multiple objects scattered across the table.
We employed one-shot detection using OWLv2 (Minderer et al., 2024) to identify and generate
bounding boxes for each object in the images.
These images, along with their bounding box data, have been utilized to create two specialized in-
domain instruction tuning datasets, each containing 2,447 single-turn conversations of equivalent
size: xArm-Det and xArm-Action. The xArm-Det dataset includes conversations that mirror the
structure from our auxiliary object localization and detection dataset, with 1,191 examples dedicated
to object localization and 1,256 to object detection. In contrast, the xArm-Action dataset is designed
similarly to data for D-inBC, featuring two distinct tasks: Rotation: rotating an object (akin to Task
T2 with 1,191 examples) and Put on top: putting one object on top of another (reminiscent of Task
T3 with 1,256 examples).
In the Rotation task, the agent is instructed to rotate a specific object by a random angle ranging
from -180 to 180 degrees, while ensuring the object’s position remains unchanged post-rotation.
The expert action is straightforwardly generated by directly replicating the specified rotation angle
from the task description and the pick and place points are set to the centroid of the object bounding
box from object detection.
In the Put on Top task, applicable to images containing more than two objects, we randomly select
two objects. The task involves generating a command that directs placing one object atop the other.
The expert actions, specifically the pick and place points, are determined using the centroids of the
bounding boxes of the two selected objects from object detection.
Tab. 19 shows examples of the real-world datasets we collected.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 19: Qualitative examples of our real-world datasets xArm-Det and xArm-Action. The description of an
object in the image (one-shot detection results) is in blue. The task description of the episode is in green and
the action is in orange.


                       Image Input


                             Input   Could you tell me the location of <p>blueberry</p> in the image?
                                     Use the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center of
         xArm-Det                    the bounding box and w and h are the width and height. Coordinates start
        Localization                 at the top left corner and should be normalized between 0 and 1.

                           Output    <p>blueberry</p> at <b>(0.478, 0.725), {0.058, 0.125}</b>.
                             Input   Describe all the objects seen in the image, and list them using the format
                                     <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>. The x and y values are the coordinates for the center
                                     of the bounding box, while w and h represent its width and height. The
                                     coordinates should be normalized from the top left corner, within a range
                                     of 0 to 1.

                           Output    <scene>
                                     <p>cupcake</p> at <b>(0.440, 0.128), {0.063, 0.123}</b>.
         xArm-Det
                                     <p>corn</p> at <b>(0.237, 0.826), {0.061, 0.246}</b>.
         Detection
                                     <p>carrot</p> at <b>(0.608, 0.135), {0.152, 0.113}</b>.
                                     <p>donut</p> at <b>(0.396, 0.355), {0.079, 0.145}</b>.
                                     <p>grape</p> at <b>(0.318, 0.534), {0.077, 0.143}</b>.
                                     <p>duck</p> at <b>(0.795, 0.280), {0.066, 0.128}</b>.
                                     <p>green_pepper</p> at <b>(0.688, 0.411), {0.062, 0.187}</b>.
                                     <p>blueberry</p> at <b>(0.478, 0.725), {0.058, 0.125}</b>.
                                     <p>tomato</p> at <b>(0.543, 0.421), {0.078, 0.154}</b>.
                                     </scene>
                             Input   <task>Rotate the <p>cupcake</p> at <b>(0.440, 0.128), {0.063,
                                     0.123}</b> by -50 degrees.</task>
                                     Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
                                     y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                     first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
       xArm-Action                   up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
         Rotation                    image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                     many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                     359.

                           Output    Pick up the <p>cupcake</p> at <b>(0.440, 0.128)</b>, rotate <r>[-50]</r>
                                     degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.440, 0.128)</b>.
                             Input   <task>Move the <p>cupcake</p> at <b>(0.440, 0.128), {0.063,
                                     0.123}</b> on the top of the <p>corn</p> at <b>(0.237, 0.826),
                                     {0.061, 0.246}</b>.</task>
                                     Every action you take must include two locations in the format of <b>(x,
                                     y)</b> and one clockwise rotation angle in the format of <r>[r]</r>. The
                                     first location is the image coordinate where you use a suction cup to pick
       xArm-Action
                                     up the object, and the second location is where you place the object. The
        Put on top
                                     image coordinate ranges from 0 to 1. The rotation angle indicates how
                                     many degrees you rotate the object clockwise, and it ranges from -359 to
                                     359.

                           Output    Step 1: Pick up the <p>cupcake</p> at <b>(0.440, 0.128)</b>, rotate
                                     <r>[0]</r> degrees, and drop it at <b>(0.237, 0.826)</b>.


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4    E XTENDED REAL - WORLD EXPERIMENTS

In addition, following the suggestion from the reviewer, we have added experiments with a new set
of tasks that require more language understanding and spatial reasoning. These tasks include:

       • T5: Put all yellow objects into the bowl. There is a bowl and 3 objects on the table.
         Between 1 and 3 of the objects are yellow. A success state is one in which all yellow
         objects are in the bowl and no non-yellow objects are in the bowl.
       • T6: Transport the baked goods to the large bowl. There is a bowl and 3 objects on the
         table. Either 1 or 2 of the objects are baked goods. A success state is one in which all baked
         goods are in the large bowl and none of the non-baked goods are in the large bowl.
       • T7: Feed the pet healthy food. There is an animal on the table and 2 objects. One of the
         objects is a fruit or vegetable and the other is a baked good. The 2 objects are equidistant
         from the animal to start. A success state is one in which the healthy food is sitting next to
         the animal while the unhealthy food is further away from the animal.

Without a proper language understanding, these tasks cannot be easily solved. These tasks are
particularly challenging as none of these tasks were seen in the training data in either sim or real.
Some of the objects in the scene (e.g., baked goods and bowl) were never seen by the model either
during the robot data training, and each episode takes multiple steps to finish.
We compare RT-2 Style and LLaRA (inBC + Aux (D)) both first trained on VIMA-8k and then
finetuned on xArm-Det, which is the model used in Tab. 4 without any changes. That is, the new
tasks and the unseen tasks for the model. For each task, we run 10 randomly initialized episodes and
report the success rate. Tab. 20 shows the results.

Table 20: Real-world experiment results of more unseen tasks that require challenging semantic understanding.

                    Method               Add. Data        T5 (%)    T6 (%)      T7 (%)
                    RT-2 Style           xArm-Det           0          0           0
                    inBC + Aux (D)       xArm-Det           60         55          50

As we are able to observe, LLaRA is able to handle tasks requiring spatial language understanding
tasks to a certain degree. It sometimes gets confused due to its smaller LLM size (7B), but it shows
the potential to effectively leverage the knowledge of LLaVA, enabling efficient transfer to robot
control with minimal data. This capability is primarily facilitated by our key contributions: the
alignment between action and image coordinates, and the integration of self-supervised auxiliary
data.
RT-2 Style on the other hand, simply fails to utilize the limited amount of training data provided in
our setting, despite using the same model architecture.

C.5    Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES ON UNSEEN REAL - WORLD TASKS

In Fig. 14 we qualitatively show that LLaRA can complete some unseen tasks that are not in the
training dataset. In the first example, we ask LLaRA to ‘place all other objects into
the large bowl’. LLaRA is able to recognize the objects to move and not to move and out-
puts the correct actions. In the second example, we let LLaRA ‘get the weight of the
tomato and put it back’. LLaRA can put the tomato on the scale and move the tomato
back to the similar place as the initial position, showing the understanding of ‘putting it back’.
These examples show the potential generalization ability of LLaRA. Video demonstrations are also
included in the supplementary material.

D     L IMITATIONS

While our model has demonstrated significant achievements and holds considerable potential, it is
important to acknowledge that there remains space for further optimization.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    LLaRA Input Observations       LLaRA Input Prompt              LLaRA Input Observations       LLaRA Input Prompt
                               Place all other objects into                                   Get the weight of the tomato
                               the large bowl.                                                and put it back.

                                       Robot Actions                                                 Robot Actions


Figure 14: Examples of using LLaRA for unseen tasks. We show the input texts from the user and input images
at each step of the task, and images about the robot’s actions to accomplish each step.


First, some concepts in the reference images still can not be easily and precisely described by lan-
guage, while in many cases these features are critical for robot control. Due to the single image limit
of the current VLM, we still rely on the object detector trained on a limited number of classes to
describe the additional images in the task description, which limits the generalization ability of this
method. In principle, in the future, this can be addressed by a VLM trained on interleave image text
data like (Bai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a).
Second, the information extracted from the dataset can be noisy, which may lead to model confusion.
In Tab. 8, there are discrepancies such as the location of an object in a reference image differing
from its actual location in the current image observation. At the same time, in VIMA dataset, when
referring to the shape of an object without a color, the object in the reference image will appear in
gray, which is a totally different color than the object with the same shape in the current observations.
Finally, our method relies on 2D to 2D mapping to convert image coordinates into actual actions,
which may face challenges when the complex 3D movement of the robot is required.
We believe enhancements in the mentioned aspects could further improve performance and broader
applicability in complex, real-world applications.

E    R AW RESULTS AND PROMPT TEMPLATES
This section contains all the numerical results of VIMA experiments and all prompt templates we
used in the paper.


                                                              31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 21: Results on VIMA-0.8k dataset. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized number of model iterations.
The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size of the localization dataset;
Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction dataset; Fut.: relative size
of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset; Temp.: relative size of the
temporal relationship dataset. The ‘*’ means the reference images that appeared only in the task description
are not used to generate this dataset.

 Method              Ep     U     Loc.    Det.    Act.    Fut.    Spa.    Temp.      L1 (%)     L2 (%)      L3 (%)
 RT-2 Style           1     1                                                          0.0         0.4        0.4
 RT-2 Style           2     2                                                          1.2         0.4        0.8
 RT-2 Style           4     4                                                          1.5         1.2        2.5
 RT-2 Style           6     6                                                          2.3         1.5        0.8
 RT-2 Style           8     8                                                          2.3         3.5        2.1
 inBC                 1      1                                                         23.1       16.5        16.7
 inBC                 2      2                                                         30.0       23.8        19.6
 inBC                 4      4                                                         22.3       21.2        15.4
 inBC                 6      6                                                         21.9       14.6        17.5
 inBC                 8      8                                                         20.4       17.7        18.3
 inBC                10     10                                                         20.4       18.1        14.6
 inBC + Aux           1    1.2    0.1*    0.1*                                         13.8       13.1         9.2
 inBC + Aux           1     3      1*      1*                                          28.8       26.5        24.2
 inBC + Aux           2    2.4    0.1*    0.1*                                         29.6       21.9        23.3
 inBC + Aux           2    2.4    0.1      0.1                                         23.5       20.4        17.5
 inBC + Aux           2     4     0.5      0.5                                         26.9       23.8        24.6
 inBC + Aux           2     4     0.2      0.2     0.2     0.2                         35.0       24.2        26.7
 inBC + Aux           2     4     0.2      0.2     0.2     0.2     0.2                 33.5       26.2        21.7
 inBC + Aux           2     6      1*      1*                                          31.9       26.5        30.4
 inBC + Aux           2     6      1        1                                          30.4       27.3        27.1
 inBC + Aux           2     7     0.5      0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5                 36.2       29.6        29.2
 inBC + Aux           2     8     0.5*    0.5*     0.5     0.5    0.5*      0.5        33.5       29.2        33.3
 inBC + Aux           2     8     0.5      0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5      0.5        31.9       29.6        26.7
 inBC + Aux           2    10      1        1       1       1                          37.7       30.8        28.7
 inBC + Aux           2    12      1        1       1       1       1                  38.8       34.6        29.6
 inBC + Aux           2    14      1*      1*       1       1      1*        1         37.7       29.6        27.9
 inBC + Aux           2    14      1        1       1       1       1        1         40.0       35.8        31.2
 D-inBC + Aux         1    1.2    0.1*    0.1*                                         18.5       17.7        13.8
 D-inBC + Aux         1     3      1*      1*                                          28.8       25.4        23.3
 D-inBC + Aux         2    2.4    0.1*    0.1*                                         23.5       16.2        22.5
 D-inBC + Aux         2    2.4    0.1      0.1                                         21.5       21.2        23.3
 D-inBC + Aux         2     4     0.5      0.5                                         28.1       25.8        21.7
 D-inBC + Aux         2     4     0.2      0.2     0.2     0.2                         32.3       29.6        22.1
 D-inBC + Aux         2     4     0.2      0.2     0.2     0.2     0.2                 30.0       26.5        25.4
 D-inBC + Aux         2     6      1*      1*                                          33.8       30.8        29.2
 D-inBC + Aux         2     6      1        1                                          35.8       28.5        28.3
 D-inBC + Aux         2     7     0.5      0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5                 38.5       26.9        30.8
 D-inBC + Aux         2     8     0.5*    0.5*     0.5     0.5    0.5*      0.5        37.3       26.5        34.6
 D-inBC + Aux         2     8     0.5      0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5      0.5        34.2       29.6        30.0
 D-inBC + Aux         2    10      1        1       1       1                          34.6       33.1        28.3
 D-inBC + Aux         2    12      1        1       1       1       1                  40.0       38.5        37.5
 D-inBC + Aux         2    14      1*      1*       1       1      1*        1         40.8       30.4        32.9
 D-inBC + Aux         2    14      1        1       1       1       1        1         40.0       35.4        36.2


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 22: Results on VIMA-0.8k dataset with object detector or Oracle. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized
number of model iterations. The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size
of the localization dataset; Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction
dataset; Fut.: relative size of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset;
Temp.: relative size of the temporal relationship dataset.

 Method                      Ep     U    Loc.   Det.    Act.   Fut.   Spa.    Temp.     L1 (%)    L2 (%)     L3 (%)
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            1     1                                                     0.0       0.0        0.0
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            2     2                                                     0.4       1.5        2.5
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            4     4                                                     1.9       1.5        2.5
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            6     6                                                     1.9       2.3        0.8
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            8     8                                                     1.9       1.2        0.0
 D-inBC + OD                  1     1                                                    17.3       11.9      12.5
 D-inBC + OD                  2     2                                                    17.3       14.6      15.0
 D-inBC + OD                  4     4                                                    32.7       24.2      24.2
 D-inBC + OD                  6     6                                                    28.1       23.1      21.7
 D-inBC + OD                  8     8                                                    26.2       17.7      22.9
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2     6      1      1                                      36.9       25.8      30.4
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    10      1      1      1       1                       41.2       31.9      32.9
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    12      1      1      1       1      1                44.6       33.5      37.9
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    14      1      1      1       1      1        1       47.3       36.5      38.8
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        1     1                                                     0.0       0.4        0.8
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        2     2                                                     0.8       0.8        1.7
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        4     4                                                     1.9       3.8        4.2
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        6     6                                                     2.7       3.5        0.8
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        8     8                                                     1.2       2.7        1.2
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    1     1                                                     1.2       0.0        0.8
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    2     2                                                     2.3       1.9        1.7
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    4     4                                                     0.8       0.4        0.8
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    6     6                                                     1.5       2.7        0.4
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    8     8                                                     0.8       1.9        0.4
 D-inBC + Oracle              1     1                                                    16.9       13.5      10.4
 D-inBC + Oracle              2     2                                                    20.0       19.2      17.5
 D-inBC + Oracle              4     4                                                    37.7       26.2      29.2
 D-inBC + Oracle              6     6                                                    30.0       28.1      27.5
 D-inBC + Oracle              8     8                                                    27.7       23.1      27.9
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2     6      1      1                                      45.0       36.9      39.2
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    10      1      1      1       1                       43.8       38.5      37.9
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    12      1      1      1       1      1                52.7       44.6      50.4
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    14      1      1      1       1      1        1       49.6       46.2      47.9


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 23: Results on VIMA-8k dataset. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized number of model iterations. The
following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size of the localization dataset; Det.:
relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction dataset; Fut.: relative size of
the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset; Temp.: relative size of the
temporal relationship dataset. The ‘*’ means the reference images that appeared only in the task description
are not used to generate this dataset.

 Method                Ep     U     Loc.   Det.    Act.    Fut.      Spa.   Temp.   L1 (%)     L2 (%)    L3 (%)
 RT-2 Style             1      1                                                      3.1        3.5        0.8
 RT-2 Style             2      2                                                      3.8        3.1        1.7
 RT-2 Style (2R)        2      2                                                      1.9        2.3        1.7
 RT-2 Style             4      4                                                      8.1        6.5        5.8
 RT-2 Style             6      6                                                      6.5        5.4        4.2
 RT-2 Style             8      8                                                      6.2        6.5        4.2
 RT-2 Style + Aux       2     14     1       1       1         1      1       1      36.9       35.8       32.1
 inBC                   1     1                                                      44.6       34.2       36.2
 inBC                   2     2                                                      57.3       46.2       42.9
 inBC                   4     4                                                      58.5       48.5       47.1
 inBC                   6     6                                                      54.6       45.4       40.4
 inBC                   8     8                                                      52.3       47.3       47.1
 inBC                  10     10                                                     53.1       47.7       47.9
 inBC + Aux             2    2.4    0.1*   0.1*                                      59.6       50.0       45.4
 inBC + Aux             2    2.4     0.1    0.1                                      57.3       52.3       45.4
 inBC + Aux             2     4      0.5    0.5                                      60.4       56.2       52.1
 inBC + Aux             2     4      0.2    0.2     0.2        0.2                   59.6       59.2       51.2
 inBC + Aux             2     6      1*     1*                                       59.2       52.3       48.3
 inBC + Aux             2     6       1      1                                       57.7       56.2       53.8
 inBC + Aux             2     7      0.5    0.5     0.5        0.5   0.5             58.1       55.0       47.9
 inBC + Aux             2    10       1      1       1          1                    60.4       55.8       54.2
 inBC + Aux             2    12       1      1       1          1     1              60.8       55.4       50.0
 inBC + Aux             2    14      1*     1*       1          1    1*       1      63.1       58.8       53.8
 inBC + Aux             2    14       1      1       1          1     1       1      59.2       58.8       52.1
 D-inBC + Aux           2    2.4    0.1*   0.1*                                      53.5       48.8       45.4
 D-inBC + Aux           2    2.4     0.1    0.1                                      58.5       55.8       50.8
 D-inBC + Aux           2     4      0.5    0.5                                      58.8       50.8       54.6
 D-inBC + Aux           2     4      0.2    0.2     0.2        0.2                   58.1       52.3       51.2
 D-inBC + Aux           2     6      1*     1*                                       63.1       57.7       55.4
 D-inBC + Aux           2     6       1      1                                       60.0       53.5       50.0
 D-inBC + Aux           2     7      0.5    0.5     0.5        0.5   0.5             62.3       55.8       48.8
 D-inBC + Aux           2    10       1      1       1          1                    63.1       58.1       49.6
 D-inBC + Aux           2    12       1      1       1          1     1              64.6       58.8       49.6
 D-inBC + Aux           2    14      1*     1*       1          1    1*       1      62.3       54.6       51.2
 D-inBC + Aux           2    14       1      1       1          1     1       1      62.3       57.7       52.1
 D-inBC (L) + Aux       2    14       1      1       1          1     1       1      61.9       54.2       55.4
 D-inBC + Aux           4    4.8     0.1    0.1                                      58.5       47.7       49.6
 D-inBC + Aux           4    12       1      1                                       61.2       57.7       49.6
 D-inBC + Aux           4    20       1      1       1         1                     62.3       56.5       49.6
 D-inBC + Aux           4    24       1      1       1         1      1              63.5       56.2       52.5


                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 24: Results on VIMA-8k dataset with object detector or Oracle. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized
number of model iterations. The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size
of the localization dataset; Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction
dataset; Fut.: relative size of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset;
Temp.: relative size of the temporal relationship dataset. The ‘*’ means the reference images that appeared
only in the task description are not used to generate this dataset.

 Method                      Ep     U    Loc.    Det.   Act.   Fut.    Spa.   Temp.     L1 (%)    L2 (%)     L3 (%)
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            1     1                                                     1.5        3.1       1.2
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            2     2                                                    10.4       8.8        7.1
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            4     4                                                    16.9       14.2      15.8
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            6     6                                                    14.2       11.5      12.9
 D-RT-2 Style + OD            8     8                                                    15.8       10.4       6.7
 D-inBC + OD                  1     1                                                    55.4       45.8      45.0
 D-inBC + OD                  2     2                                                    63.5       51.5      50.0
 D-inBC + OD                  4     4                                                    63.8       46.9      55.8
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2     6      1      1                                      74.2       58.5      56.7
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    10      1      1       1      1                       75.4       66.2      57.9
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    12      1      1       1      1       1               76.9       63.8      57.9
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    12      1      1       1      1       1               79.2       64.2      58.3
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    14     1*     1*       1      1      1*       1       72.7       55.4      57.1
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    14      1      1       1      1       1       1       79.2       65.4      60.4
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            2    14      1      1       1      1       1       1       80.8       66.2      60.0
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            4    4.8    0.1    0.1                                     65.4       50.0      55.0
 D-inBC + Aux + OD            4    12      1      1                                      76.9       63.1      55.8
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        1     1                                                     1.2        1.9       1.2
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        2     2                                                     9.6        7.7       7.5
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        4     4                                                    21.9       17.7      15.0
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        6     6                                                    13.5       16.2      11.2
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        8     8                                                    16.2       11.9      11.7
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    1     1                                                     1.5        1.2       1.2
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    2     2                                                    21.9       21.5      20.8
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    4     4                                                    25.8       23.1      19.6
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    6     6                                                    17.3       18.8      15.8
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    8     8                                                    21.9       20.0      20.4
 D-inBC + Oracle              1     1                                                    60.4       59.2      54.6
 D-inBC + Oracle              2     2                                                    73.5       62.7      63.3
 D-inBC + Oracle              4     4                                                    70.8       61.2      66.2
 D-inBC + Oracle              6     6                                                    71.9       61.5      59.6
 D-inBC + Oracle              8     8                                                    70.4       63.8      60.0
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2     6      1      1                                      78.1       73.8      65.4
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    10      1      1       1      1                       78.1       73.8      70.0
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    12      1      1       1      1       1               78.5       78.1      71.2
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    14     1*     1*       1      1      1*       1       76.2       65.8      66.2
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        2    14      1      1       1      1       1       1       82.3       78.1      69.6
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        4    4.8    0.1    0.1                                     71.9       64.6      61.7
 D-inBC + Aux + Oracle        4    12      1      1                                      78.8       75.4      67.1


                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 25: Results on VIMA-80k dataset. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized number of model iterations.
The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size of the localization dataset;
Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction dataset; Fut.: relative size
of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset; Temp.: relative size of the
temporal relationship dataset.

 Method              Ep     U    Loc.     Det.    Act.    Fut.    Spa.    Temp.      L1 (%)     L2 (%)      L3 (%)
 RT-2 Style           1     1                                                         53.1        46.9        42.1
 RT-2 Style           2     2                                                         56.9        53.1        46.2
 RT-2 Style           4     4                                                         49.6        43.8        39.6
 RT-2 Style           6     6                                                         51.2        45.4        38.3
 RT-2 Style           8     8                                                         46.2        43.5        35.8
 inBC                 1     1                                                         68.5        61.5        58.8
 inBC                 2     2                                                         66.2        62.3        56.2
 inBC                 4     4                                                         67.3        58.8        54.2
 inBC                 6     6                                                         65.4        60.0        53.8
 inBC                 8     8                                                         65.8        56.5        54.2
 inBC + Aux           1    3       1       1                                          62.7        60.4        50.8
 inBC + Aux           1    5       1       1       1       1                          66.9        63.8        56.2
 inBC + Aux           1    6       1       1       1       1        1                 66.2        59.6        55.8
 inBC + Aux           1    7       1       1       1       1        1        1        68.1        60.8        54.6
 inBC + Aux           2    6       1       1                                          65.8        64.6        56.7
 inBC + Aux           2    10      1       1       1       1                          69.2        66.9        55.8
 inBC + Aux           2    12      1       1       1       1        1                 65.4        60.0        50.0
 inBC + Aux           2    14      1       1       1       1        1        1        68.1        65.0        51.7
 inBC + Aux           4    12      1       1                                          65.8        62.7        49.6
 inBC + Aux           4    20      1       1       1       1                          65.8        63.1        52.5
 inBC + Aux           4    24      1       1       1       1        1                 63.8        59.6        48.8
 inBC + Aux           4    28      1       1       1       1        1        1        68.1        65.0        52.9
 inBC + Aux           6    18      1       1                                          67.7        61.5        51.2
 inBC + Aux           6    30      1       1       1       1                          67.3        60.4        49.2
 inBC + Aux           6    36      1       1       1       1        1                 61.9        60.4        47.1
 inBC + Aux           6    42      1       1       1       1        1        1        65.4        63.8        52.9
 inBC + Aux           8    24      1       1                                          67.3        62.7        52.1
 inBC + Aux           8    40      1       1       1       1                          66.9        61.2        51.7
 inBC + Aux           8    48      1       1       1       1        1                 66.2        58.1        50.0
 inBC + Aux           8    56      1       1       1       1        1        1        66.9        63.8        50.8
 D-inBC + Aux         1    3       1       1                                          66.2        63.5        57.5
 D-inBC + Aux         1    5       1       1       1       1                          66.2        60.8        57.1
 D-inBC + Aux         1    6       1       1       1       1        1                 65.4        60.4        52.5
 D-inBC + Aux         1    7       1       1       1       1        1        1        63.8        61.9        54.2
 D-inBC + Aux         2    6       1       1                                          68.5        61.9        54.6
 D-inBC + Aux         2    10      1       1       1       1                          70.0        65.4        56.2
 D-inBC + Aux         2    12      1       1       1       1        1                 69.6        62.7        56.2
 D-inBC + Aux         2    14      1       1       1       1        1        1        70.4        63.5        56.7
 D-inBC + Aux         4    12      1       1                                          67.7        65.4        60.0
 D-inBC + Aux         4    20      1       1       1       1                          68.1        66.5        57.5
 D-inBC + Aux         4    24      1       1       1       1        1                 66.5        61.2        52.9
 D-inBC + Aux         4    28      1       1       1       1        1        1        69.6        58.5        52.9
 D-inBC + Aux         6    18      1       1                                          69.2        63.8        57.9
 D-inBC + Aux         6    30      1       1       1       1                          70.0        68.1        58.8
 D-inBC + Aux         6    36      1       1       1       1        1                 66.5        62.3        47.5
 D-inBC + Aux         6    42      1       1       1       1        1        1        70.0        61.9        54.2
 D-inBC + Aux         8    24      1       1                                          67.7        61.5        50.8
 D-inBC + Aux         8    40      1       1       1       1                          69.6        66.5        57.1
 D-inBC + Aux         8    48      1       1       1       1        1                 71.2        69.2        51.7
 D-inBC + Aux         8    56      1       1       1       1        1        1        68.1        67.7        57.9


                                                          36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 26: Results on VIMA-80k dataset with object detector or Oracle. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized
number of model iterations. The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size
of the localization dataset; Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction
dataset; Fut.: relative size of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset;
Temp.: relative size of the temporal relationship dataset.
    Method                      Ep   U    Loc.   Det.   Act.   Fut.   Spa.   Temp.    L1 (%)    L2 (%)    L3 (%)
    D-RT-2 Style + OD           1    1                                                 49.2      43.1      36.2
    D-RT-2 Style + OD           2    2                                                 52.3      50.0      45.8
    D-RT-2 Style + OD           4    4                                                 52.3      46.5      37.9
    D-RT-2 Style + OD           6    6                                                 47.3      47.3      36.2
    D-RT-2 Style + OD           8    8                                                 44.2      42.3      36.7
    D-inBC + OD                 1    1                                                 81.9      75.0      67.5
    D-inBC + OD                 2    2                                                 78.8      75.0      69.2
    D-inBC + OD                 4    4                                                 81.2      75.4      68.3
    D-inBC + OD                 6    6                                                 81.9      75.8      67.1
    D-inBC + OD                 8    8                                                 83.8      73.8      69.2
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           1     3     1      1                                   85.0      79.2      65.8
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           1     5     1      1     1      1                      85.0      77.7      68.3
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           1     6     1      1     1      1      1               79.6      73.5      64.2
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           1     7     1      1     1      1      1       1       84.2      74.6      66.2
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           2     6     1      1                                   81.5      75.8      64.2
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           2    10     1      1     1      1                      86.2      83.1      69.6
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           2    12     1      1     1      1      1               80.0      73.1      62.5
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           2    14     1      1     1      1      1       1       85.8      77.3      66.7
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           4    12     1      1                                   78.5      73.8      68.8
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           4    20     1      1     1      1                      82.3      77.3      71.7
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           4    24     1      1     1      1      1               82.3      71.9      63.7
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           4    28     1      1     1      1      1       1       83.5      71.5      62.5
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           6    18     1      1                                   80.0      75.0      67.1
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           6    30     1      1     1      1                      86.2      81.5      69.6
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           6    36     1      1     1      1      1               79.6      74.6      64.6
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           6    42     1      1     1      1      1       1       85.0      77.3      62.1
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           8    24     1      1                                   78.5      73.1      68.3
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           8    40     1      1     1      1                      86.5      82.7      70.8
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           8    48     1      1     1      1      1               82.3      78.1      65.4
    D-inBC + Aux + OD           8    56     1      1     1      1      1       1       82.7      76.5      68.3
    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle       1    1                                                 71.2      66.5      61.3
    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle       2    2                                                 74.2      70.4      69.2
    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle       4    4                                                 73.1      70.4      63.3
    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle       6    6                                                 67.7      64.2      60.4
    D-RT-2 Style + Oracle       8    8                                                 69.2      61.5      55.4
    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle   1    1                                                 57.7      54.6      57.1
    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle   2    2                                                 55.8      54.6      55.4
    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle   4    4                                                 58.1      54.2      55.4
    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle   6    6                                                 53.5      49.6      47.9
    D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle   8    8                                                 53.8      50.8      48.8
    D-inBC + Oracle             1    1                                                 84.6      84.2      80.8
    D-inBC + Oracle             2    2                                                 84.2      82.3      77.5
    D-inBC + Oracle             4    4                                                 85.4      83.8      80.0
    D-inBC + Oracle             6    6                                                 86.9      85.8      80.8
    D-inBC + Oracle             8    8                                                 87.3      85.4      82.1
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       1     3     1      1                                   88.8      85.0      79.2
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       1     5     1      1     1      1                      86.2      84.6      79.2
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       1     6     1      1     1      1      1               82.3      77.3      69.6
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       1     7     1      1     1      1      1       1       86.2      83.5      77.5
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       2     6     1      1                                   88.5      84.2      77.5
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       2    10     1      1     1      1                      91.5      88.1      80.4
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       2    12     1      1     1      1      1               81.2      80.4      67.5
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       2    14     1      1     1      1      1       1       88.5      84.6      78.3
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       4    12     1      1                                   85.0      87.3      78.8
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       4    20     1      1     1      1                      88.8      84.6      79.6
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       4    24     1      1     1      1      1               81.5      77.3      65.8
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       4    28     1      1     1      1      1       1       84.2      80.0      71.7
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       6    18     1      1                                   84.6      85.4      76.7
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       6    30     1      1     1      1                      87.7      87.3      78.3
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       6    36     1      1     1      1      1               81.2      80.8      70.8
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       6    42     1      1     1      1      1       1       88.8      81.2      70.0
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       8    24     1      1                                   86.9      81.5      75.8
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       8    40     1      1     1      1                      90.0      88.1      79.2
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       8    48     1      1     1      1      1               82.3      83.1      70.4
    D-inBC + Aux + Oracle       8    56     1      1     1      1      1       1       83.8      88.1      78.8



                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 27: Results on full VIMA dataset with Oracle. Ep: number of epoch; U: normalized number of model
iterations. The following sizes of datasets are relative to the size of inBC. Loc.: relative size of the localization
dataset; Det.: relative size of the detection dataset; Act.: relative size of the action prediction dataset; Fut.:
relative size of the future prediction dataset; Spa.: relative size of the spatial relationship dataset; Temp.:
relative size of the temporal relationship dataset.

 Method                      Ep    U    Loc.   Det.   Act.    Fut.   Spa.   Temp.     L1 (%)    L2 (%)     L3 (%)
 RT-2 Style                   1    1                                                    61.9      55.8       47.1
 RT-2 Style                   2    2                                                    65.0      59.6       42.5
 RT-2 Style                   3    3                                                    63.1      57.7       44.6
 RT-2 Style                   4    4                                                    64.2      60.0       44.2
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        1    1                                                    82.3      80.8       74.6
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        2    2                                                    86.2      88.1       75.8
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        3    3                                                    87.7      83.5       76.2
 D-RT-2 Style + Oracle        4    4                                                    87.3      85.4       74.6
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    1    1                                                    68.8      68.1       59.6
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    2    2                                                    68.5      66.2       58.3
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    3    3                                                    70.0      70.0       59.2
 D-RT-2 Style (I) + Oracle    4    4                                                    69.6      69.2       58.3


                      Table 28: Prompt candidates for action generation during inference.



       ‘Could you write down what needs to be done to complete the task on this scene?’
       ‘List out the actions needed to accomplish the task in this scene.’
       ‘What actions are necessary to perform the task on this scene?’
       ‘Can you describe what needs to be done on this scene to complete the task?’
       ‘What steps are required to perform the task shown in this scene?’
       ‘List the actions needed to perform the task given below.’
       ‘On the following scene, could you list what actions are required to perform the task?’
       ‘Describe what actions are needed on this scene to complete the task.’
       ‘What do you need to do on this scene to accomplish the task?’
       ‘List the actions required to perform the task given on this scene.’
       ‘Could you please describe the steps needed to perform the task on this scene?’
       ‘Write down the actions required to perform the task on this scene.’
       ‘Please write down the actions required to perform the task shown below.’
       ‘Can you explain what needs to be done to perform the task in this scene?’
       ‘Describe the actions required to complete the task on this scene.’


                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 29: Prompt candidates for object localization. {object} will be replaced with the actual object name in
the dataset.


      ‘Where is {object} located in the image? Please use the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>
      where x and y represent the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h are the
      width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you provide the location of {object} in the image? Format it as <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>,
      with x and y as the center coordinates of the bounding box and w and h as the width and
      height. The coordinates should begin at the top left corner and be normalized from 0 to 1.’
      ‘What are the coordinates of {object} in the image? Use the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>,
      where x and y are the center of the bounding box, and w and h represent the width and
      height. Coordinates should start at the top left corner and be normalized to a range of 0 to
      1.’
      ‘Please specify the location of {object} in the image. List it in the format <b>(x, y),{w,
      h}</b>, where x and y denote the bounding box center coordinates, and w and h are the
      width and height. The coordinates begin from the top left corner and should be normalized
      to 0 to 1.’
      ‘What is the position of {object} within the image? Use the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>
      to describe it, with x and y as the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h as
      the width and height. The coordinates start at the top left corner and are normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Describe the location of {object} in the image using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
      In this format, x and y denote the center coordinates of the bounding box, while w and h
      represent its width and height. Coordinates should be normalized from the top left corner,
      ranging from 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you detail the location of {object} in the image? Format it as <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>,
      where x and y indicate the bounding box center, and w and h represent the width and
      height. The coordinates should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left
      corner.’
      ‘Provide the location of {object} in the image using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
      Here, x and y are the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h are the width
      and height. The coordinates begin at the top left corner and are normalized from 0 to 1.’
      ‘Where is {object} positioned in the image? Use the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>, where
      x and y denote the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h are the width and
      height. The coordinates should be normalized to a range of 0 to 1 starting from the top left
      corner.’
      ‘Specify the location of {object} in the image in the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>. In this
      format, x and y represent the bounding box center, and w and h are the width and height.
      The coordinates should start from the top left corner and be normalized between 0 and 1.’
      ‘What is the exact position of {object} in the image? Format the coordinates as <b>(x,
      y),{w, h}</b>, where x and y are the center of the bounding box and w and h denote its
      width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Describe where {object} is located in the image using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
      Here, x and y indicate the bounding box center coordinates, and w and h specify its width
      and height. The coordinates should be normalized starting from the top left corner, within
      the range of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Could you tell me the location of {object} in the image? Use the format <b>(x, y),{w,
      h}</b>, where x and y denote the center of the bounding box and w and h are the width
      and height. Coordinates start at the top left corner and should be normalized between 0
      and 1.’
      ‘Provide the coordinates of {object} in the image in the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
      Here, x and y are the center of the bounding box, while w and h represent its width and
      height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner and be normalized to 0 to 1.’
      ‘How is the {object} located in the image? List its coordinates using the format <b>(x,
      y),{w, h}</b>, where x and y are the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h
      indicate its width and height. The coordinates begin at the top left corner and are normal-
      ized to a range of 0 to 1.’


                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 30: Prompt candidates for object detection.


     ‘Identify and describe each object in the image. For each object, list it in the format <b>(x,
     y),{w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the coordinates of the bounding box center, and w
     and h represent the width and height of the bounding box. The image coordinates should
     start from the top left corner and be normalized between 0 and 1.’
     ‘Catalog all the objects present in the image. For every object, use the format <b>(x, y),{w,
     h}</b>, with x and y indicating the center of the object’s bounding box coordinates, and
     w and h specifying the width and height. The coordinates are normalized from the top left
     corner, ranging from 0 to 1.’
     ‘List each object in the image and describe it. Use the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b> for
     each object, where x and y denote the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and
     h are the width and height of the bounding box. The coordinates should start from the top
     left corner and be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Provide descriptions for all objects within the image. Each object should be listed using
     the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>, where x and y are the coordinates of the bounding box
     center, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates should be normalized,
     starting from the top left corner, within a range of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Enumerate and describe every object found in the image. For each object, utilize the
     format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>, where x, y are the bounding box center coordinates and w, h
     are the dimensions (width and height) of the bounding box. The coordinates begin at the
     top left corner and are normalized between 0 and 1.’
     ‘Detail all the objects within the image, listing each one using the format <b>(x, y),{w,
     h}</b>. Here, x and y represent the coordinates of the bounding box center, while w and
     h indicate the width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are
     normalized to the range of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Document each object present in the image. For each object, use the format <b>(x, y),{w,
     h}</b>, where x and y are the coordinates of the center of the bounding box, and w and h
     are the width and height. The coordinates should be normalized, starting from the top left
     corner, and range from 0 to 1.’
     ‘For each object in the image, provide a description using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
     Here, x and y denote the coordinates of the bounding box center, and w and h represent
     the width and height of the bounding box. The coordinates are normalized to a scale of 0
     to 1, starting from the top left corner.’
     ‘Describe all the objects seen in the image, and list them using the format <b>(x, y),{w,
     h}</b>. The x and y values are the coordinates for the center of the bounding box, while
     w and h represent its width and height. The coordinates should be normalized from the top
     left corner, within a range of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Identify and list each object found in the image. For each one, use the format <b>(x,
     y),{w, h}</b>. In this format, x and y are the coordinates for the bounding box center, and
     w and h are the width and height. The coordinates are to be normalized starting from the
     top left corner, ranging from 0 to 1.’
     ‘List and describe each object in the image using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>. Here,
     x and y correspond to the coordinates of the bounding box center, and w and h specify
     the width and height of the bounding box. The coordinates should start from the top left
     corner and be normalized to the range of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Provide a description for each object in the image, formatted as <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>.
     The x and y values indicate the center coordinates of the bounding box, while w and h
     represent the width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are
     normalized between 0 and 1.’


                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 31: (Continued) Prompt candidates for object detection.


      ‘Catalog each object within the image, using the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b> for each
      one. In this format, x and y are the coordinates for the center of the bounding box, and w
      and h are the width and height. The coordinates should be normalized, beginning at the
      top left corner and ranging from 0 to 1.’
      ‘Enumerate all the objects in the image, providing descriptions for each using the format
      <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>. The x and y values represent the center coordinates of the bounding
      box, while w and h indicate its width and height. The coordinates are normalized starting
      from the top left corner, within a range of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Describe each object in the image, listing them in the format <b>(x, y),{w, h}</b>. Here,
      x and y denote the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w and h specify the width
      and height. The coordinates should be normalized from the top left corner, ranging from 0
      to 1.’


Table 32: Prompt candidates for action prediction. {scene} will be replaced with a list of objects in the scene.


      ‘Could you detail the steps needed to transform the scene shown in the image into the
      second scene? The second scene is provided as a collection of object bounding boxes
      {scene}. The format for these bounding boxes is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y
      represent the center coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates
      should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1, starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you describe what actions are required to rearrange the scene shown in the image
      to match the second scene? The second scene is given as a set of object bounding boxes
      {scene}. These bounding boxes follow the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y
      indicate the center coordinates, and w and h represent the width and height. The coordi-
      nates should start from the top left corner and be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Could you list the steps necessary to modify the scene shown in the image to the second
      scene? The second scene is described as a collection of object bounding boxes {scene}.
      The bounding box format is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, with x and y denoting the center coor-
      dinates, and w and h representing the width and height. The coordinates are normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1, starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you explain what needs to be done to adjust the scene shown in the image to resemble
      the second scene? The second scene {scene} consists of object bounding boxes provided
      in the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>. Here, x and y represent the center coordinates, and w
      and h are the width and height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner and
      be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Could you outline the necessary actions to arrange the scene shown in the image into
      the second scene? The second scene is defined by a collection of object bounding boxes
      {scene}. These bounding boxes follow the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y
      denote the center coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates start
      from the top left corner and should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you specify what needs to be done to convert the scene shown in the image into the
      second scene? The second scene is provided as a series of object bounding boxes {scene}.
      The format for these bounding boxes is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, with x and y representing
      the center coordinates, and w and h indicating the width and height. Coordinates should
      be normalized from the top left corner to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Could you describe the steps required to change the scene shown in the image to the sec-
      ond scene? The second scene is depicted as a collection of object bounding boxes {scene}.
      The bounding box format is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coor-
      dinates, and w and h represent the width and height. The coordinates are normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’


                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 33: (Continued) Prompt candidates for action prediction. {scene} will be replaced with a list of objects
in the scene.


      ‘Can you list the actions necessary to transform the scene shown in the image into the
      second scene? The second scene is described using object bounding boxes {scene}. The
      format of these bounding boxes is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y are the center
      coordinates, and w and h represent the width and height. Coordinates should be normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you explain the process to arrange the scene shown in the image to match the
      second scene? The second scene is provided as a collection of object bounding boxes
      {scene}. These bounding boxes are formatted as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y
      represent the center coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates
      should start from the top left corner and be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you detail what needs to be done to rearrange the scene shown in the image to the
      second scene? The second scene is given as a series of object bounding boxes {scene}.
      The bounding box format is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coor-
      dinates, and w and h represent the width and height. Coordinates should be normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you specify the steps needed to modify the scene shown in the image to resemble
      the second scene? The second scene is described as a set of object bounding boxes {scene}.
      These bounding boxes follow the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent
      the center coordinates, and w and h indicate the width and height. The coordinates start
      from the top left corner and should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you outline the necessary actions to change the scene shown in the image into the
      second scene? The second scene {scene} consists of object bounding boxes provided in
      the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates, and w and
      h represent the width and height. Coordinates should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1
      starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you describe the steps to adjust the scene shown in the image to the second scene?
      The second scene is given as a collection of object bounding boxes {scene}. The format
      for these bounding boxes is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center
      coordinates, and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates should start from the
      top left corner and be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Can you explain what needs to be done to transform the scene shown in the image into
      the second scene? The second scene is depicted using object bounding boxes {scene}.
      The bounding box format is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, with x and y representing the center
      coordinates, and w and h indicating the width and height. The coordinates start from the
      top left corner and are normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Could you detail the steps necessary to convert the scene shown in the image to the second
      scene? The second scene is described as a set of object bounding boxes {scene}. These
      bounding boxes follow the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the
      center coordinates, and w and h denote the width and height. The coordinates should be
      normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’


                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 34: Prompt candidates for future prediction. {pick and place} will be replaced with the action text.


     ‘The image shows a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will the
     scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The bounding box format is <b>(x, y),
     {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates of the bounding box, and w
     and h are its width and height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner and be
     normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘An image depicts a scene containing multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what
     will the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes
     should be formatted as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates,
     and w and h are the width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and
     are normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘The image presents a scene with several objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
     the scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The format for these bounding boxes
     is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates, and w and h are
     the width and height. Coordinates should start from the top left corner and be normalized
     to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘Displayed in the image is a scene containing multiple objects. Now you {pick and place},
     what will the scene look like? Write down the list of object bounding boxes. These bound-
     ing boxes follow the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, with x and y as the center coordinates,
     and w and h as the width and height. The coordinates should be normalized starting from
     the top left corner to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘The image illustrates a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
     the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes are
     formatted as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates, and w
     and h represent the width and height. Coordinates should start from the top left corner and
     be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘The image depicts a scene with several objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will the
     scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The bounding box format is <b>(x, y),
     {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates, and w and h denote the width
     and height. The coordinates should be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top
     left corner.’
     ‘In the image, there is a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
     the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The format of these bounding
     boxes is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y indicate the center coordinates, and w and
     h represent the width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are
     normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘An image shows a scene with various objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will the
     scene look like? Write down the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes follow
     the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates, and w and
     h are the width and height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner and be
     normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘The image presents a scene containing several objects. Now you {pick and place}, what
     will the scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The bounding box format is
     <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates, and w and h are the
     width and height. Coordinates should start from the top left corner and be normalized to a
     scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘The image displays a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
     the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes should
     be in the format <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates, and w
     and h represent the width and height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner
     and be normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’
     ‘An image illustrates a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
     the scene look like? Write down the list of object bounding boxes. These bounding boxes
     are formatted as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates,
     and w and h denote the width and height. Coordinates should be normalized to a scale of
     0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 35: (Continued) Prompt candidates for future prediction. {pick and place} will be replaced with the
action text.


      ‘The image shows a scene with various objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will the
      scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The format for these bounding boxes is
      <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, with x and y representing the center coordinates, and w and h as
      the width and height. Coordinates should start from the top left corner and be normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘Displayed in the image is a scene containing multiple objects. Now you {pick and place},
      what will the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding box
      format is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y denote the center coordinates, and w and h
      are the width and height. The coordinates start from the top left corner and are normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘The image illustrates a scene with various objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
      the scene look like? List the object bounding boxes. The bounding boxes are formatted
      as <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y indicate the center coordinates, and w and h
      represent the width and height. Coordinates should be normalized from the top left corner
      to a scale of 0 to 1.’
      ‘An image depicts a scene with multiple objects. Now you {pick and place}, what will
      the scene look like? Write the list of object bounding boxes. The bounding box format
      is <b>(x, y), {w, h}</b>, where x and y represent the center coordinates, and w and h
      denote the width and height. The coordinates should start from the top left corner and be
      normalized to a scale of 0 to 1.’


Table 36: Prompt candidates for spatial relationship. {ego_obj} and {ref_obj} will be replaced with object
names and {example} will be replaced with a random spatial relationship from the same image.


      "Can you describe the relative spatial locations of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this
      image? Use relative location words like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, find the 2D
      center distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must follow
      this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0
      to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you describe the relative spatial positions of {ego_obj} in comparison to {ref_obj}
      in this image? Use terms like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, calculate the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should be formatted
      as follows: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0
      to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Please describe the relative spatial locations of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this
      image. Use words like left, right, above, below, etc. Additionally, find the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must be in this
      format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1
      starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you explain the relative spatial positions of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this
      image? Use terms such as left, right, above, below, etc. Also, determine the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should match this
      format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1
      starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Describe the relative spatial locations of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this image
      using words like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, calculate the 2D center distance
      and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must follow this format:
      {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting
      from the top left corner.’


                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 37: (Continued) Prompt candidates for spatial relationship. {ego_obj} and {ref_obj} will be replaced
with object names and {example} will be replaced with a random spatial relationship from the same image.


      ‘Could you describe the spatial relationship between {ego_obj} and {ref_obj} in this im-
      age using relative location words like left, right, above, below, etc.? Also, find the 2D
      center distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should be
      formatted as follows: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you detail the relative spatial positions of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this
      image? Use words like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, determine the 2D center dis-
      tance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must be in this format:
      {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting
      from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you explain the spatial relationship between {ego_obj} and {ref_obj} in this image
      using terms such as left, right, above, below, etc.? Also, calculate the 2D center distance
      and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should match this format:
      {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting
      from the top left corner.’
      ‘Describe the relative spatial positions of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this image.
      Use relative location words like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, find the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must follow this
      format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1
      starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you describe how {ego_obj} is positioned relative to {ref_obj} in this image using
      words such as left, right, above, below, etc.? Also, find the 2D center distance and the
      Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should be in this format: {example}.
      The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top
      left corner.’
      ‘Could you detail the relative positions of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this image
      using terms like left, right, above, below, etc.? Also, calculate the 2D center distance and
      the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must be formatted as follows:
      {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting
      from the top left corner.’
      ‘Please describe the spatial relationship of {ego_obj} in comparison to {ref_obj} in this
      image using relative location terms such as left, right, above, below, etc. Additionally,
      find the 2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output
      should match this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Can you describe the relative spatial locations of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} in this
      image? Use relative location words like left, right, above, below, etc. Also, calculate the
      2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output should
      follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘Could you describe the spatial locations of {ego_obj} relative to {ref_obj} in this image
      using words such as left, right, above, below, etc.? Additionally, find the 2D center distance
      and the Euclidean center distance between them. Your output must be in this format:
      {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting
      from the top left corner.’


                                                   45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 38: Prompt candidates for temporal relationship {scene} will be replaced with a list of objects, {ego_obj}
and {ref_obj} will be replaced with object names and {example} will be replaced with a random temporal
relationship from the same image.


      "The image shows a scene at the first timestamp, while the second image described as
      {scene} shows the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative location
      of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use relative distance
      words like getting closer or further away, etc. Also, find the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output must
      follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘In the first timestamp, the image shows a scene, and the second image described as
      {scene} depicts the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative loca-
      tion of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use terms like
      getting closer or moving further away, etc. Additionally, find the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output must fol-
      low this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale
      of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The scene in the first image is at the initial timestamp, and the second image described
      as {scene} shows the subsequent timestamp. Can you explain the change in the relative
      location of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use words
      like getting closer or moving further apart, etc. Also, calculate the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output should be
      formatted as follows: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘At the first timestamp, the image shows a scene, and the second image described as
      {scene} represents the next timestamp. Can you detail the change in the relative location
      of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use relative distance
      words like moving closer or getting further away, etc. Additionally, find the change in the
      2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      must follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The first image shows a scene at an initial timestamp, and the second image described as
      {scene} depicts the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative position
      of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use terms such as
      getting closer or moving further apart, etc. Also, determine the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output should
      follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The initial timestamp shows a scene in the first image, and the second image described
      as {scene} represents the next timestamp. Can you describe how the relative location of
      {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} changes between these two timestamps? Use relative
      distance words like getting closer or moving further away, etc. Also, find the change in the
      2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      must be in this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The image shows a scene at the first timestamp, and the second image described as
      {scene} shows the subsequent timestamp. Can you detail the change in the relative lo-
      cation of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use words
      like getting closer or moving further apart, etc. Also, calculate the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output should be
      formatted as follows: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a
      scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’


                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 39: (Continued) Prompt candidates for temporal relationship {scene} will be replaced with a list of
objects, {ego_obj} and {ref_obj} will be replaced with object names and {example} will be replaced with a
random temporal relationship from the same image.


      ‘At the initial timestamp, the image shows a scene, and the second image described as
      {scene} depicts the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative position
      of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use relative distance
      terms such as getting closer or moving further away, etc. Also, find the change in the 2D
      center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      must follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The scene in the first image is at the initial timestamp, and the second image described
      as {scene} shows the following timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative
      location of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use words
      like getting closer or moving further apart, etc. Additionally, calculate the change in the
      2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      should follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The first image shows a scene at an initial timestamp, and the second image described
      as {scene} depicts the next timestamp. Can you explain how the relative location of
      {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} changes between these two timestamps? Use relative
      distance words like moving closer or getting further away, etc. Also, determine the change
      in the 2D center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your
      output must follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates nor-
      malized to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The image shows a scene at the initial timestamp, and the second image described as
      {scene} shows the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative position of
      {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use words like getting
      closer or moving further apart, etc. Also, calculate the change in the 2D center distance
      and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output should follow this
      format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale of 0 to 1
      starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘At the first timestamp, the image shows a scene, and the second image described as
      {scene} depicts the next timestamp. Can you detail how the relative location of {ego_obj}
      compared to {ref_obj} changes between these two timestamps? Use relative distance terms
      such as moving closer or getting further away, etc. Also, find the change in the 2D center
      distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output must fol-
      low this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to a scale
      of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The initial timestamp shows a scene in the first image, and the second image described
      as {scene} represents the next timestamp. Can you describe the change in the relative
      location of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} between these two timestamps? Use words
      like getting closer or moving further apart, etc. Also, determine the change in the 2D
      center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      should follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized
      to a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’
      ‘The first image shows a scene at the initial timestamp, and the second image described
      as {scene} shows the following timestamp. Can you describe how the relative position
      of {ego_obj} compared to {ref_obj} changes between these two timestamps? Use terms
      like moving closer or getting further away, etc. Additionally, find the change in the 2D
      center distance and the Euclidean center distance between the two images. Your output
      must follow this format: {example}. The coordinates are image coordinates normalized to
      a scale of 0 to 1 starting from the top left corner.’


                                                   47
