Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NCERTAINTY MODELING FOR FINE - TUNED IMPLICIT
FUNCTIONS

 Anna Susmelj                       Mael Macuglia                       Nataša Tagasovska
 ETH AI Center                      ETH Zürich                         Prescient/MLDD, Genentech

 Reto Sutter, Sebastiano Caprara             Jean-Philippe Thiran            Ender Konukoglu
 Balgrist University Hospital, USZ           LTS5, EPFL                      ETH Zürich



                                            A BSTRACT
         Implicit functions such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs), occupancy networks,
         and signed distance functions (SDFs) have become pivotal in computer vision
         for reconstructing detailed object shapes from sparse views. Achieving optimal
         performance with these models can be challenging due to the extreme sparsity
         of inputs and distribution shifts induced by data corruptions. To this end, large,
         noise-free synthetic datasets can serve as shape priors to help models fill in gaps,
         but the resulting reconstructions must be approached with caution. Uncertainty
         estimation is crucial for assessing the quality of these reconstructions, particularly
         in identifying areas where the model is uncertain about the parts it has inferred
         from the prior. In this paper, we introduce Dropsembles, a novel method for
         uncertainty estimation in tuned implicit functions. We demonstrate the efficacy
         of our approach through a series of experiments, starting with toy examples and
         progressing to a real-world scenario. Specifically, we train a Convolutional Oc-
         cupancy Network on synthetic anatomical data and test it on low-resolution MRI
         segmentations of the lumbar spine. Our results show that Dropsembles achieve
         the accuracy and calibration levels of deep ensembles but with significantly less
         computational cost.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in neural implicit functions have facilitated their use for 3D object representa-
tions and applications in novel views synthesis in computer vision. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)
(Mildenhall et al., 2021) have gained recognition for their ability to accurately synthesize novel
views of complex scenes and became an important tool in applications of photorealistic rendering
(Martin-Brualla et al., 2021), such as virtual reality and augmented reality. Signed Distance Func-
tions (SDFs) (Park et al., 2019a; Gropp et al., 2020) is shown to be particularly useful in scenarios
where precise boundary details are crucial, like industrial design and robotics. Occupancy Networks
(Mescheder et al., 2019b), which model shapes as a probabilistic grid of space occupancy, excel in
handling topological variations, making them ideal for medical imaging (Amiranashvili et al., 2022)
and animation. Advancing this concept, Convolutional Occupancy Networks (Peng et al., 2020) in-
tegrate convolutional networks to enhance spatial learning, proving effective in detailed architectural
modeling and complex reconstructions.
In practice, achieving optimal performance with these methods often requires densely sampled input
data and a high degree of similarity between the training data and the target object. However, such
ideal conditions are rarely met in practical applications like augmented reality, virtual reality, au-
tonomous driving, and medical contexts, where inputs are typically sparse and less precise (Truong
et al., 2023; Müller et al., 2022a). For example, in medical applications, generating precise 3D
representations from sparse inputs is particularly crucial for morphological analysis (Tóthová et al.,
2020). Patient-specific anatomical modeling significantly enhances the assessment of a patient’s
condition and aids in devising customized treatment plans (Turella et al., 2021).
In addition to sparsity, real-world data usually suffers from noise and corruption that leads to dis-
tribution shifts with respect to the training data, and thus to significant performance degradation.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Occlusion, noise, truncation, and lack of depth measurements (Liao et al., 2023) greatly affect recon-
struction from monocular observations. Noise in estimations of camera poses inevitably degrades
reconstruction from sparse views (Truong et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021b). Un-
der input sparsity and distribution shifts, in safety-critical applications, such as medical (Zou et al.,
2023) or autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021), it is crucial that inferred information is transpar-
ently disclosed to the end user, as it may significantly influence the decision-making process. One
approach to this end is to quantify uncertainty in the reconstruction. For example, Shen et al. (2021)
derived a variational inference objective to model predictive distribution in NeRFs. However, similar
results are yet to be established for more generic applications of implicit functions.
To tackle the challenges of sparse and corrupted inputs, we propose to leverage dense, noise-free
synthetic data for pre-training. For instance, a pretrained encoder can be shared across both syn-
thetic and real datasets, while a lightweight implicit decoder is initially trained on synthetic data and
subsequently fine-tuned on the sparse, noisy real data. This process introduces two primary sources
of uncertainty: from the encoder’s latent representation and the fine-tuning of the decoder. In this
paper, we focus on the latter and demonstrate that epistemic uncertainty is an important, yet under-
studied source of error in implicit functions, which significantly impacts the predictions quality. To
the best of our knowledge, this type of uncertainty quantification in 3D reconstruction for fine-tuned
neural implicit functions has not been addressed in the literature.
Monte Carlo (MC) dropout (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016) and deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017) are two commonly used baselines for estimating uncertainty in computer vision ap-
plications (Kendall and Gal, 2017), which could be readily applied to our task. MC dropout is
simple to integrate and computationally efficient during training. However, it often underestimates
uncertainty and requires multiple forward passes during inference, increasing computational cost
(Postels et al.; 2021). Deep ensembles involve training multiple neural networks independently and
averaging their predictions, capturing a wider range of potential outputs. This method provides
improved predictive performance and better-calibrated uncertainty estimates but is computationally
costly and memory-intensive. This becomes especially demanding in our fine-tuning context, where
each model in an ensemble needs to be trained on both datasets. Here we introduce Dropsembles1 ,
a method that creates ensembles based on the dropout technique. Dropsembles aim to moderate the
computational demands associated with ensembles while attempting to maintain prediction accu-
racy and uncertainty calibration of deep ensembles. Combined with Elastic Weight Consolidation
(EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016), Dropsembles is able to mitigate distribution shifts between source
and target datasets.
Contributions This paper introduces several contributions to address the gap in modeling uncer-
tainties in fine-tuned neural implicit functions:

          • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to model epistemic uncertainty in the implicit
            decoder during fine-tuning from synthetic data.
          • To this end, we introduce Dropsembles (overview in Figure 1) to achieve the performance
            of vanilla ensembles with significantly reduced computation cost (subsection 4.1).
          • We introduce EWC-inspired regularization for task-agnostic uncertainty adaptation to take
            into account the distribution shift in uncertainty modeling (subsection 4.2).
          • We include a series of experiments to validate the proposed methods, in a controlled bench-
            mark on synthetic data and in a real-world medical application. We demonstrate that it is
            possible to achieve high reconstruction quality and preserve patient-specific details when
            using synthetic data in the form of an anatomical atlas (section 5).


2       R ELATED WORK

Implicit shape modeling from sparse input Much attention has recently been directed towards the
problem of novel view synthesis from sparse views enhancing this task using NeRFs (Truong et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2021a; Deng et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Niemeyer et al., 2022;
Roessle et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2021; Oechsle et al., 2021), SDFs (Yu et al., 2022; Yariv et al., 2020),
    1
        https://github.com/klanita/Dropsembles


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      y


                                                                                                                       Dataset A (dense)
             Dataset A (sparse)
                                                     3D location                     Dataset A        Step 1:
                                                                             z                   training decoder
                                                                                 x


                                                                          latent A

                                                          CNN voxel


                                                                                                                         Dataset B (sparse)
                                                          encoder



             Dataset B (sparse)
                                                                          latent B

                                                                      y
                                                     3D location                                        Step 2:
                                                                            z                    fine-tuning decoder
                                                                                 x   Dataset B
                                                           Implicit
                                  Frozen   Trained
                                                           decoder


    Figure 1: Occupancy network training with a dense prior and fine-tuning on a sparse dataset.


and occupancy networks (Niemeyer et al., 2020). Implicit functions also found their applications
in medical imaging, particularly in 3D shape reconstruction from sparse MRI slices (Amiranashvili
et al., 2022; 2024; Gatti et al., 2024; McGinnis et al., 2023; Alblas et al., 2023; Jacob et al., 2023). In
this paper, we focus on occupancy networks due to their relevance in medical imaging applications
but note that Dropsembles can be used with other neural implicit functions.
Uncertainty modeling Estimating uncertainty in deep models has attracted significant interest in
recent years (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Gawlikowski et al., 2023).
A remaining challenge here is uncertainty estimation under distribution shifts, which in most real-
world scenarios is essential for guaranteeing the reliability and resilience of predictions when con-
fronted with out-of-distribution (OOD) examples (Tran et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Wenzel et al.,
2022). In 3D reconstruction, this is important since corruption and sparsity pattern in test samples
often deviates from those in training data. While numerous methods have been devised to detect
OOD cases (Malinin and Gales, 2018; Tagasovska and Lopez-Paz, 2019; Ren et al., 2019; Charpen-
tier et al., 2020; Osband et al., 2023) or enhance accuracy in unobserved domains (Liu et al., 2021;
Hendrycks et al., 2021), the adaptation of uncertainty estimates has been relatively unexplored. In
a comprehensive benchmark study, Wenzel et al. (2022) find that from all metrics considered, cal-
ibration transfers worst, meaning that models that are well calibrated on the training data are not
necessarily well calibrated on OOD data. In an era dominated by LLMs and foundation models,
addressing this issue becomes paramount, particularly given the tendency of such models for over-
confidence as a result of fine-tuning (Guo et al., 2017a; Dodge et al., 2020). To overcome such issues,
(Balabanov and Linander, 2024) introduces a method for estimating uncertainty in fine-tuned LLMs
using Low-Rank Adaptation. In computer vision, (Wortsman et al., 2022) highlights that fine-tuning
comes at the cost of robustness, and address this issues by ensembling the weights of the zero-shot
and fine-tuned models. (Lu and Koniusz, 2022) propose uncertainty estimation in one-shot object
detection, particularly focusing on fine-tuned models.
Several works focused on modeling uncertainty in the encoder of neural implicit representations.
(Shen et al., 2022) models uncertainty in the color and density output of a scene-level neural rep-
resentation with conditional normalizing flows. Liao et al. (2023) uses this method in robotics
applications. Liao and Waslander (2024) estimates uncertainty for neural object representation from
monocular images by propagating it from image space first to latent space, and consequently to 3D
object shape. Yang et al. (2023) focused on modeling aleatoric uncertainty in occupancy networks.
Dropsembles can complement all of the above approaches by modeling the epistemic uncertainty in
the weights of implicit functions throughout fine-tuning, rendering them more robust to distribution
shifts. By doing so, it improves both the performance and reliability of methods building on neural
implicit representations.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1   I MPLICIT S HAPE R EPRESENTATIONS

Implicit functions are widely used in computer vision to represent complex shapes. Assuming a
continuous encoding of the object domain X , an SDF for a surface S encoding a shape is defined as


                                                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


f : X → R where: f (x) < 0 ⇔ x “inside” S f (x) = 0 ⇔ x ∈ S. Another popular way to repre-
sent a shape object is an occupancy function g : X → {0, 1} defined as g(x) = IShape Object (x) where
I corresponds to the indicator function. The primary advantage of both approaches lies in their abil-
ity to accurately model complex shapes from sparse observations using deep neural networks. This
capability underpins methods such as “DeepSDF” (Park et al., 2019b) and “Occupancy Network”
(Mescheder et al., 2019a), which approximate functions by non-linearly regressing observations to
the surface encoding the shape. To facilitate learning from training sets, these techniques are often
employed in conjunction with latent representations to capture diverse shape variations and at infer-
ence time yield continuous shape representations. The latent representations can be trained directly
from data using autoencoders (Mescheder et al., 2019a) or autodecoders (Park et al., 2019b). Recent
research has also explored using large pretrained models like CLIP to obtain latent representations
(Cheng et al., 2023). While the specific choice of the latent encoder is beyond the scope of this
paper, we will refer to it as an “oracle”.
Both methods can be described with the same formulation. We consider a dataset D :=

  {xij , yji }j∈[K] , Z i , where N is the number of images, K is the number of available pix-
                     i∈[N ]
els per image , Z i is a latent representation of image i given by the “oracle”, xij ∈ X ⊆ R3 is the
position corresponding to the observed value yji , which are obtained through an SDF or voxel occu-
pancy following the definitions above. In both settings, the regression function is a neural network
fθ (x, Z), θ ∈ ΘN N . At training, networks are trained using the following optimization objective.
                                         1         X
                            R̂D (θ) =                      l(fθ (xij , Z i ), yji )               (1)
                                       N ·K
                                            j∈[K] ∧ i∈[N ]

Here, the loss function l depends on the method. For occupancy networks, l is the binary cross-
entropy, reflecting the binary nature of occupancy, while it is the L2 norm for SDFs, aligning with
the continuous nature of the distance function.

3.2   U NCERTAINTY MODELING

Deep Ensembles Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) apply ensemble methods to
neural networks (Lee et al., 2020; Breiman, 2001; Schapire, 1990; Saberian and Vasconcelos, 2010).
Multiple independent networks are trained to determine a set of optimal weights {θ̂i }i∈[M ] with the
subscript i denoting different networks. Ensembles mitigate the risk of selecting a single set of
weights, which may not yield good results particularly when training data consist of fewer samples
relative to the size of the parameter space. Instead, multiple solutions with comparable accuracy are
determined, allowing the ensemble to average outputs and minimize the selection risk. Training of
deep ensembles is associated with high computational demands due to training multiple networks.

Dropout Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a regularization technique that aims to reduce over-
fitting by randomly omitting subsets of features during each training step. By “dropping out” (i.e.,
setting to zero) a subset of activations within a network layer, it diminishes the network’s reliance
on specific neurons, encouraging the development of more robust features. Gal and Ghahramani
(Gal and Ghahramani, 2016) demonstrated that dropout can also be interpreted from a Bayesian per-
spective and applied toward modeling uncertainty. Dropout at test time (referred to as Monte Carlo
Dropout) is shown to perform approximate Bayesian inference, essentially through using random-
ness in dropout configurations for uncertainty modeling.

3.3   E LASTIC W EIGHT C ONSOLIDATION

Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) is a regularization technique introduced in continual learning
to address catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016). The underlying principle is to protect
parameters crucial for previous tasks while learning new ones. Assume two distinct tasks, A and B,
with their respective datasets DA and DB , where DA ∩ DB = ∅. The tasks are learned sequentially
without access to previous tasks’ datasets. First, task A is learned by training a neural network on
DA , resulting in a set of optimal weights θ̂A . When learning task B using dataset DB , EWC regu-
larizes the weights so they remain within a region in the parameter space that led to good accuracy
for task A.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, during learning for task B, approximate posterior of weights obtained during learning for
A constrains the optimization. A Gaussian approximation to log p(θ|DA ) (see App. A for further
details), serves as the regularizer
                       θ̂B = arg min R̂DB (θ) + λ(θ − θ̂A )T F (θ̂A )(θ − θ̂A )                    (2)
                                   θ

where R̂DB (θ) corresponds to the likelihood term log p(DB |θ), λ is a hyperparameter, F is the
diagonal of Fisher information matrix. Details can be found in Appendix A

4     M ETHODS
We focus on shape reconstruction from sparsely sampled and corrupted inputs using occupancy
networks. While the proposed method can be applied to both SDF and occupancy networks, we
focus on the latter for demonstration. Given the sparse and corrupted nature of our input, we train
an occupancy network with high-quality data and then fine-tune it on a test sample. Through fine-
tuning, we expect the model to adapt to the input while transferring the prior information captured
in training.
Assume access to datasets DA and DB , defined in Section 3.1, with the number of points per image
KA and KB , and the number of images NA and NB . The dataset DA is assumed to be high quality
and “dense”, while the dataset DB is “sparse” in terms of the number of points observed per image
and potentially contains corruptions in individual images, i.e., KA ≫ KB . Additionally, it is as-
sumed that the number of images in DA is greater than in DB , i.e., NA > NB (in our experiments,
we consider the case of a single image NB = 1). The two datasets can only be accessed successively
and not simultaneously; that is, DA is accessed first, followed by DB , without further access to DA .
Note that the latent representation vectors Z i are assumed to be obtained by the same learning oracle
for both datasets DA and DB described in Section 3.1. Without loss of generality, in this paper, we
consider the latent map L : X → Z to be a “frozen” encoder pretrained on dataset DA .
The underlying parametric function class of the model is assumed to be a neural network fθ :
X × Z → Y approximating a regression function as described in Section 3.1. The parameter θ
represents the set of weight matrices of the network i.e θ := {Wi }i∈[L] where L corresponds to
the number of layers. The output space Y corresponds to [0, 1] for occupancy networks and R for
signed distance functions. It is important to note that the versatility of the network model in terms
of its output space is tailored to the specific modeling task. However, this flexibility does not limit
the proposed method, which remains versatile across different tasks.
The procedures outlined in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 involve two stages of training: initially on dataset
DA , denoted as Task A, followed by training on dataset DB , referred to as Task B. The primary ob-
jective is to achieve high prediction accuracy in the second stage, while acknowledging the inherent
challenges posed by the sparsity and smaller size of DB relative to DA .

4.1   D ROPSEMBLES

Given the sparsity and corrupted nature of test samples, adaptation of the prior model is prone to un-
certainties. Here we introduce Dropsembles, a technique that combines benefits of both dropout and
deep ensembles, to capture and quantify this uncertainty. This approach aims to moderate the com-
putational demands associated with ensembles while attempting to maintain reasonable prediction
accuracy. Although ensembles are known for their reliable predictions, they are resource-intensive.
In real-world applications, involving large training sets, this cost becomes a hindering factor.
In contrast, dropout involves training only a single model instance. Applying dropout to a neural
network involves sampling a “thinned” network, effectively the same as applying a binary mask
to the weights. However, unlike ensembles where each model is trained independently, dropout
results in networks that are not independent; they share weights. Thus, training a neural network
with dropout is akin to simultaneously training a collection of 2n thinned networks (n - number of
weights), all sharing a substantial portion of their weights. However, often this comes at a price of
less accurate predictions.
In Dropsembles, the model is first trained with dropout on dataset DA . Subsequently, M thinned
network {fθm }m∈[M ] instances are generated by sampling binary masks. Each of these “thinned”

                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


instances is then fine-tuned on dataset DB independently, effectively creating an ensemble of
“thinned” networks initialized with correlated weights. For inference and uncertainty estimations,
this ensemble is treated as a uniformly weighted mixture model, and the predictions are aggregated
                                                              1
                                                                PM
in the same manner as traditional ensembles: p(y|x) = M          m=1 pθm (y|x, θm ). Although en-
sembles typically benefit from networks being large and independent, our experiments show that
this relaxation of independence does not significantly diminish prediction performance metrics or
expected calibration error. The overall training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
In the context of implicit functions, networks are optimized according to the objective defined in
Equation (1). However, it is important to emphasize that Dropsembles is a versatile framework that
can be adapted to train with any objective necessary for a specific task.

Algorithm 1 Dropsembles
                                                                                               ▷ Task A
Require: : DA
 1: p̂(θ|DA ) ← Train fθ on DA with dropout
                                                                                         ▷ Task B
Require: : DB , p̂(θ|DA )
 2: for m = 1 to M do
          m
 3:     θinit ← Sample a thinned network initialized from p̂(θ|DA )
          m
 4:     θ̂ ← arg minθ R̂DB (θ)                                     ▷ Train thinned network on DB
 5: end for
 6: Obtain predictions and uncertainty estimates ← Ensemble {θ̂ m }m∈[M ]


4.2   E LASTIC W EIGHT C ONSOLIDATION REGULARIZATION FOR IMPLICIT SHAPE MODELING

In the basic version of optimization described above, networks start their training initialized from
the learned posterior of dataset DA . However, there is no guarantee that during fine-tuning the
network will not diverge arbitrarily from initial weights. This is particularly problematic for implicit
shape modeling, where it is essential to retain information from a large and dense prior dataset
DA while adapting to sparse and noisy data DB to avoid overfitting. To address this concern, we
borrow developments from the continual learning literature, as they seamlessly fit into the framework
described above.
In particular, when fine-tuning individual instances of thinned networks on dataset DB , we can
apply the same reasoning to each network instance as described in EWC. Thus, the learning objec-
tive for part B is replaced by the objective described in (Equation 2), which includes an additional
regularization term.

5     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our objective is to provide trustworthy predictions on dataset B without hurting performance. We
do so by modeling the uncertainty of the weights of a fine-tuned model. In standard prediction tasks,
models are evaluated with respect to accuracy and Expected Calibration Error (ECE). However, our
specific setup (reconstruction from sparse views) calls for additional evaluation metrics suitable to
computer vision tasks, such as Dice Score Coefficient (DSC) and Hausdorff distance. Besides ECE,
we include reliability diagrams (Guo et al., 2017b) given our preference for a more conservative
modeling approach. Details on evaluation metrics can be found in Appendix B.
All models were evaluated using four network instances. Training details are provided in Appendix
C. The optimal regularization parameter for EWC was determined through an ablation study pre-
sented in Appendix D. Additional ablation results on the number of network instances are included
in Appendix E.

5.1   C LASSIFICATION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFT

Toy dataset We first demonstrate our method on a toy data set for binary classification. We gener-
ated two-dimensional datasets A and B with a sinusoidal decision boundary and Gaussian noise. A


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  a        Training data                                    c
                                                                            MC dropout              Dropsembles             Ensembles
                                        --- True boundary
                                            Dataset A
                                            DatasetB



                                         Uncertainty


           MC dropout                                                     MC dropout + EWC        Dropsembles + EWC       Ensembles + EWC
  b


Figure 2: Toy classification example. a) Training data for binary classification task (“red” vs “blue”)
from datasets A (points, light) and B (crosses, dark) b) MC dropout trained only on Dataset A. c)
Comparison of methods fine-tuned on Dataset B. Points are colored by the predicted class. EWC
consistently improves both accuracy and uncertainty estimates on both A and B datasets.


moderate distribution shift was modeled between the datasets by adjusting the support values. We
created 1000 train samples for dataset A, and 50 train samples for dataset B. All metrics in Table 1
were averaged across 3 random seeds. From the evaluations (Table 1, Figure 2), it is apparent that
EWC improves the performance of Ensembles and Dropsembles on both datasets.


Table 1: Comparison of methods fine-tuned on dataset B for toy classification, MNIST and ShapeNet
reconstruction experiments. Values are shown in percentages [%] for all metrics.
                                  Toy classification                                                   MNIST                     ShapeNet
  Method                    Acc-A ↑        ECE-A ↓              Acc-B ↑         ECE-B ↓        DSC ↑           ECE ↓    mDSC ↑              ECE ↓

  MCdropout                59.0 ± 5.3    40.0 ± 4.3         90.5 ± 0.6        11.5 ± 1.7     54.8 ± 6.9    8.6 ± 2.0   82.8 ± 2.2       19.31 ± 3.97
  Dropsembles              59.2 ± 4.3    39.8 ± 4.3         90.5 ± 0.6         9.2 ± 1.3     64.1 ± 4.8    6.1 ± 2.7   83.5 ± 2.1       19.51 ± 4.64
  Ensembles                56.5 ± 2.4    42.5 ± 1.7         90.0 ± 0.0         8.5 ± 0.6     62.6 ± 5.1    5.8 ± 2.3   82.6 ± 2.2       25.88 ± 3.27
  MCdropout + EWC          66.8 ± 5.6    33.0 ± 4.8         86.5 ± 2.1        10.5 ± 1.9     55.7 ± 7.2    8.4 ± 2.2   83.9 ± 2.4       16.96 ± 3.81
  Dropsembles + EWC        96.2 ± 4.2     5.8 ± 5.3         93.5 ± 3.8         7.0 ± 1.4     70.3 ± 1.7    6.1 ± 1.9   84.3 ± 2.1       17.67 ± 4.45
  Ensembles + EWC          95.8 ± 2.5     7.5 ± 2.4         95.5 ± 1.3         5.5 ± 1.0     69.3 ± 3.8    5.2 ± 2.0   83.4 ± 1.9       24.59 ± 2.98


5.2    I MPLICIT SHAPE MODELING

MNIST digit reconstruction In our next experiment, we explore the reconstruction from sparse
inputs using the MNIST dataset. To this end, we converted the images into binary masks through
thresholding. To simulate sparse input conditions, we applied a grid mask to the images, masking
out every third row and column. This masking strategy was consistently applied across both datasets
A and B. For dataset A, we utilized all images for a single digit “7” from the MNIST training set.
To introduce a moderate distribution shift and mimic common real-world dataset corruptions, we
rotated the images in dataset B by 15 degrees and obscured approximately 15 percent of the original
pixels. In this section we are focusing on shape reconstruction, therefore “fine-tuning” and “testing”
are applied per image and not per dataset. Given that the occupancy network is trained at the pixel
level, each of these images effectively constitutes an individual “dataset B”. We randomly selected
20 distinct images from the MNIST test split, which would give us 20 different variations of “dataset
B”. Fine-tuning and evaluating the whole test split of MNIST dataset would be computationally
demanding, as each occupancy network is fine-tuned on an individual image.
Our occupancy network comprises an 8-layer MLP, designed to process the latent representation
along with the 2-dimensional coordinates of each pixel, thereby facilitating pixel-wise predictions.
For configurations utilizing dropout, we incorporated a dropout layer with a probability of p = 0.3
following each linear layer in the network.
We demonstrate qualitative predictions and associated uncertainties for a single-image example in
Figure 3. Visual inspection of the uncertainty estimates reveals that EWC-regularized ensembles
exhibit the desired behavior: they not only deliver accurate predictions but also provide conservative


                                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a        Dataset A                                b         MC dropout                                 MC dropout + EWC                             Ensembles + EWC                               Dropsembles                              Dropsembles + EWC
Sparse input     Dense GT                             Prediction Uncertainty                       Prediction Uncertainty                       Prediction Uncertainty                       Prediction Uncertainty                       Prediction Uncertainty


          Dataset B
 Sparse input     Dense GT


                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                            Expected Accuracy
                                                                               Expected Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                         Expected Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Expected Accuracy
                              ExpectedAccuracy
                             Expected


                                                           Confidence                                      Confidence                                    Confidence                                 Confidence                                    Confidence


Figure 3: Corrupted MNIST reconstruction example. a) Example of training images. b) Comparison
of fine-tuned methods on dataset B. A “perfectly calibrated” method would have reliability diagrams
aligned on the diagonal. A “good conservative” method would have all bars above the diagonal.


uncertainty estimates, particularly noting high uncertainty in regions with data corruption. Relia-
bility diagrams, along with quantitative evaluations presented in Table 1, confirm that elastic reg-
ularization enhances the performance across all methods. Notably, EWC-regularized Dropsembles
achieve performance comparable to that of the Ensembles but with significantly reduced resource
usage.

ShapeNet We demonstrate the applicability of Dropsembles for modeling uncertainty in SDFs on
a commonly used ShapeNet dataset. For dataset A, we utilized 1,000 randomly selected airplane
shapes. For dataset B, we selected 10 unseen airplane shapes and introduced a distribution shift by
applying random erosion as corruption. Encoder inputs were provided as occupancy, with the target
SDF estimated from the original meshes. For the corrupted dataset, the SDF was derived by con-
verting the corrupted occupancies into a mesh and then estimating the SDF. The decoder follows the
DeepSDF architecture with a dropout probability of p = 0.2 where applicable. Quantitative results
in Table 1 demonstrate that Dropsembles outperform other methods in terms of DSC, with EWC
regularization providing further improvements in both DSC and ECE metrics across all methods.
Although MC dropout achieves the lowest ECE score, it fails to preserve shape smoothness when
used for uncertainty modeling rather than regularization, as highlighted by additional qualitative
results in Appendix Figure 11.
Recently, non-ReLU activation functions have gained popularity in neural implicit architectures
(Sitzmann et al., 2020; Tancik et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2022b; Mehta et al., 2021; Dupont et al.,
2022). In Appendix Table 4, we demonstrate that Dropsembles can be effectively combined with
periodic activation functions without any loss in performance.

Lumbar spine In this section, we adapt the data preparation procedure from (Turella et al., 2021)
but replace the high-quality CT dataset with a synthetic dataset of anatomical shapes. As an anatomi-
cal shape prior, we utilize a rigged anatomical model from “TurboSquid”. To model patient-specific
variability and variations in poses during MRI acquisition, we generated 94 rigged deformations.
Point-cloud models from the atlas were converted to voxels at 256 voxel resolution in order to corre-
spond to the resolution of the target MRI dataset. We further applied random elastic deformations to
mimic patient-specific shape variability. We created a paired “sparse” - “dense” dataset by selecting
a consistent set of 17–21 sagittal slices and additionally applied two iterations of connected erosions
to simulate patient-specific automatic MR segmentations (Turella et al., 2021). A bicubic upsam-
pling was employed on the “sparse” inputs to adapt them for the encoder. We trained ReconNet
(Turella et al., 2021) on the entire training split of the atlas dataset to obtain an encoder, which we
subsequently kept frozen. For the implicit decoder, we employed only one of the rigged samples
to accurately quantify performance on synthetic data and demonstrate the method’s robustness to
medium and strong distribution shifts. For real-world applications, we recommend using the entire
rigged transformations dataset.
For the occupancy network, we employed the MLP architecture described by (Amiranashvili et al.,
2022), which features eight linear layers, each of 128 dimensions and dropout p = 0.2. The initial


                                                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


training of the occupancy network was conducted on an anatomical atlas. This intensive train-
ing process required 48 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU, equipped with 48 GB of
memory. This pretrained network was then used to fine-tune both Dropsembles and MC dropout
models. Additionally, we trained four distinct instances of Ensembles without dropout, with each
instance requiring 48 hours of training. A key distinction between Dropsembles and Ensembles is
that Dropsembles leverage a single pretrained model from dataset A, significantly reducing compu-
tational demand by a factor equal to the number of thinned networks. This results in a substantial
difference in total training time, as the pre-training on dataset A is much more time-consuming than
the fine-tuning on dataset B (see Table 2 and Appendix E). Additionally, this training time on dataset
A remains constant for Dropsembles as the number of thinned networks increases, while it grows
linearly for Ensembles.
As the target dataset B, we use a publicly available dataset of MR+CT images from 20 subjects
(Cai et al., 2015). We employed the same segmentation network as (Turella et al., 2021) to obtain
segmentations of 5 vertebrae, 5 discs, and the spinal canal (Pang et al., 2020). These automatically
generated segmentations of high-quality MRI samples were used as the ground truth for the sparse
3D reconstruction task. To create sparse inputs, we removed the same set of sagittal slices as in the
atlas dataset. We randomly selected 3 subjects for the consequent fine-tuning and testing.
The MR dataset described above lacks ground truth segmentations, which complicates numerical
evaluation. The goal of the model is to impute missing or misclassified parts using anatomical atlas

   a                                                                c                                                 d
                             3D view                                                  Uncertainty                                           Samples

       Sparse input            Dense GT         Dropsembles + EWC             MC dropout         Dropsembles + EWC             MC dropout     Dropsembles + EWC
                                                prediction
                                                                    Slice 1


                                                                                                                     Slice 1


   b                    Uncertainty histogram

             MC dropout                   Dropsembles + EWC
                                                                    Slice 2


                                                                                                                     Slice 2


               uncertainty                   uncertainty                                   Image intensity


Figure 4: Lumbar spine reconstruction example on Subject 2. a) 3D-rendered views of sparse inputs
(bicubic upsampling), dense ground truth (GT), and predictions by our method. b) Histograms of
uncertainty (entropy) values, truncated between 0.1 and 1 for visibility. c) Examples of uncertainty
estimates for two different sagittal slices of the 3D volume. d) For each method, network predictions
are randomly sampled and the corresponding reconstructions are depicted.


priors, which, while enhancing reconstruction, are typically marked as incorrect in standard seg-
mentation metrics. To facilitate a more accurate assessment of reconstruction metrics, we introduce
an intermediate benchmark. For this purpose, we utilize three random rigged deformations from the
atlas that were not exposed during training and apply a doubled level of erosions. This strong aug-
mentation provides a challenging input for dataset B and allows to model a significant distribution
shift aimed at rigorously testing the model under adverse conditions.
Numerical evaluation in Table 2 demonstrates consistent improvement of our method upon MC-
dropout and comparable performance to Ensembles. In order to investigate the performance of the
proposed method on MR dataset, we perform a detailed qualitative analysis in Figure 4. A consistent
and distinct pattern not captured by the metrics alone, stands out from the qualitative assessment:
MC-dropout tends to produce noisy reconstructions, as illustrated in Figure 4c-d, and generally


                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


yields predictions that lack coherent, continuous shapes. This behaviour is partially captured in
metric “DSC avg” in Table 2 - dice score evaluated on individual samples of the network instances.
This observation is notable because, although models trained with conventional dropout generate
reasonable predictions, their use in uncertainty estimation undermines the fundamental objective
of 3D modeling. Samples drawn from the dropout distribution do not yield plausible shapes, as
evidenced in Figure 4d. In contrast, our model, which draws from deep ensembles, does not exhibit
these limitations. Furthermore, increasing the number of samples in MC-dropout does not resolve
this issue but rather leads to higher computational demands, as documented in Table 2.
EWC demonstrates only minor improvements in terms of Dice score, while the difference in Haus-
dorff distance is more noticeable. We believe this is because Hausdorff distance better captures small
discrepancies that the Dice score overlooks. Dice is less sensitive to small differences in reconstruc-
tion, as the majority of structures are well reconstructed by both methods. Qualitative inspection
in Figure 5 confirms these subtle variations, which are crucial in medical applications where even
small differences can significantly impact treatment planning.

Table 2: Comparison of methods fine-tuned on dataset B of lumbar spine experiment. Evaluations
are performed on the corrupted atlas. Metrics are reported for dataset B. Baseline is a MC-dropout
model trained on dataset A (w/o fine-tuning).
            Method              DSC [%] ↑    DSC avg [%] ↑        HD ↓           ECE [%] ↓    Train-A / Tune-B [h]

            Baseline            65.0 ± 2.0   63.9 ± 1.8           17.5 ± 1.2     25.2 ± 0.4   48 / -
            MCdropout           84.8 ± 2.8   83.0 ± 2.0           18.15 ± 6.46   3.9 ± 2.4    48 / 3.5
            Dropsembles         86.8 ± 2.4   86.3 ± 2.3           11.4 ± 1.8     4.6 ± 1.7    48 / 10
            Dropsembles + EWC   86.9 ± 2.4   86.4 ± 2.3           10.9 ± 2.1     4.5 ± 1.7    48 / 11
            Ensembles           86.5 ± 3.1   86.0 ± 2.9           10.5 ± 2.8     3.9 ± 2.2    192 / 10


6   D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Strengths In this study, we advanced sparse
3D shape reconstruction for high-precision ap-
plications by introducing uncertainty model-
ing. We developed a flexible framework that fa-
cilitates uncertainty-aware fine-tuning of mod-
els and showcased its utility in reconstructing
the lumbar spine from sparse and corrupted
MRI data. Our observations suggest that tra-
ditional uncertainty methods like MC dropout
are not ideal for implicit shape reconstruction,
as they tend to undermine the basic principles
of implicit functions. However, our Dropsem-
ble method effectively addresses these limita-
tions, providing a promising alternative for un-
certainty modeling. Additionally, Dropsembles                Figure 5: Example in the performance difference
are significantly more efficient than Ensembles              between Dropsembles w/ and w/o EWC. Grey
during the resource-heavy pre-training phase,                segmentations are produced by Dropsembles w/
allowing for substantial reductions in resource              or w/o EWC regularization overlayed with color-
usage without significant loss in performance.               ful ground-truth segmentations. EWC better cap-
                                                             tures subtle details in modeling thin structures,
Limitations During the fine-tuning stage,                    such as vertebra processes.
Dropsembles face the same computation de-
mands as Ensemble models.
Future directions In this work, we focus on the epistemic uncertainty of the decoder, assuming the
encoder to be frozen. An interesting future direction is to combine Dropsembles with the uncertainty
in the encoder to comprehensively cover all aspects of uncertainty modeling in sparse 3D shape
reconstruction.


                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was financially supported by: 1. Personalized Health and Related Technologies (PHRT),
project number 222 and 643, ETH domain, 2. ETH AI Center.

R EFERENCES
Dieuwertje Alblas, Marieke Hofman, Christoph Brune, Kak Khee Yeung, and Jelmer M Wolterink.
  Implicit neural representations for modeling of abdominal aortic aneurysm progression. In Inter-
  national Conference on Functional Imaging and Modeling of the Heart, pages 356–365. Springer,
  2023.
Tamaz Amiranashvili, David Lüdke, Hongwei Bran Li, Bjoern Menze, and Stefan Zachow. Learning
  shape reconstruction from sparse measurements with neural implicit functions. In International
  Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, pages 22–34. PMLR, 2022.
Tamaz Amiranashvili, David Lüdke, Hongwei Bran Li, Stefan Zachow, and Bjoern H Menze. Learn-
  ing continuous shape priors from sparse data with neural implicit functions. Medical Image Anal-
  ysis, page 103099, 2024.
Oleksandr Balabanov and Hampus Linander. Uncertainty quantification in fine-tuned llms using
  lora ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12264, 2024.
L Breiman. Random forests.          Machine Learning, 45:5–32, 10 2001.         doi: 10.1023/A:
  1010950718922.
Yunliang Cai, Said Osman, Manas Sharma, Mark Landis, and Shuo Li. Multi-modality vertebra
  recognition in arbitrary views using 3d deformable hierarchical model. IEEE transactions on
  medical imaging, 34(8):1676–1693, 2015.
Bertrand Charpentier, Daniel Zügner, and Stephan Günnemann. Posterior network: Uncertainty
  estimation without ood samples via density-based pseudo-counts. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:1356–1367, 2020.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Fuqiang Zhao, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Fanbo Xiang, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su.
  Mvsnerf: Fast generalizable radiance field reconstruction from multi-view stereo. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages 14124–14133, 2021a.
Kefan Chen, Noah Snavely, and Ameesh Makadia. Wide-baseline relative camera pose estimation
  with directional learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pages 3258–3268, 2021b.
Yen-Chi Cheng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Alexander G Schwing, and Liang-Yan Gui. Sd-
  fusion: Multimodal 3d shape completion, reconstruction, and generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4456–4465, 2023.
Kangle Deng, Andrew Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Deva Ramanan. Depth-supervised nerf: Fewer views
  and faster training for free. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pages 12882–12891, 2022.
Jesse Dodge, Gabriel Ilharco, Roy Schwartz, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Noah Smith.
  Fine-tuning pretrained language models: Weight initializations, data orders, and early stopping.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06305, 2020.
Emilien Dupont, Hrushikesh Loya, Milad Alizadeh, Adam Goliński, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud
  Doucet. Coin++: Neural compression across modalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12904, 2022.
Yarin Gal. Uncertainty in Deep Learning. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2016.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Pro-
  ceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pages 1050–1059, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016.
  PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/gal16.html.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anthony A Gatti, Louis Blankemeier, Dave Van Veen, Brian Hargreaves, Scot Delp, Garry E Gold,
  Feliks Kogan, and Akshay S Chaudhari. Shapemed-knee: A dataset and neural shape model
  benchmark for modeling 3d femurs. medRxiv, pages 2024–05, 2024.
Jakob Gawlikowski, Cedrique Rovile Njieutcheu Tassi, Mohsin Ali, Jongseok Lee, Matthias Humt,
  Jianxiang Feng, Anna Kruspe, Rudolph Triebel, Peter Jung, Ribana Roscher, et al. A survey
  of uncertainty in deep neural networks. Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(Suppl 1):1513–1589,
  2023.
Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regu-
 larization for learning shapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10099, 2020.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017a.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v70/guo17a.html.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A criti-
  cal analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pages 8340–8349, 2021.
Athira J Jacob, Puneet Sharma, and Daniel Ruckert. Deep conditional shape models for 3d cardiac
  image segmentation. In International Workshop on Statistical Atlases and Computational Models
  of the Heart, pages 44–54. Springer, 2023.
Ajay Jain, Matthew Tancik, and Pieter Abbeel. Putting nerf on a diet: Semantically consistent few-
  shot view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pages 5885–5894, 2021.
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer
  vision? Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mijeong Kim, Seonguk Seo, and Bohyung Han. Infonerf: Ray entropy minimization for few-shot
 neural volume rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pages 12912–12921, 2022.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A Al Sallab, Senthil Yoga-
  mani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2021.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hass-
  abis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forget-
  ting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 12 2016. doi:
  10.1073/pnas.1611835114.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.
Tae-Hwy Lee, Aman Ullah, and Ran Wang. Bootstrap Aggregating and Random Forest, pages
  389–429. 01 2020. ISBN 978-3-030-31149-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-31150-6 13.
Xiaotong Li, Yongxing Dai, Yixiao Ge, Jun Liu, Ying Shan, and Ling-Yu Duan. Uncertainty mod-
  eling for out-of-distribution generalization. ICLR, 2022.
Ziwei Liao and Steven L Waslander. Multi-view 3d object reconstruction and uncertainty modelling
  with neural shape prior. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
  Computer Vision, pages 3098–3107, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziwei Liao, Jun Yang, Jingxing Qian, Angela P. Schoellig, and Steven L. Waslander. Uncertainty-
  aware 3D object-level mapping with deep shape priors, 2023.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Wei-Chiu Ma, Antonio Torralba, and Simon Lucey. Barf: Bundle-adjusting neural
  radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pages 5741–5751, 2021.
Jiashuo Liu, Zheyan Shen, Yue He, Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, and Peng Cui. Towards
   out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13624, 2021.
Changsheng Lu and Piotr Koniusz. Few-shot keypoint detection with uncertainty learning for unseen
  species. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pages 19416–19426, 2022.
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Jonathan T Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy,
  and Daniel Duckworth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo collec-
  tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pages 7210–7219, 2021.
Julian McGinnis, Suprosanna Shit, Hongwei Bran Li, Vasiliki Sideri-Lampretsa, Robert Graf,
  Maik Dannecker, Jiazhen Pan, Nil Stolt-Ansó, Mark Mühlau, Jan S Kirschke, et al. Single-
  subject multi-contrast mri super-resolution via implicit neural representations. In International
  Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 173–183.
  Springer, 2023.
Ishit Mehta, Michaël Gharbi, Connelly Barnes, Eli Shechtman, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Manmohan
   Chandraker. Modulated periodic activations for generalizable local functional representations.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 14214–
   14223, 2021.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 4455–4465, 2019a. doi:
  10.1109/CVPR.2019.00459.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Oc-
  cupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 4460–4470, 2019b.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
Norman Müller, Andrea Simonelli, Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bulò, Matthias Nießner, and Peter
  Kontschieder. Autorf: Learning 3d object radiance fields from single view observations. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
  3971–3980, 2022a.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–15,
  2022b.
Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and Andreas Geiger. Differentiable volumet-
 ric rendering: Learning implicit 3d representations without 3d supervision. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3504–3515, 2020.
Michael Niemeyer, Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Andreas Geiger, and
 Noha Radwan. Regnerf: Regularizing neural radiance fields for view synthesis from sparse inputs.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
 5480–5490, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Oechsle, Songyou Peng, and Andreas Geiger. Unisurf: Unifying neural implicit surfaces
 and radiance fields for multi-view reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pages 5589–5599, 2021.

Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi,
  Xiuyuan Lu, and Benjamin Van Roy. Epistemic neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Shumao Pang, Chunlan Pang, Lei Zhao, Yangfan Chen, Zhihai Su, Yujia Zhou, Meiyan Huang, Wei
  Yang, Hai Lu, and Qianjin Feng. Spineparsenet: spine parsing for volumetric mr image by a
  two-stage segmentation framework with semantic image representation. IEEE Transactions on
  Medical Imaging, 40(1):262–273, 2020.

Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 165–174,
  2019a.

Jeong Joon Park, Peter R. Florence, Julian Straub, Richard A. Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA,
  USA, June 16-20, 2019, pages 165–174. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019b. doi:
  10.1109/CVPR.2019.00025.          URL http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_
  CVPR_2019/html/Park_DeepSDF_Learning_Continuous_Signed_Distance_
  Functions_for_Shape_Representation_CVPR_2019_paper.html.

Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. Con-
  volutional occupancy networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part III 16, pages 523–540. Springer, 2020.

Janis Postels, Mattia Segu, Tao Sun, Luc Van Gool, Fisher Yu, and Federico Tombari. On the
  calibration of deterministic epistemic uncertainty.

Janis Postels, Mattia Segu, Tao Sun, Luca Sieber, Luc Van Gool, Fisher Yu, and Federico Tombari.
  On the practicality of deterministic epistemic uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00649, 2021.

Jie Ren, Peter J Liu, Emily Fertig, Jasper Snoek, Ryan Poplin, Mark Depristo, Joshua Dillon, and
   Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Likelihood ratios for out-of-distribution detection. Advances in neural
   information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Barbara Roessle, Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Matthias Nießner.
  Dense depth priors for neural radiance fields from sparse input views. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12892–12901, 2022.

Mohammad Saberian and Nuno Vasconcelos. Boosting classifier cascades. pages 2047–2055, 01
 2010.

Robert E. Schapire. The strength of weak learnability. Machine Learning, 5:197–227, 1990. doi:
  10.1007/BF00116037. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00116037.

Jianxiong Shen, Adria Ruiz, Antonio Agudo, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. Stochastic neural radi-
   ance fields: Quantifying uncertainty in implicit 3d representations. In 2021 International Confer-
   ence on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 972–981. IEEE, 2021.

Jianxiong Shen, Antonio Agudo, Francesc Moreno-Noguer, and Adria Ruiz. Conditional-flow nerf:
   Accurate 3d modelling with reliable uncertainty quantification. In European Conference on Com-
   puter Vision, pages 540–557. Springer, 2022.

Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:7462–7473, 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Natasa Tagasovska and David Lopez-Paz. Single-model uncertainties for deep learning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh
 Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn
 high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. Advances in neural information processing
 systems, 33:7537–7547, 2020.
Katarı́na Tóthová, Sarah Parisot, Matthew Lee, Esther Puyol-Antón, Andrew King, Marc Polle-
  feys, and Ender Konukoglu. Probabilistic 3d surface reconstruction from sparse mri information.
  In Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2020: 23rd Inter-
  national Conference, Lima, Peru, October 4–8, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 23, pages 813–823.
  Springer, 2020.
Dustin Tran, Jeremiah Liu, Michael W Dusenberry, Du Phan, Mark Collier, Jie Ren, Kehang Han,
  Zi Wang, Zelda Mariet, Huiyi Hu, et al. Plex: Towards reliability using pretrained large model
  extensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07411, 2022.
Prune Truong, Marie-Julie Rakotosaona, Fabian Manhardt, and Federico Tombari. Sparf: Neural
  radiance fields from sparse and noisy poses. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4190–4200, 2023.
Federico Turella, Gustav Bredell, Alexander Okupnik, Sebastiano Caprara, Dimitri Graf, Reto Sut-
  ter, and Ender Konukoglu. High-resolution segmentation of lumbar vertebrae from conventional
  thick slice mri. In Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2021:
  24th International Conference, Strasbourg, France, September 27–October 1, 2021, Proceedings,
  Part I 24, pages 689–698. Springer, 2021.
Florian Wenzel, Andrea Dittadi, Peter Gehler, Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel, Max Horn, Dominik
  Zietlow, David Kernert, Chris Russell, Thomas Brox, Bernt Schiele, et al. Assaying out-of-
  distribution generalization in transfer learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:7181–7198, 2022.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, et al. Robust
 fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
 and pattern recognition, pages 7959–7971, 2022.
Xueting Yang, Yihao Luo, Yuliang Xiu, Wei Wang, Hao Xu, and Zhaoxin Fan. D-if: Uncertainty-
  aware human digitization via implicit distribution field. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
  national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 9122–9132, 2023.
Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lip-
  man. Multiview neural surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and appearance. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2492–2502, 2020.
Zehao Yu, Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. Monosdf: Ex-
  ploring monocular geometric cues for neural implicit surface reconstruction. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 35:25018–25032, 2022.
Jason Y Zhang, Deva Ramanan, and Shubham Tulsiani. Relpose: Predicting probabilistic relative
  rotation for single objects in the wild. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 592–
  611. Springer, 2022.
Ke Zou, Zhihao Chen, Xuedong Yuan, Xiaojing Shen, Meng Wang, and Huazhu Fu. A review of
  uncertainty estimation and its application in medical imaging. Meta-Radiology, page 100003,
  2023.



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A PPENDIX : E LASTIC W EIGHT C ONSOLIDATION

Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) was introduced to address catastrophic forgetting in continual
learning (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016). EWC is a regularization that protects crucial parameters in a
network when learning a new task, in order to avoid catastrophic forgetting.
Assume two distinct tasks, A and B, with their respective datasets DA and DB , where DA ∩DB = ∅.
The tasks are learned sequentially without access to previous task datasets. First, task A is learned
by training a neural network on DA , resulting in a set of optimal weights θ̂A . When learning task
B using dataset DB , EWC regularizes the weights so they remain within a region in the parameter
space that led to good accuracy for task A. The justification of the method is based on probabilistic
principles. Given a combined dataset D := DA ∪ DB , applying Bayes’ rule yields:
                          log p(θ|D) = log p(D|θ) + log p(θ) − log p(D)                             (3)
where p(D|θ) corresponds to the likelihood over the entire dataset and p(θ) is the user-defined prior
over the weights of the network. Rearranging equation (3) yields
                      log p(θ|D) = log p(DB |θ) + log p(θ|DA ) − log p(DB )                         (4)

where it can be observed that all information from DA is contained in the posterior p(θ|DA ), which
is usually intractable. Therefore, the EWC method employs the Laplace approximation to the pos-
terior, a process conducted during the training of task A. The resulting approximated posterior
is modeled as a Gaussian distribution, with its mean represented by θ̂A and covariance matrix
ΣA = (F (θ̂A ) ◦ I)−1 where F (θ̂A ) denotes the Fisher information matrix evaluated over data
set DA at θ̂A .
Next, in stage B, the optimization of parameter θ incorporates the approximation of the posterior
obtained during task A as a constraint in the optimization process. Following the equation (4), this
approximation, log p(θ|DA ), serves as a regularizer in the learning objective:

                    θ̂B = arg min R̂DB (θ) + λ(θ − θ̂A )T (F (θ̂A ) ◦ I)(θ − θ̂A )                  (5)
                                 θ

where R̂(θ) corresponds to the likelihood term log p(DB |θ), λ is a hyperparameter, I represents the
identity matrix, and ◦ describes the Hadamard product.

B    A PPENDIX : METRICS

Uncertainty estimates for regression tasks involve using unbiased estimates of the modes of the
approximated posterior predictive distribution. In neural networks, this corresponds to performing
multiple stochastic forward passes. For classification tasks, three main methods for uncertainty
estimates are variational ratios, predictive entropy, and mutual information (Gal, 2016). In our
experiments, we opt for predictive entropy.

Dice score The Dice score, also known as the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC), measures the
similarity between two data sets, commonly used in medical imaging to evaluate segmentation ac-
                                       |
curacy. Defined as DSC = 2×|X∩Y|X|+|Y | , where X and Y represent the ground truth and predicted
segmentation sets, respectively. The score ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect agreement
and 0 representing no overlap.

Reliability diagrams and Expected Calibration Error Reliability diagrams are graphical tools
used in uncertainty modeling to assess the calibration of probabilistic predictions. They plot pre-
dicted probabilities against empirical frequencies, allowing for visual inspection of how well the
predicted probabilities of a model correspond to the actual outcomes. A perfectly calibrated model
would align closely with the diagonal line from the bottom left to the top right of the plot, indicating
that the predicted probabilities match the observed probabilities. Reliability diagrams are computed
by binning predicted probabilities into intervals. For each bin, the mean predicted probability is
plotted against the observed frequency of the corresponding outcomes. This involves calculating the


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


proportion of positive outcomes in each bin and plotting these against the average predicted proba-
bility for the bin. The closer the points lie to the diagonal line from the bottom left to the top right,
the more calibrated the model is considered. Reliability diagrams are closely related to the Expected
Calibration Error (ECE), which quantitatively assesses a model’s calibration. ECE is computed as a
weighted average of the absolute differences between the predicted probabilities and the actual out-
come frequencies across different bins used in reliability diagrams. Each bin’s weight corresponds
to the number of samples it contains. Thus, while reliability diagrams provide a visual interpretation
of model calibration, ECE offers a single numerical value summarizing the calibration error across
all bins.


C    A PPENDIX : TRAINING DETAILS

Toy experiment We generated two-dimensional datasets A and B with a sinusoidal decision
boundary and Gaussian noise. A moderate distribution shift was modeled between the datasets
by adjusting the support values of x1 : x1 ∈ [−0.75, 0.7] for dataset A and x1 ∈ [−0.5, 2.0] for
dataset B. We created 1000 training samples and 500 test samples for dataset A, and 50 train and
500 test samples for dataset B.
We used a consistent model architecture across experiments—a straightforward 3-layer MLP with
256 hidden units in each layer. For methods using dropout, a dropout layer (p = 0.3) followed each
linear layer. For ensemble methods, 4 separate networks were trained on dataset A. For ensembles
and Dropsembles we used 4 network instances for fine-tuning and inference. For MC dropout we
used 100 samples at inference. We trained for 800 epochs for training with a learning rate 1e − 3
and 600 epochs for tuning with a learning rate 5e − 3.

MNIST experiment First, we trained a small autoencoder, consisting of three convolutional layers
in the encoder, only on dataset A. The encoder does not have dropout layers. The encoder was trained
with cross-entropy loss for 50 epochs with a learning rate 0.01 and a cosine warmup scheduler.
After this initial training, the encoder was kept fixed (frozen) for all subsequent experiments, and
the decoder was discarded. This encoder now serves to generate a latent representation of the input
data, which is then supplied to an occupancy network.
The convolutional encoder was trained on Dataset A and consequently frozen for all the rest of the
experiments. Pooling layer was applied to produce same latent code for all 2D coordinates in a
shape.
The 8-layer MLP occupancy network was trained with cross-entropy loss for 50 epochs on dataset
A with a learning rate 0.005 and a cosine warmup scheduler. For ensemble methods, 4 separate
networks were trained on dataset A. For fine-tuning on dataset B we used same learning rate but
tuned the networks for 30 epochs only. For ensembles and Dropsembles we used 4 network instances
for fine-tuning and inference.

ShapeNet experiment For Dataset A, we selected 1,000 random samples from the ShapeNet
dataset’s airplane category. For Dataset B, we randomly selected 10 unseen shapes and applied ran-
dom erosion to simulate real-world distribution shifts. Examples of eroded and high-quality target
shapes are shown in Figure 12. For both datasets, occupancies at a resolution of 128 were provided
to the encoder. SDF values for Dataset A were estimated from ground-truth high-quality meshes.
For Dataset B, meshes were reconstructed from the eroded shapes and subsequently converted into
SDF representations.
The convolutional encoder was trained on Dataset A and consequently frozen for all the rest of the
experiments. Bi-linear upsampling was applied to query latent vectors for specific 3D coordinates
as proposed in convolutional occupancy networks architecture.
The 8-layer DeepSDF MLP network was trained on Dataset A for 100 epochs using a clipped L1
loss (with clipping parameter δ = 0.1), a learning rate of 0.001, and a step scheduler as proposed in
(Park et al., 2019a). When applicable, dropout was added after each activation layer, as suggested
in DeepSDF. For ensemble methods, four separate networks were trained on Dataset A. Fine-tuning
on Dataset B was performed using a non-clipped L1 loss with a slower learning rate of 0.0001
and limited to 75 epochs. For ensembles and Dropsembles, four network instances were employed


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


during fine-tuning and inference. In the SIREN experiment, ReLU activations were replaced with
periodic activation functions (Sitzmann et al., 2020), with dropout applied only after the 4th and 6th
layers in the decoder network.

Lumbar spine experiment All experiments in this section were performed on NVIDIA RTX
A6000 GPU, equipped with 48 GB of memory. The networks were trained at 16-mixed precision
due to memory constraints.
First ReconNet encoder was trained with cross-entropy loss on a full training split of rigged atlas
dataset to obtain a “frozen” encoder. We used a learning rate 0.01 and trained for 100 epochs with
early stopping. Bi-linear upsampling was applied to query latent vectors for specific 3D coordinates
as proposed in convolutional occupancy networks architecture.
The occupancy network architecture incorporates skip connections and ReLU activations, with
dropout layers (p = 0.2) following each linear layer except the last. To effectively model the
entire lumbar spine, we adapted the strategy from (Peng et al., 2020) by replacing the learnable
latent vector with an output from a pretrained convolutional encoder. Specifically, we performed
bilinear upsampling on the output of this frozen encoder to generate a detailed latent representation
for each voxel. This representation, coupled with 3-dimensional voxel coordinates, was provided as
input to the MLP. We used cross-entropy loss for training and fine-tuning the occupancy network.
The network was trained for 100 epochs on dataset A with early stopping applied after 68 epochs.
Learning rate 0.001 and batch size 32 were used for training, where each batch we used only [64,
64, 64] random voxels. For fine-tuning on dataset B we used the same of parameters for all the
methods: learning rate 0.001 and tuned it for 50 epochs without early stopping. Results evaluated at
the checkpoint of the last epoch are presented throughout the paper.


D          A PPENDIX : SELECTING OPTIMAL REGULARIZATION STRENGTH

              MC dropout + EWC                   Ensembles + EWC                      Dropsembles + EWC
Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy
                                  Accuracy


                   log10 lambda                       log10 lambda                           log10 lambda


Figure 6: Toy classification example ablation for EWC regularization strength. Averages and confi-
dence over 3 random seeds. Red dot represents the optimal lambda selected for the main figure.


              MC dropout + EWC               Ensembles + EWC                    Dropsembles + EWC


Figure 7: Corrupted MNIST reconstruction example ablation for EWC regularization strength. Dots
correspond to different samples.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            MC dropout + EWC                          Dropsembles + EWC


Figure 8: Corrupted atlas reconstruction example ablation for EWC regularization strength. Dots
correspond to different samples. Due to high computational demand we were not able to evaluate
all examples on the full grid.


E    A PPENDIX : ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS


Figure 9: Example in the performance difference between Dropsembles w/ and w/o EWC: tiny
details in patient-specific variability are not captured well in DSC metrics, but are apparent on the
qualitative examples and Hausdorff distance (HD). Grey segmentations are produced by Dropsem-
bles w/ or w/o EWC regularization overlayed with colorful segmentations of the HQ ground-truth.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 10: Examples of ShapeNet samples. a) Dataset A; b) Dataset B.


Figure 11: Comparison of average predictions b/w MC Dropout and Dropsembles. Dropout predic-
tions even after averaging are not smooth. a) Meshes produced by averaged predictions; b) A slice
of SDF representation produced by averaging predicted samples.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Figure 12: Examples of Corrupted Atlas dataset.


                   Figure 13: Example of Atlas to MRI segmentations dataset.


Table 3: ShapeNet: Results for models trained on dataset A only. All metrics are reported in per-
centages [%].
                 Method               mDICE [%] ↑    mIoU [%] ↑    ECE [%] ↓
                 Dropout              78.4 ± 2.4     64.5 ± 3.2    31.66 ± 3.37
                 Dropout - SIREN      78.5 ± 3.3     64.8 ± 4.4    31.94 ± 3.89
                 Ensembles            76.4 ± 2.9     61.9 ± 3.7    36.33 ± 3.11
                 Ensembles - SIREN    75.9 ± 3.7     61.3 ± 4.8    36.44 ± 3.85


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: ShapeNet with SIREN activations: Results for models trained on dataset A and B (fine-
tuned on dataset B). All metrics are reported in percentages [%].
                     Method                 mDICE [%] ↑      mIoU [%] ↑        ECE [%] ↓
                     Dropout                80.2 ± 2.4       67.0 ± 3.3        27.99 ± 2.85
                     Dropsembles            83.8 ± 2.2       72.2 ± 3.2        21.04 ± 3.04
                     Ensembles              83.4 ± 2.5       71.6 ± 3.6        24.44 ± 3.03
                     Dropout + EWC          83.3 ± 2.2       71.5 ± 3.2        19.27 ± 2.74
                     Dropsembles + EWC      84.5 ± 2.3       73.2 ± 3.4        17.73 ± 3.05
                     Ensembles + EWC        80.9 ± 2.5       68.0 ± 3.5        28.95 ± 3.07


Table 5: Detailed comparison of training time on lumbar spine experiment. We report the results in
GPU-hours [h].
 Method                   Training on atlas [h]   Tuning on corrupted atlas / lumbar spine MRI [h]    Total [h]
 Baseline                 48                      -/-                                                  48 / 48
 MCdropout                48                      3.5 / 22                                           51.5 / 99.5
 Dropsembles              48                      2.5 / 21 (per network) x4                           58 / 132
 Dropsembles + EWC        48                      2.75 / 22 (per network) x4                          58 / 136
 Ensembles                48 (per network) x4     2.5 / 21 (per network) x4                          202 / 276


Table 6: Comparison of methods tuned on dataset B of lumbar spine MR dataset. Dice Score Coef-
ficient (DSC), Hausdorff distance (HD), Dice Score Coefficient average per network sample (DSC
avg), Expected Calibration Error (ECE), and total inference time (time) are reported for dataset B.
Baseline is MC dropout trained on dataset A.
        Method                 DSC [%] ↑ DSC avg [%] ↑ HD ↓ ECE [%] ↓ time [sec] ↓
             Baseline             75.8            74.0 ± 0.0          18.2       4.7          161
 Subject 1


             MCdropout            93.5            92.3 ± 0.0          6.3        3.6          159
             Dropsembles          93.9            93.5 ± 0.1          6.2        4.4          20
             Dropsembles + EWC    93.9            93.5 ± 0.0          6.0        4.2          21
             Ensembles            93.9            93.5 ± 0.2          24.3       4.3          21
             Baseline             35.9            36.4 ± 0.1          34.2       33.6         30
 Subject 2


             MCdropout            91.3            89.7 ± 0.0          15.2       4.9          160
             Dropsembles          92.0            91.5 ± 0.1          9.4        6.1          19
             Dropsembles + EWC    92.0            91.5 ± 0.1          9.5        6.1          19
             Ensembles            91.9            91.4 ± 0.1          25.2       6.0          21
             Baseline             76.5            74.2 ± 0.0          19.5       3.7          159
 Subject 3


             MCdropout            92.5            91.3 ± 0.0          7.1        4.9          158
             Dropsembles          92.6            92.2 ± 0.0          8.2        5.3          19
             Dropsembles + EWC    92.6            92.2 ± 0.0          6.7        5.2          19
             Ensembles            92.8            92.5 ± 0.1          6.5        5.6          21


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Comparison of methods tuned on dataset B of lumbar spine experiment. Evaluations are
performed on the corrupted atlas. Dice Score Coefficient (DSC), Hausdorff distance (HD), Dice
Score Coefficient average per network sample (DSC avg), Expected Calibration Error (ECE), and
total inference time (time) are reported for dataset B. Baseline is MC dropout trained on dataset A.
            Method                  DSC [%] ↑ DSC avg [%] ↑ HD ↓ ECE [%] ↓ time [sec] ↓
             Baseline             65.5          64.4 ± 0.0        16.8    24.7          172
 Corrupted


             MCdropout            83.5          81.7 ± 0.0        14.3    4.6           160
  Atlas 1


             Dropsembles          85.0          84.7 ± 0.2        13.2    5.7           21
             Dropsembles + EWC    85.0          84.7 ± 0.2        13.3    5.6           21
             Ensembles            84.5          84.2 ± 0.7        13.4    5.0           21
             Baseline             67.2          65.8 ± 0.0        16.5    25.6          164
 Corrupted


             MCdropout            88.6          85.7 ± 0.0        9.4     0.8           170
  Atlas 2


             Dropsembles          90.2          89.6 ± 0.0        8.9     2.3           22
             Dropsembles + EWC    90.3          89.6 ± 0.0        8.1     2.1           22
             Ensembles            90.0          89.3 ± 0.7        7.8     1.3           22
             Baseline             62.3          61.4 ± 0.0        23.5    25.4          163
 Corrupted


             MCdropout            83.7          81.5 ± 0.0        15.4    4.8           162
  Atlas 3


             Dropsembles          85.2          84.8 ± 0.1        12.0    5.9           22
             Dropsembles + EWC    85.3          84.8 ± 0.2        11.2    5.8           22
             Ensembles            84.9          84.5 ± 0.7        10.2    5.3           22


                                               23
