Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OOL D IAL :
           MULTI - TURN DIALOGUE GENERATION
METHOD FOR TOOL - AUGMENTED LANGUAGE MODELS

 Jeonghoon Shim1 , Gyuhyeon Seo1 , Cheongsu Lim2 , Yohan Jo1∗
 1
   Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
 2
   Department of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University
 jhshim98@snu.ac.kr



                                            A BSTRACT

           Tool-Augmented Language Models (TALMs) leverage external APIs to answer
           user queries across various domains. However, existing benchmark datasets for
           TALM research often feature simplistic dialogues that do not reflect real-world
           scenarios, such as the need for models to ask clarifying questions or proactively
           call additional APIs when essential information is missing. To address these lim-
           itations, we construct and release ToolDial, a dataset comprising 11,111 multi-
           turn dialogues, with an average of 8.95 turns per dialogue, based on APIs from
           RapidAPI. ToolDial has two key characteristics. First, the dialogues incorpo-
           rate 16 user and system actions (e.g., “Request”, “Clarify”, “Fail inform”) to
           capture the rich dynamics of real-world interactions. Second, we simulate dia-
           logues where the system requests necessary information from the user based on
           API documentation and seeks additional APIs if the user fails to provide the re-
           quired information. To facilitate this process, we introduce a method for gener-
           ating an API graph that represents input and output compatibility between APIs.
           Using ToolDial, we evaluate a suite of language models on their ability to pre-
           dict correct actions and extract input parameter values for API calls from the di-
           alogue history. Modern language models achieve accuracy scores below 70%,
           indicating substantial room for improvement. We release our dataset and code at
           https://github.com/holi-lab/ToolDial.


1       I NTRODUCTION
A Tool-Augmented Language Model (TALM) is a language model designed to select and call appro-
priate tools (usually APIs) while interacting with the user to answer the user’s query. By leveraging
external tools, the TALM can conduct complex tasks beyond its parametric knowledge and adapt
its actions based on API results. Recent TALM benchmarks mostly feature single-turn interactions
(Qin et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023) with a primary focus on improving tool selection and reasoning
capabilities to address complex user queries within a single turn. However, such interactions do not
reflect real-world scenarios where the TALM should request additional information from the user or
the user clarifies their intent. Even in studies that involve multi-turn interactions (Li et al., 2023),
dialogues tend to be short and limited to scenarios where the TALM asks the user for more details.
The lack of richer datasets that reflect complex user-system interactions makes it difficult to accu-
rately assess the ability of modern language models to handle challenging tool use scenarios in the
wild, such as when the system identifies and requests information from the user based on available
APIs, or when the user cannot provide requested information, requiring the model to call additional
APIs to obtain the information.
To address this issue, we present a new dataset named ToolDial, which consists of multi-turn dia-
logues between the user and TALM based on APIs from RapidAPI1 . The main focus of our dataset
is to simulate dialogues where multiple APIs should be called in sequence (e.g., due to the user
failing to provide information that is needed to call the main API) and where the user and the TALM
can take diverse actions (16 total), such as clarifying the user’s intent or handling the user’s failure
    ∗
         Corresponding author.
    1
        https://rapidapi.com/hub


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Graph Construction                 Action Sequence Construction                                    Scenario Generation                                   <Dialogue Data>
                                                                                                                                                  Inform Intent Clear
            Output
                                                                                                      User turn
    Input                                                                                                                                         User: I want the weather information.
                                                                                                      - Action: Inform intent clear
                                                                   Inform Intent                      - User ask to system with ...
            API
                                                                       Clear
                                                                                                      System turn                                 Request
                                                                                                      - Action: Request
                                                                     Request                          - System asks information...                System: I need the coordinates!
                                           API                                                        User turn
                                       Chain usage                                                    - Action: Fail Inform                       Fail Inform
                                                                    Fail Inform                       - User can’t provide the...     ChatGPT
                         Triple        Information     Define                           Scenario
                                                                                                                                      Prompting
                       Extraction                    Interaction                       Generation                                                 User: I don’t know the coordinates.



                                                                    System                            System turn                                 System Goodbye
                                                                    Goodbye                           - Action: System Goodbye
                                                                                                      - System says good bye                      System: Thank you! Goodbye!


       Figure 1: Overall structure of ToolDial. This represents the whole pipeline of our method.

to provide requested information. To that end, our data generation pipeline consists of four steps,
as shown in Figure 1. First, to facilitate selecting two APIs that should be called in sequence, we
construct an API graph where nodes are APIs and edges between two APIs indicate that one API’s
output can be used as input for the other API (§3.1). Second, to simulate rich dynamics between
the user and TALM, we define 16 types of user and system actions informed by the literature of
task-oriented dialogue systems and compile 23 plausible sequences of actions that are likely to oc-
cur in dialogues (e.g., Inform intent clear → Retriever call → Request → Fail inform) (§3.2). Third,
to generate each dialogue, we select a pair of APIs from the API graph and choose a sequence of
actions that serves as a skeleton. Based on this, we enrich the skeleton by incorporating additional
dialogue state information for each turn, such as the input parameters of the APIs informed by the
user (§3.3). Fourth, we convert the augmented action sequence into natural utterances to complete
a dialogue (§3.4). As a result, ToolDial contains 11,111 dialogues with an average of 8.95 turns per
dialogue.
Based on ToolDial, we designed three evaluation tasks to assess a suite of language models in
their ability to use tool. Specifically, we evaluated their ability (1) to predict appropriate actions
to progress toward answering the user query, (2) to choose the correct API and predict dialogue
states (i.e., extracting user-informed values for API inputs), and (3) to generate responses faithful
to API outputs. We found that GPT-based models struggle with dialogue state prediction, and their
performance declines as the dialogue length increases. Additionally, these models perform poorly
at predicting next actions, particularly struggling with requesting input parameters and asking clar-
ifying questions. For smaller Llama models, they generally underperform compared to GPT-based
models, but fine-tuning on our dataset significantly improved the performance of each task. Notably,
it led to substantial improvements in many actions that GPT models struggled with. Our experiments
suggest that ToolDial can be a valuable resource for both assessing and improving TALMs in com-
plex multi-turn interactions with users.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:

            • We generate and release ToolDial, a dataset consisting of dialogues that reflect real-world
              interactions between the user and a TALM, encompassing 16 user and system actions.
            • We present a framework for creating a large-scale and multi-turn dialogue benchmark using
              an API graph and GPT-4o with minimal human effort.
            • We provide insights into the abilities of various language models to answer user queries
              while interacting with the user across multiple turns and using external APIs.


2      R ELATED W ORKS

Tool Augmented Language Models Table 1 compares our dataset with existing benchmarks. Re-
cent research on TALM has evolved toward investigating how to effectively select tools and deter-
mine which reasoning steps are beneficial for solving complex problems (Yao et al., 2023; Schick
et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023). Similar to our
work, ToolNet (Liu et al., 2024) leverages an API graph, but this graph connects APIs that are called
back-to-back in dialogues without considering the compatibility of the input and output of APIs.
Most existing datasets contain single-turn dialogues between the user and a TALM. For instance,


                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison between ToolDial and other TALM datasets. We derived the number of actions
based on how many action types occur in each dataset with our action taxonomy as a reference.

    Resource                        ToolDial          ToolBench       API-Bank         ToolAlpaca
    Real-world API?                    ✓                  ✓               ✓                X
    Multi-turn Scenario?               ✓                  X               ✓                X
    Multi-tool Scenario?               ✓                  ✓               ✓                X
    Multi-step Reasoning?              ✓                  ✓               ✓                X
    Situation Complexity?              ✓                  X               X                X
    Number of Actions                  16                 3                7               3
    Number of Dialogues              11,111            188,304          6,860            4,889
    Avg. Turn per Dialogue            8.95                2              2.84              2

TaskBench (Shen et al., 2024) attempted to construct graphs by matching API inputs and outputs
and generating user queries that can be solved using API chains. However, they did not propose
a method for graph construction, and focused solely on inferring the sequence of APIs required to
solve a user query in a single turn rather than through a multi-turn dialogue. Although API-Bank (Li
et al., 2023) contains multi-turn interactions, the number of turns in each dialogue is limited (2.84
on average), and the interactions are relatively simplistic. ToolTalk (Farn & Shin, 2023) also reflects
some degree of multi-turn interactions (6.44 on average), but it relies on dialogue generation using
human annotators, resulting in only a small amount of data (a total of 78 dialogues).



Task-Oriented Dialogue System A task-oriented dialogue (TOD) system is a goal-oriented di-
alogue system that processes user queries, understands the intent, and provides answers based on
database searches or tool calls. Representative datasets for TOD include MultiWOZ (Budzianowski
et al., 2020) and Schema-Guided Dialogue (SGD) (Rastogi et al., 2020). MultiWOZ is a multi-turn
dialogue dataset generated by human annotators, which reflects the interactions between users and
the system. Additionally, the annotations of dialogue states allow for the evaluation of a system’s
ability to track dialogue states. Similarly, the SGD dataset features multi-turn interactions. Notably,
the way SGD was generated shares similarities with our data generation method, particularly in that
an action sequence is chosen first for each dialogue, and then utterances are generated. However,
unlike our work, the dialogues in SGD do not reflect difficult situations that a real-world tool agent
may face, as SGD utilizes a limited number of APIs and there are no scenarios where the user fails
to provide the necessary information for an API call. The literature on TOD offers useful concepts
such as dialogue state tracking (Jacqmin et al., 2022) and rich taxonomies of user and system ac-
tions that occur in interactions with real-world agents. There have also been attempts to transfer
TOD datasets into TALM-style data (Moghe et al., 2024). We designed the ToolDial dataset by ref-
erencing representative benchmarks in TOD (e.g., the format of dialogue states in MultiWOZ and
action types in SGD).



3     T OOL D IAL

The dialogues in ToolDial are generated to reflect complex interactions between the user and system
in realistic situations involving chained API usage (i.e., the output of one API is used as the input
for another API). To achieve this, we follow four steps, as shown in Figure 1. First, we construct an
API graph by connecting the input and output entities of APIs (§3.1). This graph plays a critical role
in selecting interdependent APIs to be used for each dialogue. Second, we define 16 types of user
and system actions to capture the complex dynamics in interactions with tool agents. Based on these
actions, we create 23 plausible action sequences that are likely to occur in dialogues (§3.2). Third,
to generate a dialogue, we choose a pair of APIs from the API graph, select an action sequence, and
augment it with concrete dialogue states that track the collection of input parameters for the APIs
(§3.3). Lastly, we generate utterances that reflect the augmented action sequence using GPT-4o
(§3.4). These processes are carried out with minimal human effort.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Reasoning Step                                                                                    Dialogue                                                          Reasoning Step
                                                                    Action: Inform Intent Clear                         Action: Response
                                                                    Can you help me find detailed league                 Here are the home standings for the
 (Thought 1: User seems to have intent. I’ll call the retriever.)                                                                                                     Dialogue State:{seasonId:“45”,tournamentId:“1”}
                                                                    information for a specific basketball                Premier Basketball League:
                                                                    category and home standings for the                  1. Team A: 9 wins, 3 losses, 860 points      (Thought 1: Based on the user's response and dialogue
 (Internal Action: Retriever Call)
                                                                    current season?                                      for, 710 points against, home record 7-1.    history, I can call the LeagueHomeStandings.)
 - Retrieve API: {LeagueHomeStandings: 0.87...})
                                                                                                                                                                      (Internal Action: Call)
 (Thought 2: I need to call LeagueHomeStandings. To call it,                                                                                                          - Call Result:
 I need to ask 'seasonId' and tournamentId to user.)                                              Action: Request                                   Action: Inform
                                                                                                                                                                      1. Team A: 9 wins, 3 losses, 2. Team B: 8 wins, 4 losses ...
 Action: Request                                                                                                                                             Inform
                                                                     Please tell me the seasonId and                                                                  (Thought 2: Based on the results, I can respond to user.)
                                                                                                                                    Sure! I choose NBA.
                                                                     tournamentId for the league
 Dialogue State: {seasonId: “ ”, tournamentId: “ ”}                                                                                                                   Action: Response

                                                                    Action: Fail Inform                                 Action: Request
 (Thought 1: User provided seasonId but no the tournamentId.                                                                                                          Dialogue State: {categoryid:“264” }
  I’ll call the retriever to find the API to get tournamentId.)       I know the seasonId is 45, but I                         Please choose one of the
                                                                      don't know the tournamentId.                             following leagues: NBA, NCAA           (Thought 1: Based on the user's response,I can call
  (Internal Action: Retriever Call)                                                                                                                                   the API CategoryTournaments.)
  - Retrieve API: {CategoryTournaments}
                                                                                                                                                                      (Internal Action: Call)
                                                                                                                                                                      - Call Result: {id: 1, name: NBA}, {id: 2, name: NCAA Men}
  (Thought 2:I need to call CategoryTournaments. To call it,                                      Action: Request                                    Action: Inform
  I need to ask 'categoryid' to user. request.)                                                                                                                       (Thought 2: I got multiple results. I need to ask the name.)
  Action: Request                                                       Please provide the id of the                           Certainly! The id of the               Action: Request
                                                                        basketball category to retrieve                        basketball category is 264.
  Dialogue State: {categoryid:“ ” }                                                                                                                                   Dialogue State:{seasonId:“45”, tournamentId: “ ”}


Figure 2: An example dialogue from ToolDial. This illustrates the user and TALM actions for
each turn, along with corresponding utterances. It also shows the reasoning steps TALM undergoes,
including API calls and retriever calls, before asking or responding to the user.

3.1           G RAPH C ONSTRUCTION

Motivation To simulate dialogues where APIs should be called in sequence to fulfill the user’s
needs (e.g., the user fails to provide a necessary argument for an API, and thus the system should
proactively find and run another API that can provide it), it is necessary to identify which API’s
output can be used as the input for another API (i.e., API chaining). To facilitate this, we construct
an API graph where APIs from RapidAPI are represented as nodes, and two APIs are connected by
an edge if one API’s output can be used as the input for the other API. Eventually, this API graph
will be used in dialogue generation, allowing us to easily select compatible APIs to be called in
sequence.

Settings To determine whether to build an edge between two APIs, we used the names and de-
scriptions of their input and output entities from the API documentation on RapidAPI. However,
these input and output entities often had generic names (e.g., ‘id’), and their descriptions did not
sufficiently explain their meanings. To address this, we augmented the descriptions using GPT-4o-
mini, incorporating the API documentation and instructions (A.1). To replace generic names with
more descriptive and informative identifiers, we summarized the augmented description into a 5- to
7-word phrase. Additionally, we extracted up to 4 keywords from each API’s description to repre-
sent its functionality, ensuring that APIs from vastly different domains were not connected during
edge construction (A.2).

Edge Construction Using the keywords of APIs, along with the names and descriptions of their
input and output entities, we established three criteria for constructing edges Edge based on their
similarities. This process is formalized in Equation 1.


                                               1, if emb(do , di ) > td ∧ emb(do + ko , di + ki ) > tk ∧ LCS(no , ni ) > tl
               Edge =                                                                                                                                                                                                           (1)
                                               0, otherwise

where i and o represent the input and output entities, respectively. d, k, n, and d + k denote the
description, keywords, name, and the concatenation of keywords and description, respectively. emb
is the embedding of a description obtained from the S-BERT model all-mpnet-base-v2 (Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019). LCS stands for the longest common subsequence (Hirschberg, 1977). t represents
the threshold for each criterion. With the embedding similarity between di and do and the longest
common subsequence similarity between ni and no , we aimed to match input and output entities that
exactly correspond to each other. Furthermore, by considering the embedding similarity between
di + ki and do + ko , we ensured that entities from vastly different domains were not incorrectly
matched. As a result, we constructed 4,857 edges from 500 million edge candidates (4,474 × 4,474
API pairs, with each pair averaging 25 edge candidates).


                                                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edge Evaluation To verify the edges in the constructed graph, we designed an automated evalua-
tion metric to classify whether each edge was valid (see the examples of mismatched edges in A.11).
Directly calling the API would be the most reliable method for validating edges, but it requires a
substantial amount of time and cost and suffers from non-executable APIs in RapidAPI. To address
this, we utilized StableToolBench (Guo et al., 2024), an API simulator based on large language
models. StableToolBench can generate API outputs similar to real API calls, allowing us to validate
edges in a similar way to actual API calls. However, StableToolBench also has some issues; for ex-
ample, the outputs of the same API have different formats upon multiple calls. We fixed such issues
by augmenting StableToolBench with additional information from API documentation. We sam-
pled 200 edges from our API graph and measured the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (Matthews,
1975) against human evaluations, which resulted in a score of 0.868. This score indicates a strong
correlation between the evaluation metric and human judgment. For the 4,857 constructed edges, the
precision (the proportion of valid edges among constructed edges) was 70.9%. Next, to estimate the
number of missing edges, we measured Negative Predictive Value (the proportion of invalid edges
among non-constructed edges). Since the graph contained too many unconstructed edges (i.e., no
connection between APIs), we sampled 5,501 pairs of input and output entities that were not con-
nected. The NPV score was 95.0%, indicating that among the candidates that could form edges, the
proportion missing was small. These results indicate that our constructed graph covers most valid
edges at the expense of 30% invalid edges. For dialogue generation, we discarded the invalid edges
in the subsequent steps.

3.2   ACTION S EQUENCES

Motivation In dialogue systems, an action refers to a dialogue act representing a specific behavior
taken by the user or system during a conversation (e.g., “request information”, “deny suggestion”,
etc.). A taxonomy of user and system actions allows a dialogue system to manage dialogue flow
effectively, by focusing on high-level behaviors before generating utterances and providing inter-
pretability. We compile a taxonomy that covers a wide range of actions occurring in user-system
interactions so that the generated dialogues and trained systems reflect the complexity of the real
world. To generate a dialogue in the next step, we will first choose a plausible sequence of actions
(i.e., dialogue flow) as a skeleton before generating utterances (a similar approach was adopted in
SGD (Rastogi et al., 2020)).

Definition of Actions We define a total of 16 actions that the user and system can take. User
actions include three types of intent expressions: “Inform intent clear” (an unambiguous query that
can specify the correct API), “Inform intent clear add” (an unambiguous query along with one
additional input entity of the corresponding API), and “Inform intent vague” (an ambiguous query).
Additionally, “Inform” and “Fail inform” refer to the success and failure, respectively, of providing
an API’s input entities requested by the system. With “Affirm” and “Negate”, the user can accept or
reject the system’s suggestions.
System actions include “Request”, which asks the user for information, and “Response”, which
provides an answer to the user’s query. When the user’s query is ambiguous, the system may take
actions such as “Clarify” or “Suggest” to refine the query. We also define internal system actions
such as “Retriever call” and “Call”, which occur during the TALM’s reasoning steps. The “Retriever
call” action retrieves the appropriate API, while “Call” executes the selected API once all input
parameters have been obtained from the dialogue history (see the description of actions in A.3).

Action Sequences Based on the predefined actions, we define plausible action sequences (Fig-
ure 3). ToolDial is created by combining API pairs from the API graph with action sequences.
The types of combinable action sequences depend on whether the APIs in the pair require input
parameters and on the form of their outputs (e.g., a single value vs. a list of values).
For example, in Figure 2, the “CategoryTournaments” API outputs “id”, which can serve as the input
parameter “tournamentId” for the “LeagueHomeStandings” API. Both APIs require input parame-
ters, and “CategoryTournaments” returns a list of “id”s. In this case, the high-level action sequence
is as follows:

      • Inform intent clear → Retriever call → Request → Fail inform → Retriever call → Request
        → Inform → Call → Request → Inform → Call → Response.


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Inform Intent Clear                   Suggest                                        Negate               Response Fail

                                                      Retriever score
           Inform Intent Vague                            0.5~0.6                                Affirm
                                                                            Input parameter
                                                                                   X
          Inform Intent Clear Add              Retriever call                                    Call                  Response


                                                                Input parameter
                                                                       O                           Input parameter
                             Retriever score    Fail Inform                                                            User Bye
                             lower than 0.5                                                            fulfilled

                                                                              Input parameter
                                                                                 fulfilled X
                  Clarify                        Request                                        Inform                System Bye


Figure 3: Action graph based on predefined user and system actions. This represents the whole
multi turn interaction between user and TALM in our dataset.

There are three “Request” actions in this action sequence. The first one retrieves the input parameters
needed to execute “LeagueHomeStandings”, the second executes “CategoryTournaments”, and the
third selects one “id” from the multiple IDs outputted by “CategoryTournaments” (see the 6th turn
in Figure 2). If an API required no input parameters or returned a single value instead of a list, there
would be at most two “Request” actions, modifying the overall structure of the action sequence.
We also construct different action sequences depending on whether the intent-informing action is
“Inform intent clear” or “Inform intent vague”. In the latter case, we further distinguish whether it
transitions into a “Clarify” or “Suggest” action. Additionally, we design different action sequences
based on the user’s “Fail inform” action within the same API pair (see details in A.5). The complete
set of rules governing action sequences is visualized in Figure 3 (see all types of action sequences
in A.6).

3.3   S CENARIO I NSTRUCTION G ENERATION

ToolDial is a collection of task-oriented dialogues where the system utilizes appropriate APIs to
achieve the user’s goal. When necessary, the system retrieves suitable APIs through an API retriever
and collects the required input parameters for API calls through multi-turn interactions. Generating
such a dialogue involves simulating a user query, defining dialogue states that specify the required
input parameters for APIs provided by the user, and creating utterance instructions that guide utter-
ance generation in the subsequent step.

User Query For each dialogue, we randomly sampled either a single API or a pair of connected
APIs from the API graph. We also randomly sampled an action sequence to be used in the dialogue.
The next key step was to generate a user query relevant to the API(s). To accomplish this, we
prompted GPT-4o with the names and documentation of the API(s) and instructed it to generate a
user query that covers all the API(s). For example, given two APIs “search weather station (input:
coordinates, output: weather station)” and “nearby weather station coordinate API (input: location
name, output: coordinates)”, GPT-4o generated the query “I’m going hiking next week and would
like to find a nearby weather station”. This query became the first user utterance, initiating the
dialogue.

Dialogue State The dialogue state at any point in a dialogue specifies the API name the system
aims to call, its input parameters, and the parameter values provided by the user. To generate a
dialogue given a user query and API(s), GPT-4o simulated concrete and plausible parameter values
(e.g., ”45”, ”264”, and ”NBA” in Figure 2). Dialogue states serve as a basis for generating utterances
and as the ground-truth labels for dialogue state tracking (DST) evaluation (§4). The format of the
dialogue state is specified in A.4.

Scenario Instruction Based on the dialogue states, we construct instructions to guide GPT-4o in
generating user and system utterances. These instructions are based on templates.
For instance, the instruction for the dialogue in Figure 2 is as follows:


                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Overall statistics of ToolDial.                       Table 3: Dialogue quality scores.

 Metric                                 Value               Criterion             G-Eval      Humans
 Train                                  8,859               Naturalness (1–3)         2.28         2.54
 Validation                             1,086               Coherence (1–3)           2.58         2.81
 Test                                   1,166               Efficiency (1–3)          2.81         2.60
 Total                                 11,111               Faithfulness (0–1)        0.90         0.95
 # of turns                            99,476
 # of turns per dialogue                 8.95

          • Inform intent clear: the user utters a pre-constructed query related with API LeagueHome-
            Standings and CategoryTournament.
          • (Retriever call) → Request: the system to ask the user for seasonId and tournamentId.
          • Fail inform: the user responds with seasonId 45 but fails to provide tournamentId.
          • (Retriever call) → Request: the system prompts the user for id.
          • Inform: the user responds with the requested information.
          • (Call) → Request: the system asks the user for the name variable, to select one id from
            multiple results.
          • Inform: the user responds with NBA.
          • (Call) → Response: the system responds based on the results of the call.

By prompting GPT-4o with these scenario instructions, we create a multi-turn dialogue in which the
user and system exchange utterances that align with the dialogue states to fulfill the user query (see
details in A.8).

3.4      D IALOGUE G ENERATION

Utterance Generation We prompt GPT-4o with simple instructions, the scenario instruction
(§3.3), and the relationship between the two APIs in the API pair. Based on this guideline, GPT-4o
generates each utterance of the user and the system that aligns with each turn’s dialogue state (refer
to the examples in Figure 2).

Data Statistics Our dataset ToolDial contains 11,111 dialogues in English reflecting various sce-
narios that can happen in the real world. The statistics of ToolDial are shown in Table 2. ToolDial
is constructed based on 23 types of action sequences and has an average of 8.95 turns per dialogue.

Data Quality To assess the quality of our dataset, we sampled a total of 100 dialogues from all
action sequences and evaluated them using both G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023) and human annotators2 .
The evaluation criteria are as follows:

          • Naturalness (1–3): Are the dialogues natural interactions between the user and TALM?
          • Coherence (1–3): Are the user’ and the TALM’s utterances relevant to and coherent with
            the dialogue context?
          • Efficiency (1–3): Are the system’s reasoning and actions to perform the user’s request
            efficient and natural?
          • Faithfulness (True or False): Are the system’s responses consistent with the output of the
            API call?

Table 3 presents the scores from G-Eval and human annotators. On average, G-Eval assigned high
scores when evaluating the 100 sample dialogues across four criteria. The dialogues received partic-
ularly high scores in Efficiency, indicating that the TALM efficiently performed the necessary steps
to call APIs and collect information.
   2
       Three Master’s students majoring in data science volunteered as annotators. The authors are not included.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Evaluation scores on three tasks. (w GT: ground-truth labels are included in the dialogue
history, w/o GT: no ground-truth labels are provided)


                                           Dialogue State Tracking           Action Prediction      Faithfulness
                  Model                    w GT            w/o GT           w GT       w/o GT         w/o GT
           GPT-3.5-turbo                    38.8             33.1            53.5       54.1           95.4
            GPT-4o-mini                     58.8             67.7            63.7       60.2           96.6
            GPT-4-turbo                     77.5             68.6            64.2       61.5           97.1
              GPT-4o                        81.4             67.8            57.6       63.7           96.7
       CodeLlama-7b-Instruct-hf             47.2             28.9            35.7       30.0           81.7
      Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct             48.9             34.2            55.8       46.8           93.9
         Llama3-8B-Instruct                 53.4             24.5            37.7       35.5           91.5
             TD-Llama                       92.7             72.2            77.5       91.0           88.4


Model Biases In ToolDial, we have leveraged several methods to mitigate GPT-4o’s biases in dia-
logue generation. When GPT-4o generates dialogues without any guidance, the resulting dialogues
tend to be overly repetitive and monotonous. Specifically, certain types of APIs are dispropor-
tionately preferred, and the actions performed by both the user and system lack variety, typically
following a simple “Inform intent - Response” pattern. In ToolDial, we addressed this by creating
dialogue data using 473 real-world APIs spanning 23 domains from RapidAPI (§3.1) and incorpo-
rating 16 actions and 23 action sequences to cover diverse scenarios (§3.2). Furthermore, for certain
actions, GPT-generated utterances tend to have overly consistent speaking styles. As a solution,
we predefined speaking styles for specific actions (A.7) and incorporated a mechanism to randomly
select from these predefined speaking styles during the scenario instruction generation (§3.3).

4     E XPERIMENTS
In these experiments, we designed evaluation tasks to assess the capabilities that the TALM should
possess when engaging in multi-turn interactions with users. The input to the model includes:


      Hn = (u1 , s1 , . . . , un , sn ),   Rn = (r1 , r2 , . . . , rn ),   rn = {tn , An , RS n , Dn , DS n }      (2)

where Hn is the dialogue history up to the n-th turn, and ui and si are the utterances of the user
and TALM in the i-th turn. Rn represents the reasoning steps of the TALM up to the n-th turn,
where ri is the reasoning step in turn i. Each reasoning step includes the thought t, action A,
retriever status RS, retrieved API documentation D from the retriever, and dialogue state DS of the
corresponding turn (see the formation of dialogue state and retriever status in A.4). The reasoning
step of Figure 2 illustrates each component. We used Hn and Rn to predict DS and A in each
turn to evaluate whether the model accurately captures the dialogue context, extracts the appropriate
information, and takes the correct action. Additionally, we evaluated the last utterance sn where An
=“Response” in order to assess the consistency between the model’s response and the output of the
API call.

4.1     E VALUATION TASKS

Dialogue State Tracking Dialogue state tracking (DST) evaluates the model’s ability to determine
which API should be called based on the dialogue history, as well as the accuracy of the collected
input parameter values. DST can be formalized as
                                   DS n = M(Hn−1 , Rn−1 , un )                                   (3)
where DS n is the dialogue state of turn n, M is the TALM’s output, Hn−1 and Rn−1 are the
dialogue history and the TALM’s reasoning steps up to turn n − 1. We evaluate a total of 6,746
annotated dialogue states within the test set. The evaluation checks whether the two dialogue states
match completely after removing all special characters, converting to lowercase, and comparing API
names, input parameters, and their corresponding values.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: F1 score for each action in the action prediction task. This indicates that fine-tuning with
our data supports the system in selecting appropriate actions in multi-turn conversations.

                            Response   Response fail   Request   Retriever call   Clarify   System bye   Suggest   Call
           GPT-3.5-turbo     63.8           0.0         28.4         66.2           1.3        95.5        0.0     53.4
           GPT-4o-mini       78.9           0.0         44.3         67.4          64.5        97.2        0.0     67.0
           GPT-4-turbo       93.6           0.0         18.1         87.5          56.7        97.2       29.9     56.4
 w GT
           GPT-4o            88.3           0.0         13.7         74.9          29.6        97.2       24.6     54.1
           Llama3-8b-Inst    46.4           0.0          8.5         23.7           0.0        99.8       14.0     44.4
           TD-Llama          100.0         77.5         44.8         97.2          77.4        99.9       16.8     68.6
           GPT-3.5-turbo      70.7          0.0          1.3         77.6           0.0       93.0         0.0     49.7
           GPT-4o-mini        88.5          0.0         36.1         62.6           0.0       97.2         0.0     65.1
           GPT-4-turbo        96.6          0.0         10.8         79.9          40.6       97.2        35.5     57.8
 w/o GT
           GPT-4o             95.8          0.0         14.3         81.2          38.6       97.2        46.1     62.0
           Llama3-8b-Inst     30.5          0.0          1.9         27.3           0.0       93.1         9.4     42.0
           TD-Llama           98.2         99.1         78.4         94.5          99.8       100.0       99.9     86.9

Action Prediction The action prediction task involves selecting the next action to be taken based
on the dialogue history and reasoning steps. For this task, the reasoning steps do not include ground-
truth thought t, as it offers a direct cue for which action to take. Action prediction is formalized as
                                     An = M(Hn−1 , (Rn−1 \ tn−1 ), un )                                              (4)
where An is the system action in turn n. We evaluate a total of 9,200 annotated actions within
the test set. Each turn’s true action and predicted action are converted to lowercase, and special
characters are removed. Evaluation is based on whether they match exactly.

Faithfulness We evaluate whether the final response of the TALM is grounded in the API call
output, as generating responses faithful to API call results is critical for tool agents. We provide
the TALM with dialogue history that includes the API call results and use G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023)
to assess whether the responses reflect the API call output. The evaluation method aligns with the
faithfulness criterion outlined in the Dialogue Generation step (§3.4). We evaluate a total of 943
system responses (removing “Response fail”) within the test set. Following the same method as
G-Eval, a GPT-4o-mini model with temperature set above 0 evaluates each response for 10 times.
The average score of the 10 results (all either 0 or 1) is used as the score.

4.2     E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

In the real world, the model is not provided with ground-truth actions or dialogue states in the di-
alogue history. Hence, we evaluate models in two settings: “with GT (ground truth)” and “without
GT”. The latter is to see the upper bound performance of the models assuming that all prior pre-
dictions are correct. “With GT” uses the formulations in Equations 3 and 4, and “without GT” is
formalized as
 DS wogt
    n    = M(Hn−1 , (Rn−1 \DS), un ),                  Awogt
                                                        n    = M(Hn−1 , (Rn−1 \(tn−1 ∪An−1 )), un ) (5)
For the faithfulness task, we only conduct the experiment in the “without GT” setting, as the model
generates the final turn response and no ground-truth label exists in Hn−1 or Rn−1 . All instruction
prompts used in each task are in A.13.
As baseline models, we choose GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4-turbo, GPT-4o, CodeLlama-
7b-Instruct-hf, Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct, and LLaMA3-8B-instruct. We also instruction-tuned
LLaMA3-8B-instruct with the ToolDial dataset (TD-Llama) and conducted the same experiments.
All experiments are conducted in a zero-shot setting, where only task-specific instructions are pro-
vided without any additional few-shot samples.

4.3     R ESULTS

The experiment results are summarized in Table 4.

Dialogue State Tracking For the GPT-based models (rows 1–4), we observed that the latest ver-
sions outperform their predecessors. Additionally, both closed-source and open-source LLMs scored
lower in the “w/o GT” setting compared to the “with GT” setting, as expected. Instruct-tuning the


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Llama model (TD-Llama) on our dataset (row 7) significantly enhances its performance in both set-
tings, demonstrating the value of our dataset for training TALMs. Furthermore, we observed that
accuracy decreases as the number of turns increases (A.10). For TD-Llama, performance remains
stable in the “with GT” setting even with longer turns. However, in the “w/o GT” setting, which
better reflects real-world scenarios, performance declines as the number of turns increases. This
suggests that dialogue state tracking over multiple turns in real-world settings remains a challenging
task. A detailed error analysis of DST is provided in A.9.


Action Prediction In the action prediction task, GPT models (rows 1–4) achieved an accuracy
of around 60%, which suggests that there is significant room for improvement. On the other hand,
Llama3-8B-Instruct received a much lower accuracy of around 35%, indicating the difficulty in
determining appropriate actions based on dialogue history. However, once fine-tuned on our dataset,
TD-Llama (row 7) achieved an accuracy of 77.5% and 91.0% on with GT and w/o GT respectively,
outperforming GPT models.
To better understand the models’ performance across actions, Table 5 shows the F1-score for each
action. Here, GPT models show relatively low scores for predicting actions like “Request”, “Clar-
ify”, and “Suggest”. This result is consistent with our observation that GPT-based models often
rush to provide answers without collecting further information or asking clarifying questions. These
actions are essential in real-world interactions to serve the user’s needs precisely and reduce hal-
lucinations, and TD-Llama demonstrates improved performance on these actions. Another notable
result is the low performance of GPT models on the “Response fail” action. When the user refuses to
proceed with a suggested API, the models often attempt to clarify the user’s intent (“Clarify”) rather
than acknowledging the failure and terminating the dialogue. While this move could be considered
somewhat reasonable, it violates the instruction provided in the prompt and may bother the user.


Faithfulness GPT models achieved over a 90% accuracy in the faithfulness task. However, the
performance of the smaller Llama-based models remains around 88.4%. This demonstrates that
small language models are vulnerable to hallucination, and we need better methods for improving
the faithfulness of these models.


Overall Performance To accurately resolve a user’s query in real-world settings, generating cor-
rect reasoning trace (dialogue state, action) based on dialogue history and the user’s most recent
utterance is crucial at each turn. We evaluated the overall performance of the fine-tuned TD-Llama
model in this context. We assessed whether the model correctly generated both the dialogue state
and action after processing 5,213 user utterances in the test set. A result was marked as true if both
the action and dialogue state were accurately generated for each reasoning step; otherwise, it was
marked as false. This evaluation yielded a performance score of 77.1%. Additionally, for 1,166 test
dialogues, we measured the proportion of dialogues in which the reasoning trace was correctly gen-
erated for all turns—from the first to the last— achieving an accuracy rate of approximately 28.3%.
This suggests that there is significant room for improvement in overall performance.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduce ToolDial, a multi-turn dialogue dataset that reflects interactions between
a user and the TALM in real-world scenarios. To generate realistic dialogues, we construct and em-
ploy an API graph representing the interdependencies between APIs, aiming to simulate scenarios
in which the TALM must call multiple APIs to obtain necessary information. Additionally, we de-
fine 16 user and system actions to reflect the rich dynamics of tool-use conversations. To generate
a dialogue, we first sample APIs and an action sequence as a skeleton. This skeleton is then aug-
mented with dialogue states specific to the APIs and finally converted into utterances using GPT-4o.
Our evaluation demonstrates that modern language models perform poorly in predicting appropriate
actions and dialogue states in complex multi-turn interactions. We believe ToolDial can serve as a
valuable resource for advancing the field of TALM.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the New Faculty Startup Fund and the Creative-Pioneering Researchers
Program through Seoul National University. It was also supported by the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) grants (RS-2024-00333484, RS-2024-00414981) and the Institute of Informa-
tion & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) under the Leading Generative AI
Human Resources Development (IITP-2025-RS-2024-00397085) grant, both funded by the Korea
government (MSIT, Ministry of Science and ICT).

R EFERENCES
Paweł Budzianowski, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Bo-Hsiang Tseng, Iñigo Casanueva, Stefan Ultes, Osman
  Ramadan, and Milica Gašić. Multiwoz – a large-scale multi-domain wizard-of-oz dataset for
  task-oriented dialogue modelling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00278.
Nicholas Farn and Richard Shin. Tooltalk: Evaluating tool-usage in a conversational setting, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10775.
Zhicheng Guo, Sijie Cheng, Hao Wang, Shihao Liang, Yujia Qin, Peng Li, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Yang Liu. Stabletoolbench: Towards stable large-scale benchmarking on tool learning
  of large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07714.
Daniel S. Hirschberg. Algorithms for the longest common subsequence problem. J. ACM, 24
  (4):664–675, October 1977. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/322033.322044. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/322033.322044.
Léo Jacqmin, Lina M. Rojas Barahona, and Benoit Favre. “do you follow me?”: A survey of recent
   approaches in dialogue state tracking. In Oliver Lemon, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Junyi Jessy Li, Arash
   Ashrafzadeh, Daniel Hernández Garcia, Malihe Alikhani, David Vandyke, and Ondřej Dušek
   (eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and
   Dialogue, pp. 336–350, Edinburgh, UK, September 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.sigdial-1.33. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   sigdial-1.33.
Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei
 Huang, and Yongbin Li. Api-bank: A comprehensive benchmark for tool-augmented llms, 2023.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08244.
Xukun Liu, Zhiyuan Peng, Xiaoyuan Yi, Xing Xie, Lirong Xiang, Yuchen Liu, and Dongkuan
  Xu. Toolnet: Connecting large language models with massive tools via tool graph, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00839.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2303.16634.
Brian W. Matthews. Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of t4 phage
  lysozyme. Biochimica et biophysica acta, 405 2:442–51, 1975. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:44596673.
Nikita Moghe, Patrick Xia, Jacob Andreas, Jason Eisner, Benjamin Van Durme, and Harsh Jhamtani.
  Interpreting user requests in the context of natural language standing instructions, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09796.
Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15334.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein,
  Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master
  16000+ real-world apis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16789.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, and Pranav Khaitan. Towards
  scalable multi-domain conversational agents: The schema-guided dialogue dataset, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05855.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hug-
  ginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Wenqi Zhang, Kan Ren, Siyu Yuan, Weiming Lu, Dongsheng
  Li, and Yueting Zhuang. Taskbench: Benchmarking large language models for task automation,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18760.
Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, Boxi Cao, and Le Sun. Toolal-
  paca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05301.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2210.03629.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   E NTITY DESCRIPTION GENERATION

                           Table 6: Prompt used to generate input entity

 Prompt for generating input entity descriptions
 System
 You are an intelligent annotator. Your mission is to write the description of input parameters more
 specifically, referring to the given information.
 Write as specifically as possible, referring to the given information. The new description should be
 based on the existing description but rewritten to better reflect the content of the API description and
 API endpoint description than before. Just return the input and its description, not individual words.
 For example:
 Category of the API: Data Description of the Category: APIs facilitate the seamless exchange of
 data between applications and databases, enabling developers to integrate functionalities securely
 and swiftly. API Name: YouTube Media Downloader API Description: A scraper API for YouTube
 search and download. Get videos, subtitles, comments without age or region limits (proxy URL
 supported). API Endpoint Name: Get Channel Details API Endpoint Description: This endpoint
 fetches details of a YouTube channel.
 List of input parameters:
 Input parameter name: channelId Description: Channel ID, custom URL name, or handle. @ is
 required as a prefix for a channel handle.
 Input parameter name: lang Description: Language code (ISO-639) for localized results. Defaults
 to en-US. Unsupported codes will fallback to en-US.
 For this, you should return:
 [ [“channelId”, “The unique identifier for the YouTube channel, which can be the channel’s ID, a
 custom URL name, or a channel handle. When using a channel handle, ensure to prefix it with ‘@’
 (e.g., ‘@channelname’)”.], [“lang”, “The language code (ISO-639) used to specify the language for
 the localized results. If not provided, the default is ‘en-US’. In case an unsupported language code
 is supplied, the results will revert to ‘en-US”’.] ] Now, I’ll give you another description. Follow the
 instructions, referring to the example.
 Write as specifically as possible, referring to the given information. The new description should
 be based on the existing description but written in a way that better reflects the content of the API
 description and API endpoint description than before. Just return the input and its description, not
 individual words.


                      Table 7: Prompt used to generate output entity description

 Prompt for generating output entity descriptions
 System
 You are an intelligent annotator. Your mission is to write the description of the output components
 of an API endpoint, referring to the given information below.
 For example:
 Category of the API: Data Description of the Category: APIs facilitate the seamless exchange of
 data between applications and databases, enabling developers to integrate functionalities securely
 and swiftly. API Name: YouTube Media Downloader API Description: A scraper API for YouTube
 search and download. Get videos, subtitles, comments without age or region limits (proxy URL
 supported). API Endpoint Name: Get Channel Details API Endpoint Description: This endpoint
 fetches details of a YouTube channel.
 Based on the given description, write the description of the output component of this API endpoint.
 Write as specifically as possible. Do not generate examples for each component. The description
 should reflect as closely as possible the description of the API and the API endpoint, so that even
 someone seeing this API endpoint for the first time can understand exactly what the output compo-
 nent means. (A component separated with — refers to the hierarchy of the schema. For example,
 avatar—height refers to the height of the avatar.)



                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Output components: [ { ‘name”: status” }, { ‘name”: type” }, { ‘name”: id” }, { ‘name”: name” }, {
 ‘name”: handle” }, { ‘name”: description” }, { ‘name”: isVerified” }, { ‘name”: isVerifiedArtist” },
 { ‘name”: subscriberCountText” }, { ‘name”: videoCountText” }, { ‘name”: viewCountText” }, {
 ‘name”: joinedDateText” }, { ‘name”: country” }, { ‘name”: links—title” }, { ‘name”: links—url”
 }, { ‘name”: avatar—url” }, { ‘name”: avatar—width” }, { ‘name”: avatar—height” } ]
 For this example, you have to return,
 [ { ‘name”: status”, ‘description”: Indicates whether the API call was successful. True means the
 call was successful, while False means it failed” }, { ‘name”: type”, ‘description”: Specifies the
 type of YouTube channel, such as ’User’ or ’Brand’, indicating the category of the channel”. }, {
 ‘name”: id”, ‘description”: The unique identifier assigned to the YouTube channel, which can be
 used to reference the channel in other API calls or services”. }, { ‘name”: name”, ‘description”:
 The official name of the YouTube channel as displayed on the platform, which is set by the channel
 owner”. }, { ‘name”: handle”, ‘description”: The unique handle of the YouTube channel, which
 often appears in the URL of the channel’s page”. }, { ‘name”: description”, ‘description”: A textual
 description provided by the channel owner that gives an overview of the channel’s content, themes,
 and purpose”. }, { ‘name”: isVerified”, ‘description”: Indicates whether the YouTube channel is
 verified by YouTube. A verified status signifies authenticity and is usually granted to public figures,
 brands, and popular content creators”. }, { ‘name”: isVerifiedArtist”, ‘description”: Specifies if the
 YouTube channel is recognized as a verified artist’s channel, which is a special status for musicians
 and bands to highlight their official content”. }, { ‘name”: subscriberCountText”, ‘description”: A
 human-readable representation of the number of subscribers the channel has, formatted for display
 purposes”. }, { ‘name”: videoCountText”, ‘description”: A human-readable representation of the
 total number of videos uploaded by the channel, formatted for display purposes”. }, { ‘name”: view-
 CountText”, ‘description”: A human-readable representation of the total number of views across all
 videos on the channel, formatted for display purposes”. }, { ‘name”: joinedDateText”, ‘description”:
 A human-readable representation of the date when the YouTube channel was created, formatted for
 display purposes”. }, { ‘name”: country”, ‘description”: The country where the YouTube channel is
 registered or primarily based, providing geographical context”. }, { ‘name”: links—title”, ‘descrip-
 tion”: The title of an external link provided by the channel, which can lead to the channel’s social
 media profiles, websites, or other related content”. }, { ‘name”: links—url”, ‘description”: The
 URL of an external link associated with the channel, which directs users to other online presences
 of the channel”. }, { ‘name”: avatar—url”, ‘description”: The URL of the channel’s avatar image,
 which is the profile picture displayed on the channel’s page”. }, { ‘name”: avatar—width”, ‘descrip-
 tion”: The width of the avatar image in pixels, providing information about the image dimensions”.
 }, { ‘name”: avatar—height”, ‘description”: The height of the avatar image in pixels, providing
 information about the image dimensions”. } ]
 Now, I’ll give you another API endpoint description. Write the description of the output components
 and return it in the same format as the example. Just return the result, not individual words. Based
 on the given description, write the description of the output components of this API endpoint. Write
 as specifically as possible. Do not generate examples for each component. The description should
 reflect the API and the API endpoint as closely as possible, so that even someone seeing this API
 endpoint for the first time can understand exactly what the output component means. (A component
 separated with — refers to the hierarchy of the schema. For example, avatar—height refers to the
 height of the avatar.)
 Fill the <Your response>.
 <Your response>


A.2   K EYWORDS EXTRACTION

                             Table 8: Prompt used to extract keywords

 Prompt for extracting keywords
 System
 Extract the keywords from the given paragraph. Prioritize proper nouns first and nouns second,
 selecting up to 4 words that best describe the paragraph. Return the keywords in CSV format.
 Remember, the maximum is 4 words.
 Paragraph:


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    U SER AND SYSTEM ACTION LIST

Our work defines 8 user actions and 8 system actions, which form the basis for conceptualizing
interactions. Table 9 and 10 provide the names and descriptions of these actions.

                                 Table 9: User action and description

      User Action                     Description
      Inform intent clear             Say what one wants specifically.
      Inform intent clear add         Say what one wants specifically with the information of
                                      input parameter.
      Inform intent vague             Say what one wants vaguely.
      Inform                          Inform the requested information to system.
      Fail inform                     Fail to reply to system’s request.
      Affirm                          Agree to the system’s proposition.
      Negate                          Deny the system’s proposal.
      User bye                        Say thank you and goodbye to system.

                                Table 10: TALM action and description

      System Action                   Description
      Request                         Asks some information to user.
      Response                        Reply to user’s request based on the result of API call.
      Clarify                         If user’s query is vague,
                                      re-ask user to get intent specifically.
      Suggest                         Making a suggestion for an unclear user’s intent and ask-
                                      ing whether it satisfies the user.
      Response fail                   Notify the user that the system cannot execute the request
                                      due to insufficient information.
      System bye                      System says goodbye to user politely.
      Call                            Call the API with collected information from user or else
                                      and don’t reply to user yet.
      Retriever call                  Call the retriever to find proper API to satisfy user’s re-
                                      quests.


A.4    D IALOGUE STATE AND R ETRIEVER STATUS ANNOTATION FORMAT

Our data is annotated with “retriever status” each turn. This indicates whether the retriever was
called for each turn of the conversation, the APIs retrieved as a result, and their respective retriever
scores. The actions that the TALM should take vary depending on the retriever score. If there is an
API with a score of 0.6 or higher, the TALM asks the user for input parameters to call it. If the score
is between 0.5 and 0.6, the TALM suggests the retrieved API, and if the score is lower, it asks for
clarification of the user’s query. Format of retriever status can have three types described below:

 • When retriever is not called
   {Retriever status: false, Retrieved API: none}
 • Situation where the TALM needs to find the appropriate API to solve the user’s query.
   {Retriever status: true, Retrieved API: {API 1: 0.65, API2: 0.54, API3: 0.51...}}
 • Situation that TALM needs to obtain an input parameter that the user has not provided.
   {Retriever status: true, Retrieved API: [Output component of source API to procure target API’s
   input parameter param1 → output1]}

Additionally, our dataset is labeled with the dialogue state for each turn. The dialogue state includes
the API that the TALM is currently attempting to execute and the input parameter information col-
lected for that API, based on the dialogue history. The dialogue state has the following format:


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Case1                     Fail inform                          Request      Fail inform                                           (User provide “name” previously)

                                               Name is John                                                                     Call API1 {email: abc@net}          Call API2
                                                                                      I need email     It’s abc@net
                                               but I don’t know Id                                                              Result: {Id: 123454}                {Id: 123454, name: John}



      Inform Intent                       Request                   Retriever Call                                                                                                                              Response
                                                                   (API1 retrieved)
                                   I need Id and
  Can you solve..                                                                                                                                                                                    Here are the results
                                   name
                                                                    Retriever Call                                Call API1 {email: abc@net}
                                                                   (API1 retrieved)                               Result: {Id: 123454}

                     Retriever Call                     Fail inform                          Request           Inform                     Request                    Inform
                    (API2 retrieved)
                                                                                                                                 Can you give me                                         Call API2
                                                   I can’t provide Id                 I need email     It’s abc@net                                              It’s John
                                                                                                                                 the name?                                               {Id: 123454, name: John}
                              Case2
                                                                                                                      (User didn’t provide “name” previously)


      Figure 4: Possible cases of two action sequences according to perform types “Fail inform”.

 • When there is no confirmed API
   {API confirmed: false, API status: none}
 • When the API is confirmed
   {API confirmed: true, API status: {API name: “API1”, Required parameters: {param1: “ ”,
   param2: “ ”}, Optional parameters: {param3: “ ”}}}
 • When the API is confirmed and some input parameter information can be extracted from
   dialogue history
   {API confirmed: true, API status: {API name: “API1”, Required parameters: {param1:
   “value1”, param2: “ ”}, Optional parameters: {param3: “value3”}}}

A.5        VARIATION OF FAIL INFORM ACTION

User can perform “Fail inform” in two ways: either indicating they don’t know one parameter while
providing the rest, or simply stating they don’t know the missing parameter without further input.
Figure 4 demonstrates the two ways.

A.6        C OMPREHENSIVE ACTION S EQUENCES

Assuming that at most two APIs are called in a dialogue, a total of 23 action sequences are derived
for data generation. Among these, 15 sequences involve two APIs, 7 involve one API, and 1 involves
a failure to call any APIs. The 15 sequences with two APIs are further categorized based on the type
of action sequence request: either directly requesting input parameters from the user (“Request”)
or making an additional requesting to select an appropriate value from multiple results (“Request-
multi”).

                                                                  Table 11: Action Sequences with two APIs

    No.                Action Sequence
     1                 ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’,
                       ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System
                       bye’
       2               ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’,
                       ‘Retriever call’, ‘Call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System
                       bye’
       3               ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
                       call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’,
                       ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
       4               ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
                       call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request-
                       multi’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
       5               ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
                       call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request’,
                       ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’


                                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      6      ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’,
             ‘Call’, ‘Request-multi’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      7      ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Re-
             quest’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System
             bye’
      8      ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Re-
             quest’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      9      ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’,
             ‘Call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      10     ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’,
             ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request-multi’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Re-
             sponse’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      11     ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
             call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Call’,
             ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      12     ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’,
             ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’,
             ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      13     ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Re-
             quest’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Request-multi’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’,
             ‘System bye’
      14     ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
             call’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Call’, ‘Request-multi’, ‘Inform’,
             ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      15     ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Fail inform’,
             ‘Retriever call’, ‘Call’, ‘Request-multi’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’,
             ‘System bye’


                               Table 12: Action Sequences with one API

   No.       Action Sequence
    1        ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever
             call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      2      ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear add’, ‘Retriever
             call’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      3      ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Affirm’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’,
             ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      4      ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Clarify’, ‘Inform intent clear add’, ‘Retriever
             call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      5      ‘Inform intent clear add’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’,
             ‘User bye’, ‘System bye’
      6      ‘Inform intent clear add’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User bye’, ‘System
             bye’
      7      ‘Inform intent clear’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Request’, ‘Inform’, ‘Call’, ‘Response’, ‘User
             bye’, ‘System bye’


                                Table 13: Action Sequence with failure

   No.       Action Sequence
    1        ‘Inform intent vague’, ‘Retriever call’, ‘Suggest’, ‘Negate’, ‘Response fail’


A.7       U TTERANCE STYLE

We have defined several utterance styles for some actions to prevent GPT-4o from generating con-
sistent speaking styles.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • User Action
           – Inform
              * Sure! ∼, Ok ∼, Certainly!
           – Affirm
              * Yes, that works., That would be great., Sure, that sounds good., Yes, please pro-
                 ceed.
           – Negate
              * No, that’s not what I meant, I’m good. Thank you though, Umm... that’s not what
                 I want
       • System Action
           – Request
              * To call ∼, I need ∼, May I ask for ∼, Please tell me ∼,
           – Clarify
              * Could you please provide more ∼, I’m not sure I understand. Can you clarify ∼,
                Could you explain that in more ∼, Can you clarify your ∼

A.8   S CENARIO I NSTRUCTION

We use detailed dialogue scenario instruction to ensure that the predefined interactions are accurately
reflected in the dialogue data and that the correct entities are included in each utterance.

                               Table 14: Example of scenario instruction

 Scenario prompt

 User turn
 -user action: Inform intent vague (Say what one wants vaguely.)
 -situation: User requests something from the system. User says “Can you provide detailed informa-
 tion about a city I plan to visit, including its geographical context and population data, so I can find
 some highly-rated local businesses with good reviews and contact details nearby?”


 System turn
 -system action: Retriever call (Call the retriever to find the proper API to satisfy the user’s request.)
 -situation: The system, having received the user’s query, calls the retriever to find an appropriate
 API. In this turn, the system’s thought is, “The user seems to have intent. I will call the retriever”.
 Retriever status: retriever call: ‘true’, retrieved api: ‘Data—local business data—Search Nearby’:
 0.56445915, ‘Data—local business data—Search In Area’: 0.5539355, ‘Mapping—places—Place
 properties’: 0.5367253, ‘Location—spott—Search places’: 0.53351307, ‘Data—serpwow—Google
 Place and Maps Details’: 0.5169816
 Dialogue state: api confirmed: ‘false’, api status: ‘none’


 System turn
 -system action: Suggest (Make a suggestion for an unclear user intent and ask whether it satisfies
 the user.)
 -situation: Since the user’s query is unclear, no API with a retriever score higher than 0.6 has been
 found. However, several APIs have scores between 0.5 and 0.6. The system asks whether it would be
 appropriate to run Data—local business data—Search Nearby, which has the highest score among
 them, and retrieve the result. At this time, the system does not mention the name of the API directly.
 Retriever status: retriever call: ‘false’, retrieved api: ‘none’
 Dialogue state: api confirmed: ‘false’, api status: ‘none’


 User turn
 -user action: Affirm (Agree to the system’s proposition.)


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 -situation: User agrees with the system’s proposition. User’s speech should follow this format: “Yes,
 please proceed”.


 System turn
 -system action: Request (Asks some information to user.)
 -situation: System asks user to..



A.9   DST E RROR A NALYSIS

                        Table 15: DST error analysis for GPT-based models

                              GPT-3.5-turbo           GPT-4o-mini            GPT-4-turbo               GPT-4o
                             W GT W/O GT            W GT W/O GT            W GT W/O GT            W GT W/O GT
 # of Error                  4128      4512         2781     2177          1515     2117          1257      2169
 Generation Err                0         0            0        0             0         0            0         0
 API Conf Err (GT = T)       1609      1841         1060      504           211      224           243      1607
 API Conf Err (GT = F)        750       410          848      373           692      891           343       133
 Format Err                   532       502          153       0             0        74            0        531
 Slot Err                    1139      1674          508      912           430      774           443       221
 Value Err                    561       630          398      823           498      626           495       221

                Table 16: DST error analysis for Llama3-8b-instruct and TD-llama

                                          Llama3-8b-instruct            TD-llama
                                          W GT    W/O GT           W GT W/O GT
               # of Err                    3138     5090            492       1873
               Generation Err                3        0             260       1619
               API Conf Err (GT = T)        583     1014             30         1
               API Conf Err (GT = F)        723      923              0          0
               Format Err                   531      319             61        103
               Slot Err                    1101     2663              6         23
               Value Err                    846     1423            134        144

Tables 15 and Table 16 present the error analysis results for each model on the dialogue state tracking
(DST) task. We categorized the errors in DST as follows.

       • Generation Error: This occurs when the dialogue state dictionary is not generated at all.
       • API Confirmation Error (GT = True): This error happens when the API is
         confirmed (api confirmed=true), but is incorrectly predicted as not confirmed
         (api confirmed=false).
       • API Confirmation Error (GT = False): This error occurs when the API is not con-
         firmed (api confirmed=false), but the model incorrectly predicts it as confirmed
         (api confirmed=true).
       • Format Error: This occurs when the dialogue state does not fully generate all fields such
         as api confirmed, api status, required parameters, and optional parameters.
       • Slot Error: When api confirmed is true, this error involves generating a dialogue
         state that does not include all required and optional parameter slots as specified in the API
         documentation.
       • Value Error: This error involves incorrectly extracting the slot’s value from the dialogue
         history, with the following types:
            – Extracting Input Value from Multiple Result Error: This error occurs when an
               appropriate value cannot be selected from multiple results returned by the API output
               (as seen in turns 6 and 7 of Figure 2).


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           – Inform Intent Add Error: This occurs when there is a value within the user query
             that could be used as an input parameter (Inform intent clear add), but the
             model fails to track it.
           – Other General Input Parameter Extraction Errors: Errors that occur in typical
             situations where the input parameter is extracted incorrectly.

The error analysis tables show error counts, where slot and value errors can overlap in a single
prediction, causing their sum to exceed the total errors. We also provide examples of DST errors as
part of a qualitative error analysis.
------------------------------------------------------------------
<Example1. Extracting Input Value from Multiple Result Error>
...
- Retriever status:{‘Retriever call’:‘true’, ‘retrieved api’: [‘getPaymentInitiationInstruc-
tionSummary’,‘Output to procure input parameter uetr of getPaymentInitiationInstruction:
end to end identification’]} ...
- Call result:

[{’end_to_end_identification’: ’XYZ/123-45678/2021-07-15’,
  ’creation_date_time’: ’2022-05-20T14:30:00’,
  ’requested_execution_date’: ’2021-10-01T09:00:00’,
  ’instructed_amount’: ’1500000.50’},
 {’end_to_end_identification’: ’XYZ/123-45679/2021-07-16’,
  ’creation_date_time’: ’2022-05-25T10:15:00’,
  ’requested_execution_date’: ’2021-10-02T09:00:00’,
  ’instructed_amount’: ’750000.00’}]

- Thought: The API call to ‘getPaymentInitiationInstructionSummary’ returned multiple results. I
need to ask the user to select one based on the ‘requested execution date’. ...
- Message: Please tell me the requested execution date of the transaction you are interested in:
‘2021-10-01T09:00:00’ or ‘2021-10-02T09:00:00’?
------------------------------------------------------------------
Label: {...{‘api name’:‘getPaymentInitiationInstruction’,‘required parameters’: {‘uetr’:‘’},...}}
Predict:{...{‘api name’:‘getPaymentInitiationInstruction’,‘required parameters’:{‘uetr’:‘XYZ/123-
45678/2021-07-15’},...}}
------------------------------------------------------------------
Example 1 is a situation where the output ‘end to end identification’ of API ‘getPaymentInitia-
tionInstructionSummary’ can procure the ‘uter’ of ‘getPaymentInitiationInstruction’. In this turn,
multiple ‘end to end identification’ values are returned, requiring a request to the user to select one
value and gather the uter value accordingly. However, it was observed that the model’s prediction
arbitrarily selected one of the results, which leads to generate wrong dialogue state.
------------------------------------------------------------------
<Example2. Inform Intent Add Error Error>
User: How do I create a Basic Plan for recurring billing payments?
System:
...
(retrieved createPlan from the retriever)
...
- API docs: {‘api name’:‘createPlan’,
{‘input parameter name’: ‘name’,
‘description’: ‘The name of the billing plan that is being created for the purpose of managing pay-
ment schedules and billing cycles in the PayPal payment processing system.’,
...(and other input parameter’s name and descriptions)...
},
- Message: To call the API to create a Basic Plan, I need the following information: accessToken,
description, paymentDefinitions, type, merchantPreferences, and sandbox.
------------------------------------------------------------------
Label: {...{‘api name’: ‘createPlan’, ‘required parameters’: {‘accessToken’: ‘’, ‘description’:


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


‘’, ‘paymentDefinitions’: ‘’, ‘name’: ‘Basic Plan’, ‘type’: ‘’, ‘merchantPreferences’: ‘’}, ‘op-
tional parameters’: {‘sandbox’: ‘’}}}
Predict: {...{‘api name’: ‘createPlan’, ‘required parameters’: {‘accessToken’: ‘’, ‘description’: ‘’,
‘paymentDefinitions’: ‘’, ’name’: ‘’, ‘type’: ‘’, ‘merchantPreferences’: ‘’}, ‘optional parameters’:
{‘sandbox’: ‘’}}}
------------------------------------------------------------------
Example 2 is a case where the input parameter ‘name’ required for executing the ‘createPlan’ API is
specified as the value ‘Basic Plan’ in user’s query. Additionally, the system’s request action message
only inquires about input parameters other than ‘name’. In such a situation, the dialogue state should
be generated with ‘name’ already populated as ‘Basic Plan’. However, it was generated with ‘name’
left empty, resulting in this case being classified as an error.
------------------------------------------------------------------


A.10     DST ACCURACY BASED ON TURN LENGTH

                                                     DST in w GT                                                            DST in w/o GT
                          1.0                                                                    1.0

                          0.9
                                                                                                 0.8
                          0.8

                          0.7
           DST Accuracy


                                                                                  DST Accuracy

                                                                                                 0.6
                          0.6

                          0.5
                                                                                                 0.4
                                    gpt-3.5-turbo                                                          gpt-3.5-turbo
                          0.4       gpt-4o-mini                                                            gpt-4o-mini
                                    gpt-4-turbo                                                            gpt-4-turbo
                          0.3       gpt-4o                                                       0.2       gpt-4o
                                    Llama3-8b-Inst                                                         Llama3-8b-Inst
                          0.2       TD-Llama                                                               TD-Llama
                                2      3       4     5     6     7   8   9   10                        2      3       4     5     6     7   8   9   10
                                                         Turns                                                                  Turns

         Figure 5: DST Accuracy for each model as the number of dialogue turns increases.


A.11     R EMOVING MISMATCH ERRORS

Blow examples shows the mismatch errors that occur during edge construction. There is a domain
mismatch and an entity mismatch.
Domain mismatch

API 1
        • Domain and Tools: Sports basketapi
        • API name: LeagueTopPlayersPlayoffs
        • Entity name: tournamentId
        • Entity Description: The id of the specific basketball tournament for which the top players
          in the playoffs are being retrieved.
API 2
        • Domain and Tools: Sports baseballapi
        • API name: PlayerRegularSeasonStatistics
        • Entity name: tournamentId
        • Entity Description: The id of the specific baseball tournament for which the regular season
          statistics of a player are being requested.
Entity mismatch

API 1


                                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         • Domain and Tools: Sports icehockeyapi
         • API name: PlayerRegularSeasonStatistics
         • Entity name: playerId
         • Entity Description: The unique identifier for a specific ice hockey player whose regular
           season statistics are being requested.

API 2

         • Domain and Tools: Sports icehockeyapi
         • API name: LeaguePlayoffsTopPlayers
         • Entity name: seasonId
         • Entity Description: The id of the specific ice hockey season for which the top players are
           being retrieved during the playoffs.

A.12      P ROMPT F ORMAT FOR THE E XPERIMENT

Table 18 presents the prompt format used in the experiments conducted in our work. Both open-
source and closed-source LLMs utilized this format. DST involves predicting all dialogue states
present in the format for each dialogue, while action prediction focuses on predicting all actions. In
the case of action prediction, all “thought” within the format are removed prior to the task. The W/O
GT setting requires predicting the dialogue state and action for each turn using the dialogue history
in the format without any dialogue states or actions included in the reasoning steps (for DST and
action prediction, respectively).

A.13      E VALUATION P ROMPTS

We release all the prompts used in our experiments. Table 17 contains the prompt used for evaluating
edges in graph construction (§3.1), Table 19 includes the prompt used for dialogue state tracking
evaluation, Table 20 provides the prompt used for action prediction evaluation, and Table 21 presents
the prompt used for faithfulness evaluation. The prompt used in the overall performance task is
detailed in the provided link3 .


   3
       https://github.com/holi-lab/ToolDial/blob/main/experiments/prompts.py


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 17: Prompt used to evaluate edges.

 Edge Evaluation Prompt
 System
 Your task is to determine whether the source attribute in the response from the source API is compat-
 ible with the api input of the target API. Then, craft a JSON formatted response that aligns with the
 expected output of the API, guided by the provided examples. For your judgment, we will provide
 descriptions of tool description, API Documentation, source attribute and target attribute of both
 APIs.
 The judgment is a two step process. In the first step, determine whether the two attributes are
 compatible based on a deep understanding of the source attribute and target attribute. Determine
 whether the source attribute and target attribute are compatible through attribute descriptions. The
 second step is to determine whether the input of the target API is compatible with the intent of the
 target API. If both steps are considered compatible, follow the Output format for True to output the
 result. If not, follow the Output format for False to output the result. Your responses must adhere to
 a specific JSON structure, which is as follows:
 Output format for True:
 {"error": "","response": "<Your_Response>"}
 Output format for False:
 {"error": "Invalid Edge Error","response": "<Your_Response>"}
 The response field should contain the content you formulate based on the API’s functionality and the
 input provided. Ensure that your responses are meaningful, directly addressing the API’s intended
 functionality. If the provided examples are mostly error messages or lack substantial content, use
 your judgment to create relevant and accurate responses. The key is to maintain the JSON format’s
 integrity while ensuring that your response is an accurate reflection of the API’s intended output
 within the tool. Please note that your answer should not contain anything other than a json format
 object, which should be parsable directly to json.
 Note that:
        • Your response should be around 100 to 200 words, containing rich information given the
          api input parameters. Keep Your answer short and simple.
        • Your response must be effective and have practical content.
        • If the api response example if null or ineffective, ignore the example and give your inde-
          pendent response.

 User
 API Documentation:
 source API Documentation JSON file
 target API Documentation JSON file
 source attribute: description of source attribute
 tource attribute: description of target attribute
 API Examples:
 Example input 1: Example response 1
 Example input 2: Example response 2
 Example input 3: Example response 3
 API Input:
 Argument JSON string, e.g:
 {"category":"Logistics", "tool_name": "SQUAKE",
 "api_name": "Checkhealth", "tool_input": "{}",
 "strip": "filter"}


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 18: Prompt Format for the Experiment

 Prompt format used in our experiments

 User: Can you provide insights into which articles on NYTimes.com have been shared the most on
 social media platforms, particularly Facebook, to understand active engagement trends?

 System:
 - Thought: The user seems to have intent. I will call the retriever.
 - Action: retriever call
 - Retriever status: {retriever call: true, retrieved api: {NYTimesAPI: 0.71, . . . }}
 - API documentation: {api name: NYTimesAPI, (with required and optional parameter informa-
 tions)}
 - Thought: Based on results of the retriever, I need to call NYTimesAPI. To call it, I need to ask
 “share type” and “period” to the user.
 - Action: request
 - Retriever status: {retriever call: false, retrieved api: none}
 - Message: Could you please provide the type of sharing on Facebook for articles and the time
 period for retrieving popular articles?
 - Dialogue State: <Current dialogue state>

 User: Certainly! The share type is Facebook and the period is 7 days.

 System:
 - Dialogue State: <Current dialogue state>
 - Thought: Based on the user’s response, now I can call the API NYTimesAPI
 - Action: call . . .


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 19: Instruction prompt for the Dialogue State Tracking task

 Dialogue state tracking task evaluation prompt
 System
 Instruction: You will be given part of a dialogue between the user and the system. In this dialogue,
 the user is requesting information from the system, and the system will execute an API call to retrieve
 the necessary information.
 Your task is to output the appropriate dialogue state for the current turn, based on the dialogue
 provided.
 System Rules:
       1. The system selects the API with the highest score from among the APIs in the retriever
          status that have a score of 0.6 or higher and are suitable for processing the user’s query.
       2. If no API has a score higher than 0.6, the system cannot confirm the API to call.
 Dialogue state format:
 Case 1. When the API has not been confirmed (if the retrieved API does not have a score of 0.6 or
 higher):
 {’api_confirmed’: ’false’, ’api_status’: ’none’}
        • The API is not confirmed, so api confirmed is set to false.
        • Therefore, api status is ‘none’.
        • If api confirmed is false, api status must be ‘none’.
 Case 2. When the API is confirmed (if the retrieved API has a score of 0.6 or higher):
 {’api_confirmed’: ’true’, ’api_status’: {’api_name’: ’API1’,
 ’required_parameters’: {’param1’: ’’, ’param2’: ’value1’},
 ’optional_parameters’: {’param3’: ’’}}}
        • The API is confirmed, so api confirmed is set to true.
        • The api status contains the name of the API and the input parameter list needed for the API
          call. Any parameter whose value can be extracted from the dialogue history will have its
          value filled in.
        • The ‘param1’, ‘param2’, and ‘param3’ in Case 2 are just example values. Do not use these
          parameters. Refer to the given API documentation on each turn.
        • The input parameters should always be determined by consulting the API documentation.
          Do not hallucinate them.
 Now, part of the dialogue will be given. Just generate the dialogue state in the given format, without
 adding any extra words.

 Dialogue:
 {dialogue_history}


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 20: Instruction prompt for the Action prediction task

 Action prediction task evaluation prompt
 System
 Instruction: You will be given part of a dialogue between the user and the system. In this dialogue,
 the user is requesting information from the system, and the system will execute an API call to retrieve
 the necessary information.
 Your task is to predict the action that the system should take after the last utterance of the user. Read
 the dialogue history and return the one action that is most appropriate for the system to take next.
 The actions that the system can take are as follows:
        • Request: Asks the user for some information.
        • Response: Replies to the user’s request based on the result of the API call.
        • Clarify: If the user’s query is vague, re-ask the user to specify their intent. If there is no
          API in the most recently retrieved results with a score above 0.5, “Clarify” is required.
        • Suggest: Makes a suggestion for an unclear user’s intent and asks whether it satisfies the
          user. If there is an API in the most recently retrieved results with a score above 0.5 but
          none exceeding 0.6, a “Suggest” action is required.
        • Response fail: Notifies the user that the system cannot execute the request due to insuffi-
          cient information.
        • System bye: Politely says goodbye to the user.
        • Call: Calls the API with the collected information from the user or other sources but does
          not reply to the user yet.
        • Retriever call: Calls the retriever to find the proper API to satisfy the user’s request. The
          system should call the retriever in the following two situations:
            1. When the user specifies a requirement, and the system needs to search for an API to
               fulfill it.
            2. When the user does not provide the input parameters required for an API call, and the
               system needs to search for another API to obtain those parameters.
 Of the eight actions given, return only the one that you think is most appropriate. Do not return any
 value other than the action provided above. Just return the action, not a single word more.
 Dialogue History:
 {dialogue_history}


                       Table 21: Instruction prompt for the Faithfulness task

 Faithfulness task evaluation prompt
 System
 Instruction: You will be given part of a dialogue between the user and the system. In this dialogue,
 the user is requesting information from the system, and the system will execute an API call to retrieve
 the necessary information. Your task is to generate a response that satisfies the user’s initial query
 based on the API call results provided in the dialogue history.
 Dialogue History:
 {dialogue_history}


                                                  26
