Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RECAST: R EPARAMETERIZED , C OMPACT                                                       WEIGHT
A DAPTATION FOR S EQUENTIAL TASKS
 Nazia Tasnim                                            Bryan A. Plummer
 Boston University                                       Boston University
 nimzia@bu.edu                                           bplum@bu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

            Incremental learning aims to adapt to new sets of categories over time with
            minimal computational overhead. Prior work often trains efficient task-specific
            adapters that modify frozen layer weights or features to capture relevant infor-
            mation without affecting predictions on any previously learned categories. While
            these adapters are generally more efficient than finetuning the entire network, they
            still can require tens or hundreds of thousands of task-specific trainable parame-
            ters, even for relatively small networks. This is can be problematic for resource-
            constrained environments with high communication costs, such as edge devices or
            mobile phones. Thus, we propose Reparameterized, Compact weight Adaptation
            for Sequential Tasks (RECAST), a novel method that dramatically reduces the
            number of task-specific trainable parameters to fewer than 50 – several orders of
            magnitude less than competing methods like LoRA. RECAST accomplishes this
            efficiency by learning to decompose layer weights into a soft parameter-sharing
            framework consisting of a set of shared weight templates and very few module-
            specific scaling factor coefficients. This soft parameter-sharing framework allows
            for effective task-wise reparameterization by tuning only these coefficients while
            keeping the templates frozen. A key innovation of RECAST is the novel weight
            reconstruction pipeline called Neural Mimicry, which eliminates the need for
            training in our framework from scratch. Extensive experiments across six diverse
            datasets demonstrate RECAST outperforms the state-of-the-art by up to ∼ 1.5%
            and improves baselines > 3% across various scales, architectures, and parameter
            spaces. Moreover, we show that RECAST’s architecture-agnostic nature allows
            for seamless integration with existing methods, further boosting performance1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

Incremental Learning (IL) aims to learn from a continuous stream of data or tasks over time. Gener-
ally speaking, the goal of IL methods is to avoid catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
French, 1999) while minimizing computational overhead. As summarized in Figure 1(a), prior work
in IL can be separated into three themes. First, Rehearsal methods that learn what samples to retain
to use on subsequent iterations to ensure their task-specific knowledge is retained (Caccia et al.,
2020; Rebuffi et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019; 2021; Shin et al., 2017), but they can require
large amounts of storage as the number of tasks grows. Second, Regularization methods that re-
quire no extra storage (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2021; Aljundi et al., 2018; Nguyen et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2020), but can result in network instability due, in part, to the plasticity-stability
dilemma (Grossberg, 1982). Finally, third, Reconfiguration/Adaptation methods (Yoon et al., 2018;
Rusu et al., 2006; Hung et al., 2019; Mallya et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2021; Jin
& Kim, 2022; Ge et al., 2023; Douillard et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a) that learn task-specific pa-
rameters, but can result in large numbers of new parameters per-task that may not scale well. Even
methods designed to be efficient, like those based on LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), still require tens or
hundreds of thousands of task-specific trainable parameters for each task (e.g., (Wang et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024; Erkoç et al., 2023)) making them ill-suited for some applications in resource-
constrained environments like mobile phones or edge devices.
    1
        Code: Repository


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 (a) Prior Methods                                                     (b) RECAST (Ours)
         Rehearsal                   Regularization               Reconfiguration
                                  Constrained Backbone                                                                Reparameterized
 Frozen Backbone Memory Buffer                             Frozen BackboneTask Adapters          Coefficient-tuning
                                                                                                                          Model


                                                                                                                                           <0.0002% task-
                                                                                                                                               params
        Growing Memory                                          Large task-wise parameters                 Extremely low-parameter
                                     Network Instability                                                  dynamic weight generation
         Requirement                                               & uncontrolled growth



                Task1: Birds                 Task2: Flowers                      Task3: Scenes                          Task n: Aircraft
                #classes: 200                 #classes: 102                       #classes: 67                            #classes: 55


                                                               Target Tasks

Figure 1: (a) Existing IL methods, i.e. Rehearsal, Regularization, Reconfiguration - exhibit various
limitations in terms of model complexity, memory requirements, and training overheads. In com-
parison our proposed method, (b) RECAST can be uses as a frozen backbone, allowing efficient
reparameterization of any target module with a negligible number of parameter updates (order of
10−6 ) and can accommodate any number of disjoint tasks.


To address this, we propose Reparameterized, Compact weight Adaptation for Sequential Tasks
(RECAST), which provides an extremely parameter-efficient approach for IL via reparameteriza-
tion of a model’s pretrained weights. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), RECAST achieves its compact
task-specific representation by finetuning only the coefficients for a set of shared weight templates,
enabling us to reconfigure an entire network’s weights using fewer than 50 trainable parameters.
RECAST framework shares some principles with prior Template Mixing methods (e.g., (Plummer
et al., 2022; Savarese & Maire, 2019)). However, these methods did not explore incremental learn-
ing or reparameterization, focusing instead on hierarchy discovery and parameter allocation. They
also required training from scratch, preventing the use of existing pre-trained models.
In contrast, our proposed Neural Mimicry approach allows RECAST to utilize existing large pre-
trained weights without costly retraining. This weight reconstruction approach learns to decompose
pretrained layers into our framework, effectively emulating the original network’s weights. This en-
ables us to leverage any pretrained model with minimal processing (often just a few minutes). Thus,
REACAST addresses a gap in reparameterization schemes and IL research where reconstruction
methods remain underexplored where recent work has focused on generating weights for LoRA,
typically through diffusion (Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Erkoç et al., 2023) or used pre-
trained weights to initialize their LoRA components (Liu et al., 2024a; Si et al., 2024). Some prior
work also learned additional predictor networks from scratch to generate weights for a subset of
modules (Salimans & Kingma, 2016). In contrast to these methods, our work directly changes the
backbone weights rather than learning an adapter like LoRA-based methods, while also being sev-
eral orders of magnitude more parameter efficient. Figure 2 provides an overview of our approach.
We evaluate RECAST’s effectiveness on diverse datasets in a Task-incremental IL setting. We com-
pare against 16 baselines comprising state-of-the-art IL methods on both CNN and Transformer
architectures, where RECAST reports > 3% gain over prior work. When combined with adapter
methods with higher parameter budgets, RECAST further increases performance by ∼ 1.5%.
Our key contributions can thus be summarized as follows:
• We propose RECAST, A novel framework that dynamically generates module weights using
  shared basis matrices & module-specific coefficients. This weight-decomposed architecture en-
  ables task-specific adaptations optimizing only coefficients, leveraging cross-layer knowledge.
• We introduce Neural Mimicry, a novel weight-reconstruction pipeline, that reproduces network
  weights without resource-intensive pretraining. This scale and architecture-agnostic approach
  enables easy upgrades to existing architectures. We demonstrate that it builds stronger, more
  expressive backbones for transfer learning.


                                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Frozen Shared Template Bank                        Taskwise Reparameterized Module Weight

                    Decomposition                                      Dynamic Weight
 Target Module's       Through                                           Generation
Pretrained Weight   Reconstruction
                                                                        (Section 2.2)
                     (Section 2.1)


                                           Taskwise tuned                                               Module
                                                                                                       Operation
                                          Module Coefficients

Figure 2: RECAST decomposes module weights into templates and coefficients, which are learned
through reconstruction from pretrained weights (Section 3.2). These components are linearly com-
bined to dynamically generate weights for a target layer (Section 3.1). During TIL training, the
templates are kept frozen, and only task-specific coefficients are learned to create new layer weights.


• RECAST’s fine-tuned resource-performance control, suits efficient continual learning with
  bounded resource constraints. Its compact task-specific parameters enable easier distribution
  across large-scale systems and edge devices.

2      R ELATED W ORK
Our work builds upon and extends several key areas in neural network adaptation, in particular the
area of weight decomposition. These methods have previously shown that such modular networks
are well suited for task adaptation (Mendez & Eaton, 2021; Ostapenko et al., 2021). Older works
like Weight Normalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016) decouples the length of target weight vectors
from their direction to reparameterize the network weights. Decomposition has also been used to
make DNNs more interpretable (Zhou et al., 2018) and to discover hierarchical structures (Patil
et al., 2023). Savarese & Maire (2019) and Plummer et al. (2022) demonstrate the effectiveness
of weight sharing through decomposition, similar to our approach. However, these methods either
require training models from scratch in their decomposed form or learning additional task-driven
priors to accommodate new tasks (Veniat et al., 2020). In terms of parameter-efficient tuning, LoRA
is now popularly used to adapt to new tasks through low-rank updates (Chen et al., 2022; Liang & Li,
2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Nikdan et al., 2024), but adds thousands of tunable parameters. In contrast,
our approach learns to decompose the weights of a pretrained network to enable quick adaptation to
new tasks with < 0.0002% task parameters.
Our work is also similar to works that generate neural network weights. Earlier works like, Hy-
perNetworks (Ha et al., 2017) uses a small subnetwork to predict the weights of a larger network.
Unlike our reconstruction scheme, this requires end-to-end training on input vectors. NeRN (Ashke-
nazi et al., 2023) builds upon this idea of subnetworks by using positional embeddings of weight
coordinates; however, it does not leverage pre-trained knowledge. A recent work, DoRA (Liu et al.,
2024b) shares some similarities with our approach by decomposing pretrained weights into magni-
tude vectors and LoRA matrices. However, the weight is utilized only during initialization and re-
quires significant parameter tuning. Another contemporary work, Wang et al. (2024) attempts novel
weight generation through autoencoders and latent diffusion, which can be resource-heavy to train.
In comparison, RECAST offers a direct, efficient approach to weight generation and reparameteri-
zation. We also show that RECAST can be combined with existing methods to boost performance.

3      R EPARAMETERIZED , C OMPACT WEIGHT A DAPTATION FOR S EQUENTIAL
       TASKS (RECAST)
In Task Incremental Learning (TIL) a model sequentially learns D tasks {d1 , d2 , d3 , . . . dD }, where
each task di = (Xi , Yi ) introduces new categories, domains, or output spaces. The objective
is to maximize classification performance across all tasks while minimizing resource usage, i.e.,
      PD
max i=1 P (di ) s.t. R ≤ Rmax , where P (di ) is the performance on task di , R is the total resource
usage, and Rmax is the resource constraint. This resource-awareness is crucial in practice, as it
enables deployment on edge devices with limited memory, impacts cloud infrastructure costs and
real-time processing, and ensures accessibility in resource-limited environments. Thus, TIL poses
a complex optimization problem: how can we design a system that adapts to new tasks without
significantly increasing its computational footprint or compromising performance on existing tasks?


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 RECAST Framework
Require:
    L: Total number of layers in network
    G: Number of template bank groups
    n: Number of templates per bank
    K: Number of coefficient sets
    d: Dimension of weight matrices
    Ml : Number of target modules in layer l
 1: procedure I NITIALIZE(L, G, n, K, d, Ml )
 2:     for g = 1 to G do
 3:         τg = Tg,i ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , n                              ▷ Template bank for group g
 4:     end for
 5:     for l = 1 to L do
 6:         for m = 1 to Ml do
                          k
 7:             Cl,m = Cl,m,i ∈ R|k = 1, . . . , K; i = 1, . . . , n               ▷ Module coefficients
 8:             OrthogonalInitialization(Cl,m )
 9:         end for
10:     end for
11: end procedure
12: procedure F ORWARD PASS(x, l, m)
13:     g = ⌈l/(L/G)⌉                                                                 ▷ Get group index
                  1
                    PK Pn          k
14:     Wl,m = K      k=1   i=1 Cl,m,i · Tg,i                                        ▷ Generate weights
15:     y = ModuleOperation(x, Wl,m )                                            ▷ Apply layer operation
16:     return y
17: end procedure



We address this multifaceted challenge with our novel framework Reparameterized, Compact
weight Adaptation for Sequential Tasks (RECAST), that strategically balances model plasticity
and stability while adhering to resource constraints. As illustrated in Figure 2, RECAST introduces
a flexible way to adapt the layers of neural networks through the dynamic combination of sets of
shared weight blueprints (i.e., template banks) and module-wise calibration factors or coeffi-
cients. In Section 3.1 we present our Weight Decomposition scheme. Section 3.2 introduces Neural
Mimicry for direct reconstruction of pretrained weights into reusable templates and coefficients.

3.1   W EIGHT D ECOMPOSITION

At its core RECAST replaces pretrained layer weights with modules that can dynamically generate
weights. A target module has access to a bank of templates which is shared with some other layers
in the network (discussed in Section 4.2). Each module has its own set of coefficients which are
used to generate the weights. Formally, let L be the total number of layers in the network organized
into G groups, where each group shares a template bank. For each group g ∈ 1, . . . , G, we define
a template bank τg = Tg,1 , Tg,2 , . . . , Tg,n , where n is the number of templates per bank. Each
template Tg,i ∈ Rdout ×din ×... has the same dimensions as the layer being parameterized. For each
target module m ∈ 1, . . . , Ml in layer l ∈ 1, . . . , L, where Ml is the number of target modules in
layer l, we generate K sets of coefficient vectors. The k-th set of coefficients for module m in layer
                  k       k       k                 k              k
l is defined as Cl,m = Cl,m,1  , Cl,m,2  , . . . , Cl,m,n , where Cl,m,i ∈ R is the learned coefficient for
template Tg,i in group g = ⌈l/(L/G)⌉. The weight matrix for module m in layer l is computed via:
                                                 n
                                                 X
                                          k                    k
                                        Wl,m =         Tg,i · Cl,m,i                                   (1)
                                                 i=1

where · represents element-wise multiplication. The final weight matrix for module m in layer l is
generated by averaging these K parameter matrices.
                                                        K
                                                   1 X k
                                         Wl,m =       Wl,m                                             (2)
                                                   K
                                                        k=1


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Neural Mimicry
Require:
    M : Original pretrained model
    M ∗ : Reconstructed Model
    L: Number of layers
    Ml : Number of modules in layer l
    Tg(l) : Template bank for group g containing layer l
    Cl,m : Coefficients for module m in layer l
 1: procedure N EURAL M IMICRY(M, M ∗ , max epochs)
 2:     for epoch = 1 to max epochs do
 3:          total loss ← 0
 4:          for l = 1 to L do                                                        ▷ Layer iteration
 5:              for m = 1 to Ml do                                                 ▷ Module iteration
                        ∗
 6:                  Wl,m    ← GenerateWeights(Tg(l) , Cl,m )                   ▷ Weight reconstruction
                                               ∗
 7:                  Ll,m ← LossFunction(Wl,m      , Wl,m )
 8:                  total loss ← total loss + Ll,m
 9:                  Tg(l) , Cl,m ← Update(Tg(l) , Cl,m , Ll,m )
10:              end for
11:          end for
12:     end for
13:     return M ∗                                                        ▷ Return reconstructed model
14: end procedure



Algorithm 1 describes how template banks for each group are created and as well as the orthogonal
initialization of coefficients for each module m in layer l. The forward pass computes the final
weight matrix using these components before applying the module operation. The target module
then generates the appropriate output (e.g., convolutional feature map for CNN, attention feature
vectors for attention module). See Appendix A.4.1 for additional architecture-specific details.

3.2   N EURAL M IMICRY

We introduce “Neural Mimicry” as a foundational technique for efficiently emulating complex pre-
trained neural networks. This end-to-end pipeline enables the recreation of a target model within our
framework, bypassing resource-intensive pretraining. The input to this pipeline is a pretrained target
model M , whose module weights we aim to emulate. The output is a set of template banks and
coefficients that, when combined, approximate the target module weights of M . The core of Neural
Mimicry lies in its iterative refinement process, which progressively shapes the custom model M ∗
to closely mirror the behavior of the target model M . In our experiments the pretrained weights of
M are obtained from official releases (see Appendix A.3). To generate weights for each module in
each layer, we employ Equations 1 and 2 as described in Section 3.1, and then aim to reduce the
                                                                                                   ∗
difference between the original pretrained weight (Wl,m ) and RECAST-generated weight (Wl,m           ).
The main update step uses gradient descent (Algorithm 2 line 9) on the coefficients and templates
                            k
(η is the learning rate): Cl,m,i     k
                                 ← Cl,m,i − η ∂C∂L
                                                 k   ; Tg(l),i ← Tg(l),i − η ∂T∂L
                                                                               g(l),i
                                                                                      . The process can
                                                   l,m,i
be formulated as the following optimization problem:
                                           " L M                      #
                                            X Xl
                                                       ∗
                          min Eϵ∼N (0,σ2 )         L(Wl,m (ϵ), Wl,m )                                 (3)
                            C,T
                                               l=1 m=1

where ϵ = (ϵ1 , . . . , ϵK ) is a set of K-noise vectors sampled from a Gaussian distribution N (0, σ 2 ),
where ϵi ∈ Rn×1×... . The noise vectors are added with the coefficients only during the recon-
struction training process. Here, L denotes total layers, Ml target modules in layer l, n templates
per bank, and L the weight discrepancy loss. As discussed in Section 4.2, L should be chosen
carefully, and we found Smooth L1 loss to be most effective for generating diversified template.
It offers smooth gradients for small differences and stability for larger errors, crucial for stable re-
construction (Figures 5 & 4). This outperforms L2/MSE (sensitive to outliers) and KL divergence
(computationally expensive) (See Figures 5 & 6). After reconstruction, we calculate the layerwise


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


feature similarity between M and M ∗ using the cosine similarity metric to evaluate the quality (see
Table 6). Overall, this process requires negligible overhead (< 5 minutes, see Table 5).

3.3   PARAMETRIC S CALING S TRATEGY

RECAST’s design is governed by three parameters: the number of groups (G), templates per group
(n), and coefficient sets (K), balancing model expressiveness and efficiency. Increasing G improves
specialization, while increasing n increases expressiveness within groups. The parameter-sharing
scheme allows K to expand weight configurations without significantly increasing parameters. This
design achieves substantial memory savings, S = L×Ml ×d2 −(G×n×d2 ×Ml +L×Ml ×n×K).
Here, Ml refers to the number of target modules per layer, and we can approximate the savings as:
S ≈ L×Ml ×d2 −G×n×d2 ×Ml = d2 Ml (L−G×n). The savings stem primarily from replacing
L × Ml weight matrices with G × n × Ml templates. In our experiments, G and n are calibrated
to match the baseline model’s parameter count but can be adjusted for desired compression. Ad-
ditionally, multiple coefficient sets enable a combinatorially large number of weight matrices (nK )
per module, covering extensive parameter spaces even with small n. The total learnable coefficients
    PL
are l=1 Ml × n × K, providing flexibility in controlling tunable parameters.


4     E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS

Baselines. To evaluate our proposed architecture, we have compared the performance against 16
baselines in total, representing the aforementioned categories of IL strategies. From Regularization
approaches, we include EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), which penalizes changes to critical net-
work parameters, and LwF (Li & Hoiem, 2016), which uses previous model outputs as soft labels.
For Replay Methods, we implement GDumb (Prabhu et al., 2020) with a 4400-sample memory
buffer, and ECR-ACE (Caccia et al., 2022) and DER++ (Buzzega et al., 2020), both using 120
samples per class. Reconfiguration methods are our primary focus as they are most similar to our
approach, particularly adapter-based schemes that learn extra task-specific components. Among
them, PiggyBack (Mallya et al., 2018) uses binary masking schemes within a fixed architecture,
while HAT Serra et al. (2018) learns a soft attention mask. CLR Ge et al. (2023) is a purely
adapter-based method, that introduces depthwise separable Ghost modules (Han et al., 2020) after
each convolutional layer. We also consider several LoRA-based approaches that apply LoRA to
various ViT components (Attention (Zhu et al., 2024) or Fully-connected layers (Chen et al., 2022)).
In addition, we compare with InfLoRA (Liang & Li, 2024), which has regularization and recon-
figuration components, RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024), which combines LoRA with sparse adaptation,
DoRA (Liu et al., 2024b) that decomposes pretrained weight into magnitude and direction matrices,
and a prompt-based adapter technique: L2P (Wang et al., 2022b). Finally, we include finetuned
classifier layers as naive baselines.
Datasets. Following standard experiment setups in similar works by Aljundi et al. (2019); Ge
et al. (2023) we employ six diverse benchmarking datasets covering fine-grained to coarse im-
age classification tasks across various domain including flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008),
scenes (Quattoni & Torralba, 2009), birds (Wah et al., 2011), animals (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009),
vehicles (Maji et al., 2013), and other man-made objects (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009). These
datasets capture the diversity and inter-task variance essential for evaluating IL tasks. Images are
standardized to 224 × 224 pixels, applying basic transformations and dataset-specific normalization.
Additional details are in Appendix A.1 Table 3 .
Metrics. We report Top-1 accuracy averaged over our six datasets. For RECAST, we report the
mean and standard deviation averaged over 3 runs. See Appendix Table 4 for per-task performance.
Implementation Details. We use both ResNet (He et al., 2016) and Vision Transformer
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) backbones to demonstrate the versatility of our framework as
they represent two different branches of image classification architectures (CNN and Transformer).
Specifically, we use ResNet-34 and ViT-Small variants for all our methods, both of which have
approximately 21 mil. parameters. However, average best performance across the six datasets
for larger models is also presented in Figure 3. For fair evaluation, we compare the ResNet de-
pendent baselines, against our RECAST-Resnet models and compare ViT-based baselines against
RECAST-ViT model. We trained GDUMB (Prabhu et al., 2020), EWC (Lee et al., 2019), LWF (Li


                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: TIL accuracy averaged over six datasets using a ResNet-34 comparing non-adapter (top)
and adapter methods (bottom). RECAST surpasses non-adapter methods and enhances adapter-
based approaches when combined. Parameters: M : model size, R: buffer, P: total parameters, U :
unit attention mask, G: ghost modules Task Parameters and Storage metrics are reported Per Task
         Method                              Task Params        Storage      Acc@top1(%)
         ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016)              0.0            M                 65.2
         EWC (Lee et al., 2019)               P + F IM        M + F IM             22.1
         LWF (Li & Hoiem, 2016)                   P              M                 19.3
         GDUMB (Prabhu et al., 2020)               P           M +R                34.8
         ER-ACE (Caccia et al., 2022)             P            M +R                36.1
         DER++ (Buzzega et al., 2020)             P            M +R                16.2
         RECAST (ours)                        3 × 10−6 P         M              66.3±0.05
         HAT (Serra et al., 2018)                 P               U               40.0
         Piggyback (Mallya et al., 2018)          P              M                82.9
         CLR (Ge et al., 2023)                4 × 10−3 P        M +G              79.9
         RECAST (ours) + Piggyback                P              M              83.9±0.1
         RECAST (ours) + CLR                  4 × 10−3 P        M +G            80.9±0.3


& Hoiem, 2016), and L2P (Wang et al., 2022b) using the avalanche library (Carta et al., 2023).
Official PyTorch implementations of other methods were modified for TIL settings. We evaluated
two RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024) variants: sparse MLP adaptation and full RoSA (LoRA-based at-
tention). A sparsity of 0.001% ensured active parameters remained under 150, matching RECAST’s
efficiency. LoRA methods used rank=1 and task-specific configurations: DoRA (Liu et al., 2024b)
(Q,K,V matrices), MeLo (Q,V matrices), and Adaptformer (MLP layers). RECAST, MeLo (Zhu
et al., 2024), and AdaptFormer (Chen et al., 2022), RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024), DoRA (Liu et al.,
2024b) used AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with 2e−3–5e−3 learning rates, 1e−6 weight
decay, and stepwise LR scheduling (decay by 0.1 every 33 epochs) for 100 epochs. Default hy-
perparameters were used for avalanche models and methods like HAT (Serra et al., 2018), Piggy-
back (Mallya et al., 2018), and CLR (Ge et al., 2023), trained for 100 epochs. InfLoRA (Liang & Li,
2024) used class increments of 90 and 10 epochs per task. For RECAST-ViT, we used a group size
of 6, 2 templates per bank, and 2 coefficient sets. Integrated models used RECAST as the backbone,
with adapter layers modifying features while RECAST generated core layer weights and coefficients
adapted per task (See Appendix A.4.2). All experiments were run on a single RTX8000 GPU.

4.1   R ESULTS

Table 1 showcases the performance of different methods using a ResNet-34 backbone. Traditional
IL methods such as EWC (Lee et al., 2019) and LWF (Li & Hoiem, 2016) show significant catas-
trophic forgetting, with performance drops of approximately 66% and 70% respectively, compared
to the baseline ResNet-34. GDUMB (Prabhu et al., 2020), ER-ACE (Caccia et al., 2022), despite uti-
lizing a large memory buffer, only perform slightly better than these traditional methods but still lag
significantly behind simple finetuning. HAT (Serra et al., 2018), which learns unit-wise masks over
the entire network, achieves further improvement over GDUMB but still lags 39% behind the base-
line. This underperformance is likely because HAT was designed to allocate fixed network capacity
to each task, struggling with our diverse task suite. In contrast, RECAST improves upon the baseline
ResNet-34 by ∼ 2%, while fine-tuning only 0.0003% of the original parameters. This represents a
significant efficiency advantage while still delivering performance gains. Among adapter methods,
Piggyback (Mallya et al., 2018) and CLR (Ge et al., 2023) show strong performance, exceeding the
baseline by 27% and 23% respectively. Combined with these methods, RECAST further enhances
their effectiveness. RECAST + Piggyback achieves ∼ 1.5% improvement over Piggyback alone.
Similarly, RECAST + CLR also shows a ∼ 1.5% gain over standalone CLR. These consistent im-
provements across different adapter-based approaches demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness
of RECAST as a complementary technique.
Table 2 summarizes the results for methods using the ViT-Small (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) backbone,
further emphasizing RECAST’s strong performance. RECAST improves the baseline ViT-Small by


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: TIL accuracy averaged over six datasets using a ViT-Small comparing non-adapter (top) and
adapter methods (bottom). RECAST improves baseline accuracy by 3 points and enhances existing
methods > 1%. M : model parameters, P : total parameters, r: LoRA rank, P l: prompt pool size,
T o: tokens per prompt, D: embedding dimension, SpA : Sparse Adaptation. Task Parameters and
Storage metric are reported in a Per Task manner (except L2P and InfLoRA)
                  Method                                                                                                 Task Params                             Storage    Acc@top1(%)
                  ViT-Small (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)                                                                           0.0                               M                 82.4
                  RECAST (ours)                                                                                              2 × 10−6 P                            M               85.0±0.1
                  L2P (Wang et al., 2022b)                                                                      T o ∗ D ∗ Mpool                              M + Pl               35.9
                  InfLoRA (Liang & Li, 2024)                                                                 P + 2 × 10−3 P (T − 1)                            M                  88.5
                  AdaptFormer (Chen et al., 2022)                                                                 6 × 10−4 P r                                 M                  89.0
                  MeLo (Zhu et al., 2024)                                                                         8 × 10−4 P r                                 M                  88.7
                  DoRA (Liu et al., 2024b)                                                                       1.9 × 10−3 P r                                M                  89.3
                  RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024)(Full - Att.)                                                         7 × 10−3 P r                                 M                  88.6
                  RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024)(SpA MLP)                                                             6 × 10−6 P                                   M                  84.5
                  RECAST (ours) + Adaptformer                                                                     6 × 10−4 P r                                 M                90.1±0.2
                  RECAST (ours) + MeLo                                                                            8 × 10−4 P r                                 M                89.6±0.2
                  RECAST (ours) + RoSA(Full - Att.)                                                               7 × 10−3 P r                                 M               88.9 ±0.08
                  RECAST (ours) + RoSA(SpA MLP)                                                                   6 × 10−6 P                                   M               85.4±0.05

                                   Baseline-FT                                                                     92
                         92.5                                                                                            LoRA only
                                   Reconstructed-FT                                                                      Coefficient-tuning
                                   Reconstructed-FT w/ Coefficients                                                90
                         90.0                                                                                            LoRA with Coefficient-tuning
                                                                                          Averaged Best acc@top1


                                                                                                                         ViT-Small
Averaged Best acc@top1


                                                                                                                   88
                         87.5
                         85.0                                                                                      86

                         82.5                                                                                      84
                         80.0
                                                                                                                   82
                         77.5
                                                                                                                   80
                         75.0
                                mall           ase            arge                 mall
                                                                                                                    24

                                                                                                                         48

                                                                                                                                 96

                                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                            00

                                                                                                                                                                      00

                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                        0
                          ViT S          ViT B          ViT L                ViT S
                                                                                                                                         14

                                                                                                                                                  46


                                                                                                                                                                    ,00

                                                                                                                                                                    ,00

                                                                                                                                                                    ,00

                                                                                                                                                                    ,00
                                                                                                                                                         1,1

                                                                                                                                                                  1,5



                                                                      DiNO
                                                                                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                                                                                 18

                                                                                                                                                                 22

                                                                                                                                                                 37
                                                                                                                                         Number of trainable parameters per task
                                                                                          Figure 4: Comparing averaged best Top-1 accuracy across
Figure 3: Averaged best Top-1 accu-                                                       six datasets for ViT-Small across various model config-
racy across six datasets for ViT mod-                                                     urations. We find RECAST excels in ultra-low parame-
els of varying scales, comparing Base-                                                    ter ranges (24-96) where LoRA struggles. RECAST w/
line, RECAST, and RECAST with Co-                                                         LoRA improves performance across all parameter ranges,
efficient fine-tuning (FT) approaches.                                                    offering complementary advantages.


∼ 3.5%, adding only 0.0002% task parameters. This represents a significant enhancement with
minimal computational overhead. Adapter and reparameterization methods all show strong perfor-
mance improvements over the baseline: RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024) (with SpA MLP) improves
by 2.5%, while InfLoRA (Liang & Li, 2024), MeLo (Zhu et al., 2024), AdaptFormer (Chen et al.,
2022), DoRA (Liu et al., 2024b), and RoSA (Full - Att.) all deliver improvements in the 7.5 − 8.5%
range. However, combining RECAST with these methods yields additional gains. Both RECAST +
RoSA (SpA MLP) and RECAST + AdaptFormer, show a ∼ 1.5% gain over standalone RoSA and
AdaptFormer alone, and RECAST + MeLo achieves a 1.0% improvement over MeLo. In contrast,
prompting methods like L2P (Wang et al., 2022b), which rely on instance-level prompts, underper-
form the baseline by 56%, struggling to handle diverse domains effectively.
Figure 3 reports the performance of using RECAST over a range of architecture sizes including ViT-
Small, ViT-Base, and ViT-Large, demonstrating that our approach generalizes. In addition, we also
show that our approach generalizes across pretraining datasets by demonstrating that our approach
can boost performance using a DINO Caron et al. (2021) backbone, as well.
Comparison of Resource Efficiency. Tables 1 and 2 compare various incremental learning meth-
ods for ResNet-34 and ViT-Small backbones, respectively. We see that parameter-free methods
(EWC, LWF) maintain minimal storage (only the backbone model parameters) but suffer from per-


                                                                                                                         8
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                Frobenius                                         Entropy
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.7
                         85.4
                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
Averaged Best acc@top1   85.2

                         85.0                                                                                      80                                                                       0.5


                                                                                              Frobenius Distance
                         84.8                                                                                                                                                               0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                              Entropy
                                                                                                                   60
                         84.6
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                         84.4                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                         84.2
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                         84.0
                                 thL1   MSE         + No
                                                         ise         MSE           thL1
                            Smoo               thL1            VAE +          Smoo                                  0                                                                       0.0
                                          Smoo                          VAE +                                            thL1          MSE       + No
                                                                                                                                                      ise           MSE           thL1
                                                                                                                   Smoo                     thL1            VAE +          + Smoo
                                                                                                                                       Smoo                          V A E
   Figure 5: Plot showing average classification
   accuracy of models reconstructed in different                                               Figure 6: Plot showing Diversity (Frobenius
   ways.     VAE-reconstructed models performed                                                Norm) and adaptability measurements (En-
   slightly worse than the rest, with Smooth L1 loss                                           tropy) of models reconstructed in different
   providing the best performance                                                              ways. VAE models have shallow template di-
                                                                                               versity and low internal information content


   formance degradation as task diversity increases. Rehearsal-based methods (GDUMB, DER++ &
   ER-ACE) and HAT offer improved performance at the cost of increased storage requirements, which
   may limit scalability for long-term learning. Recent parameter-efficient methods balance perfor-
   mance and resource usage. CLR learns 0.3% of backbone parameters, requiring backbone storage
   plus task-specific depthwise modules. InfLoRA trains the full model for the first dataset and only
   0.2% for subsequent tasks. Other LoRA variants train less than 1% per rank. While masking re-
   quires training a large number of parameters, both LoRA updates and binary masks (PiggyBack,
   RoSA Sparse updates) can be mathematically merged to prevent extra storage and communication
   costs during deployment. Our proposed RECAST method demonstrates unprecedented parame-
   ter efficiency, learning only 0.0002% of the total backbone parameters while maintaining only the
   backbone model in storage. When combined with other efficient methods like MeLo or Adapt-
   former, RECAST achieves state-of-the-art performance (90.1% Acc@top1 for ViT-Small) with the
   base storage requirement. This reveals that RECAST not only enhances existing adapter methods
   but does so in ways that are complementary to their strengths. The impact is delineated clearly in
   Figure 4, in a range of taskwise parameter counts. It compares three adaptation approaches using
   ViT-Small backbone (82.4% baseline). Traditional LoRA adaptation (blue) becomes effective only
   above 464 parameters/task. RECAST (orange) achieves consistent 85% accuracy with just 24-96 pa-
   rameters, showing marginal improvement beyond this range. The combined RECAST+LoRA (red)
   peaks at 91% accuracy, outperforming across all parameter ranges, including areas where LoRA
   alone falters. To scale traditional LoRA implementations to a negligibly small (< 150) parameters,
   we utilized three techniques: (1) lowering LoRA rank, (2) sharing LoRA matrices across layers,
   and (3) binary masking for pruning. The figure reveals that RECAST can be used effectively in
   parameter ranges where other reparameterization methods might struggle.

    4.2                         M ODEL A NALYSIS

   How does the number of coefficients impact performance? We analyze the effect of hyperpa-
   rameters G, n, and K (Subsection 3.3) through two experiments. First, we vary n while keeping
   K = 1, adjusting G to maintain constant parameters (G ∝ n1 ), comparing three sharing schemes:
   Low (two-layer sharing), Balanced (four-layer sharing), and Extreme (all-layer sharing). Results
   are shown in Figure 7. Second, we fix G and n while varying K (since |C| ∝ K) as depicted in
   Figure 8. Both experiments use RECAST on MLP and Attention layers of a small ViT model, with
   marker sizes indicating relative coefficient sizes. Results reveal that adjusting template numbers and
   sharing schemes has a greater impact than linearly increasing K, emphasizing the importance of
   template diversity and specificity for task adaptation. Additional linear combinations show dimin-
   ishing returns once sufficient coefficients are available (see the orange line in Figure 4).
   Where do we apply RECAST? RECAST is applicable to various layers or modules (Ap-
   pendix A.4.1), with notable insights highlighted in Figures 7 and 8. These figures illustrate the


                                                                                          9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        87                                                                                  87
                                   Baseline                                                                                            Baseline
                                   RECAST on MLP                                                                                       RECAST on MLP
                        86         RECAST on Attention.                                                     86                         RECAST on Attention.


                                                                                    Average Best Accuracy
Average Best Accuracy
                        85                                                                                  85

                        84                                                                                  84

                        83                                                                                  83

                                                                                                            82
                        82
                                                                                                            81
                        81                                                                                       1                                      2
                             Low                          Balanced   Extreme                                         Coefficient Set
 Figure 7: Increasing template numbers (lay-                                         Figure 8: Comparing the strategies of chang-
 ers in a group) enhances coefficient count and                                      ing coefficients. The size of the markers cor-
 template sharing across the architecture. Low                                       responds to the relative number of coefficients.
 sharing uses G=6, Balanced G=3, and Extreme                                         The impact of increasing coefficients by vary-
 G=1 (one template bank shared by all network                                        ing the number of coefficient sets K, is much
 layers). The last setting delivers significant                                      less prominent than changing it through group-
 performance improvements.                                                           ing schemes.


 differing performance boosts when applying the method to attention layers versus MLP layers. MLP
 layers, though simpler, have more parameters that may introduce redundancy, making them more
 amenable to sharing. In contrast, attention layers are complex, involving multiple computational
 steps to model relationships between input parts rather than directly transforming representations.
 This complexity leads to a challenging optimization space, hindering effective template sharing and
 reparameterization. Figure 4 confirms this pattern, showing performance spikes when smaller LoRA
 matrices target MLP layers (Chen et al., 2022) rather than attention mechanisms (Zhu et al., 2024).
 What is the best way to reconstruct weights? Section 3.2 described the weight reconstruction
 methodology for RECAST. Earlier we noted that model expressivity depends more on template bank
 diversity. To investigate this, we generated five models with the same configurations (6 groups, 2
 layers each), varying the reconstruction objective: 1) SmoothL1 loss, 2) MSE loss, 3) SmoothL1 loss
 with coefficient noise, 4) VAE with MSE loss, and 5) VAE with SmoothL1 loss. All models achieved
 at least 98.5% reconstruction similarity (Appendix Table 6). Figure 5 shows that SmoothL1 loss
 (with or without perturbation) provides the most benefit during reparameterization & VAE models
 provide the least. To understand this, we calculated template diversity within groups using Frobenius
 Norm (diversity metric) and Entropy (versatility metric) (See Appendix A.3) Just like their classifi-
 cation performance, SmoothL1 loss shows roughly similar internal patterns with or without noise.
 The high Frobenius norm for Neural Mimicry (Algorithm 2) with SmoothL1 loss indicates greater
 template diversity than the rest of the approaches. MSE models showed slightly lower Frobenius
 norms but higher entropy, suggesting templates are versatile and not overly dependent on dominant
 components. In contrast, VAEs showed shallow template diversity, limiting adaptability, and lower
 entropy, indicating reduced versatility. Figure 10 (Appendix A.3) illustrates higher intra-group co-
 efficient similarity in VAE-based models, suggesting multiple layers perform similar operations.

  5                          C ONCLUSION
 RECAST represents a significant advancement in neural network architecture design, addressing
 the challenge of optimizing parameter efficiency while maintaining model expressivity. By decom-
 posing network layers into templates and coefficients, it facilitates dynamic, task-specific weight
 generation with a reduced parameter footprint. Our comprehensive evaluations demonstrate RE-
 CAST’s efficacy across diverse image classification tasks and vision architectures. Based on our
 model analysis, future research directions may include enhancing model diversity and coefficient
 versatility, exploring applications beyond computer vision, and investigating alternative approaches
 for reconstructing novel parameters to overcome the limitations of existing pretrained weights. Ad-
 ditionally, further research is necessary to elucidate the relationship between model complexity and
 performance, particularly in the context of model compression techniques.


                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgments This material is based upon work supported, in part, by DARPA under agree-
ment number HR00112020054. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
supporting agencies.

6   E THICS S TATEMENT
While our work on efficient reparameterization aims to improve model robustness and adaptabil-
ity, we acknowledge the potential ethical implications of such advancements. First, the incremental
learning capabilities enabled by our approach could be beneficial in scenarios like robotics, where
systems need to constantly adapt to new categories or environments, as well as provide potential
benefits in terms of environmental sustainability by reducing computational footprint. While we
intend to democratize access to powerful AI models, we recognize that easier deployment of these
models could also lower barriers to potential misuse, such as in surveillance applications that could
infringe on privacy rights. Additionally, as with any machine learning model, there are inherent
biases and limitations in the training data and model architecture that users should be aware of. As
we reconstruct from existing weights, our reconstructed pretrained weights also likely inherits the
implicit biases in those existing weights. Thus, we caution against over-reliance on model predic-
tions without human oversight, especially in high-stakes decision-making processes. As researchers,
we emphasize the importance of responsible development and deployment of AI technologies, and
we encourage ongoing discussions about the ethical use of incremental learning and efficient deep
learning models in various applications.

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY
To ensure the reproducibility of our work, we have taken several key steps. The implementation de-
tails of our custom ResNet and Vision Transformer architectures are fully described in the main text,
with complete code provided in the supplementary materials. We have also provided the full codes
for our framework integrated with other adapter and reparameterization methods we have discussed
in the main text. Our reconstruction scripts for both ResNet and ViT models, including the loss func-
tions and training procedures, are also included in the supplementary material. We have specified all
hyperparameters, including learning rates, scheduling, and template bank configurations. The base
models used for comparison (ResNet34 and ViT-Small) are from widely available libraries (torchvi-
sion and timm), ensuring consistent baselines. All experiments were conducted using PyTorch, with
specific versions and dependencies listed in the supplementary materials. We have also included our
data preprocessing steps and evaluation metrics to facilitate accurate replication of our results. The
supplementary material also includes descriptions of how to use the codebase to both reproduce our
results, as well as to extend or use by users in a plug-and-play manner.

R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2018:
  15th European Conference, Munich, Germany, September 8–14, 2018, Proceedings, Part III, pp.
  144–161, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2018. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-01218-2. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-030-01219-9 9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_9.
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection for
  online continual learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/e562cd9c0768d5464b64cf61da7fc6bb-Paper.pdf.
Maor Ashkenazi, Zohar Rimon, Ron Vainshtein, Shir Levi, Elad Richardson, Pinchas Mintz, and
 Eran Treister. Nern - learning neural representations for neural networks. In -, January 2023.
 Publisher Copyright: © 2023 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 2023. All rights reserved.; 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 2023 ; Conference date: 01-05-2023 Through 05-05-2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark
  experience for general continual learning: a strong, simple baseline. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Lucas Caccia, Eugene Belilovsky, Massimo Caccia, and Joelle Pineau. Online learned continual
  compression with adaptive quantization modules. Proceedings of the 37th International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, 2020.
Lucas Caccia, Rahaf Aljundi, Nader Asadi, Tinne Tuytelaars, Joelle Pineau, and Eugene Belilovsky.
  New insights on reducing abrupt representation change in online continual learning. In ICLR,
  2022.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Antonio Carta, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Andrea Cossu, Hamed Hemati, and Vincenzo Lomonaco.
  Avalanche: A pytorch library for deep continual learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  24(363):1–6, 2023. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/23-0130.html.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with a-gem. In ICLR, 2019.
Arslan Chaudhry, Albert Gordo, Puneet K Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and David Lopez-Paz. Using
  hindsight to anchor past knowledge in continual learning. In AAAI, 2021.
Shoufa Chen, Chongjian Ge, Zhan Tong, Jiangliu Wang, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Ping Luo.
  Adaptformer: adapting vision transformers for scalable visual recognition. In Proceedings of the
  36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook,
  NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. CoRR, abs/2010.11929, 2020.
Arthur Douillard, Alexandre Ramé, Guillaume Couairon, and Matthieu Cord. Dytox: Transformers
  for continual learning with dynamic token expansion. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9275–9285, 2022. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.
  2022.00907.
Ziya Erkoç, Fangchang Ma, Qi Shan, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Hyperdiffusion: Generat-
  ing implicit neural fields with weight-space diffusion. 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14254–14264, 2023.
R. M. French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3:
  128–135, 1999. doi: 10.1016/s1364-6613(99)01294-2.
Yunhao Ge, Yuecheng Li, Shuo Ni, Jiaping Zhao, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Laurent Itti. Clr: Channel-
  wise lightweight reprogramming for continual learning. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Con-
  ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 18752–18762, 2023. doi: 10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.
  01723.
S. Grossberg. Studies of mind and brain. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 1982. doi:
   10.1007/978-94-009-7758-7.
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In 5th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track
  Proceedings, 2017.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kai Han, Yunhe Wang, Qi Tian, Jianyuan Guo, Chunjing Xu, and Chang Xu. Ghostnet: More
  features from cheap operations. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1577–1586, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00165.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Steven C. Y. Hung, Cheng-Hao Tu, Cheng-En Wu, Chien-Hung Chen, Yi-Ming Chan, and Chu-Song
  Chen. Compacting, picking and growing for unforgetting continual learning, pp. 11. Curran
  Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
Hyundong Jin and Eunwoo Kim. Helpful or harmful: Inter-task association in continual learning.
  In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 519–535. Springer, 2022.
Chris Dongjoo Kim, Jinseo Jeong, Sangwoo Moon, and Gunhee Kim. Continual learning on noisy
  data streams via self-purified replay. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 517–527, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00058.
J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. C. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan,
   T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwińska, D. Hassabis, C. Clopath, D. Kumaran, and R. Hadsell. Over-
   coming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
   ences, 114:3521–3526, 2017. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114.
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s
  thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
K. Lee, K. Lee, J. Shin, and H. Lee. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting with unlabeled data in
  the wild. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. doi:
  10.1109/iccv.2019.00040.
Z. Li and D. Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 614–629,
   2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0 37.
Yan-Shuo Liang and Wu-Jun Li. Inflora: Interference-free low-rank adaptation for continual learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 23638–23647, 2024.
Shih-Yang Liu, Chien-Yi Wang, Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Kwang-
  Ting Cheng, and Min-Hung Chen. Dora: weight-decomposed low-rank adaptation. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024a.
Shih-Yang Liu, Chien-Yi Wang, Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Kwang-
  Ting Cheng, and Min-Hung Chen. DoRA: Weight-decomposed low-rank adaptation. In Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and
  Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 32100–32121. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
  2024b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24bn.html.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Fixing weight decay regularization in adam.         CoRR,
   abs/1711.05101, 2017.
S. Maji, J. Kannala, E. Rahtu, M. Blaschko, and A. Vedaldi. Fine-grained visual classification of
   aircraft. -, 2013.
Arun Mallya, Dillon Davis, and Svetlana Lazebnik. Piggyback: Adapting a single network to mul-
  tiple tasks by learning to mask weights. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2018: 15th European Con-
  ference, Munich, Germany, September 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part IV, pp. 72–88, Berlin, Hei-
  delberg, 2018. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-01224-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01225-0 5.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01225-0_5.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks:
 The sequential learning problem. In Gordon H. Bower (ed.), -, volume 24 of Psychology
 of Learning and Motivation, pp. 109–165. Academic Press, 1989. doi: https://doi.org/10.
 1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/S0079742108605368.
Jorge A Mendez and Eric Eaton. Lifelong learning of compositional structures. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=ADWd4TJO13G.
Cuong V. Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D. Bui, and Richard E. Turner. Variational continual learn-
  ing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Mahdi Nikdan, Soroush Tabesh, Elvir Crnčević, and Dan Alistarh. RoSA: Accurate parameter-
 efficient fine-tuning via robust adaptation. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine
 Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceed-
 ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings
 of Machine Learning Research, pp. 38187–38206. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v235/nikdan24a.html.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing, Dec 2008.
Oleksiy Ostapenko, Pau Rodrı́guez, Massimo Caccia, and Laurent Charlin. Continual learning
  via local module composition. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’21, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Associates Inc.
  ISBN 9781713845393.
Shreyas Malakarjun Patil, Loizos Michael, and Constantine Dovrolis. Neural sculpting: uncovering
  hierarchically modular task structure in neural networks through pruning and network analysis.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc.
Bryan A. Plummer, Nikoli Dryden, Julius Frost, Torsten Hoefler, and Kate Saenko. Neural parameter
  allocation search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
A. Prabhu, P. H. S. Torr, and P. K. Dokania. Gdumb: a simple approach that questions our
  progress in continual learning. Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, pp. 524–540, 2020. doi:
  10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 31.
Ariadna Quattoni and Antonio Torralba. Recognizing indoor scenes. In 2009 IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 413–420, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.
  5206537.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H. Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5533–5542, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.587.
E. Rusu, O. Makarynskyy, A. Gavrilov, and D. Makarynska. Filling gaps in wave records with artifi-
   cial neural networks. Maritime Transportation and Exploitation of Ocean and Coastal Resources,
   pp. 1085–1091, 2006. doi: 10.1201/9781439833728.ch131.
Tim Salimans and Diederik P. Kingma. Weight normalization: a simple reparameterization to ac-
  celerate training of deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pp. 901–909, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016.
  Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510838819.
Pedro Savarese and Michael Maire. Learning implicitly recurrent CNNs through parameter sharing.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting with hard attention to the task. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4548–4557. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/serra18a.html.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NIPS’17, pp. 2994–3003, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
  9781510860964.

Chongjie Si, Xiaokang Yang, and Wei Shen. See further for parameter efficient fine-tuning by
  standing on the shoulders of decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05417, 2024.

Pravendra Singh, Vinay Kumar Verma, Pratik Mazumder, Lawrence Carin, and Piyush Rai. Calibrat-
  ing cnns for lifelong learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15579–15590. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/b3b43aeeacb258365cc69cdaf42a68af-Paper.pdf.

Tom Veniat, Ludovic Denoyer, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Efficient continual learning with modular
  networks and task-driven priors. CoRR, abs/2012.12631, 2020.

V. K. Verma, K. J. Liang, N. Mehta, P. Rai, and L. Carin. Efficient feature transformations for dis-
   criminative and generative continual learning. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021. doi: 10.1109/cvpr46437.2021.01365.

C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011
  dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.

Kaili Wang, Zhaopan Xu, Yukun Zhou, Zelin Zang, Trevor Darrell, Zhuang Liu, and Yang You.
  Neural network parameter diffusion. In -, 2024.

Yabin Wang, Zhiwu Huang, and Xiaopeng Hong. S-prompts learning with pre-trained transform-
  ers: An occam’s razor for domain incremental learning. In Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022a.

Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Han Zhang, Ruoxi Sun, Xiaoqi Ren, Guolong Su, Vin-
  cent Perot, Jennifer Dy, and Tomas Pfister. Learning to prompt for continual learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 139–149,
  2022b.

Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                   https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.

Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. In -. ICLR, 2018.

Baoquan Zhang, Chuyao Luo, Demin Yu, Xutao Li, Huiwei Lin, Yunming Ye, and Bowen Zhang.
  Metadiff: Meta-learning with conditional diffusion for few-shot learning. Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(15):16687–16695, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.
  v38i15.29608. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/
  29608.

J. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Ghosh, D. Li, S. Tasci, L. Heck, H. Zhang, and C. J. Kuo. Class-incremental
   learning via deep model consolidation. 2020 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Com-
   puter Vision (WACV), 2020. doi: 10.1109/wacv45572.2020.9093365.

Bolei Zhou, Yiyou Sun, David Bau, and Antonio Torralba. Interpretable basis decomposition for
  visual explanation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  September 2018.

Yitao Zhu, Zhenrong Shen, Zihao Zhao, Sheng Wang, Xin Wang, Xiangyu Zhao, Dinggang Shen,
  and Qian Wang. Melo: Low-rank adaptation is better than fine-tuning for medical image diagno-
  sis. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1–5, 2024. doi:
  10.1109/ISBI56570.2024.10635615.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   DATASET

In Table 3 we have summarized the class variations and number of samples for the six datasets we
have used in our TIL experiments. All the datasets were split with 75%−15%−15% train-validation-
test split. Simple augmentations like resizing, centercropping, horizontal flips, and normalization
have been applied for each.

                          Table 3: Details on the Benchmarking Datasets

               Dataset                                           Classes   #Sample
               Oxford Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008)       102       6553
               FGVC Aircrafts (Maji et al., 2013)                55        10001
               MIT Scenes (Quattoni & Torralba, 2009)            67        15614
               CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009)              100       60000
               CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009)               10        60000
               CUBs (Wah et al., 2011)                           200       11789



A.2   TASKWISE P ERFORMANCE B REAKDOWN

Impact of Task-order The sensitivity to task ordering varies significantly across different incre-
mental learning approaches. Methods that rely on knowledge distillation or parameter importance
estimation, such as LwF and EWC, exhibit cumulative degradation as knowledge gets diluted across
sequential tasks. In particular, LwF’s distillation-based approach becomes less effective for later
tasks as the knowledge transfer chain grows longer. EWC’s reliance on Fisher Information Matrix
to protect earlier tasks’ parameters can lead to representation bias, where earlier tasks dispropor-
tionately influence the learned feature space. Rehearsal-based methods like GDUMB and DER++
face challenges in maintaining balanced representative memory buffers across tasks, though sam-
ple selection strategies help mitigate but don’t eliminate these order effects. Even masked-based
approaches like HAT, despite maintaining unit-wise masks over the entire model, show order sen-
sitivity due to the constrained mask allocation being influenced by earlier tasks. In contrast, both
RECAST and several adapter-based baselines (AdaptFormer, MeLo, RoSA, DoRA) maintain ab-
solute parameter inference through strict parameter isolation. As shown in Table 4, these methods
achieve consistent performance across tasks, with no significant degradation in earlier task perfor-
mance as new tasks are learned. For instance, RECAST + AdaptFormer maintains high accuracy
across all domains (99.2% on Flowers, 84.7% on Aircraft, 87.1% on Scene), demonstrating that
task-specific parameters can effectively adapt while the shared feature space remains stable. This
architectural design choice effectively eliminates task interference, as each task’s performance re-
mains stable once learned, regardless of the order in which subsequent tasks are introduced. The
empirical results suggest that methods employing strict parameter isolation are inherently robust to
task ordering effects compared to approaches that modify shared parameters or rely on knowledge
transfer between tasks.

A.3   R ECONSTRUCTION A NALYSIS

Pre-trained Model Details We obtained the ViT and DiNO pretrained weights from the official
timm repository Wightman (2019). Resnet weights are obtained from Pytorch Hub. The specific
models and their corresponding weight URLs are:

       • ResNet-34:                          https://download.pytorch.org/models/
         resnet34-b627a593.pth
       • ViT-Small: https://storage.googleapis.com/vit_models/augreg/
         S_16-i21k-300ep-lr_0.001-aug_light1-wd_0.03-do_0.0-sd_0.
         0--imagenet2012-steps_20k-lr_0.03-res_224.npz


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • ViT-Base:  https://storage.googleapis.com/vit_models/augreg/
        B_16-i21k-300ep-lr_0.001-aug_medium1-wd_0.1-do_0.0-sd_0.
        0--imagenet2012-steps_20k-lr_0.01-res_224.npz
      • ViT-Large: https://storage.googleapis.com/vit_models/augreg/
        L_16-i21k-300ep-lr_0.001-aug_medium1-wd_0.1-do_0.1-sd_0.
        1--imagenet2012-steps_20k-lr_0.01-res_224.npz
      • DiNO-Small Caron et al. (2021): https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/dino/
        dino_deitsmall16_pretrain/dino_deitsmall16_pretrain.pth


Table 4: Model Performance Comparison Across Different Datasets. For InfLoRA the 6 tasks are
generated by taking a chunk of 90 classes from the combined dataset - so, the classification result
doesn’t exactly correspond to each dataset.

 Model Type                          Flowers     Aircraft   Scene    CIFAR100       CIFAR10      Birds
 Small ViT                             97.4       66.6       82.6       72.5          94.9       81.1
 L2P                                    0.4        5.7        0.8       56.4          75.0       77.6
 InfLoRA                               99.8       89.0       88.2       84.8          84.6       84.5
 AdaptFormer                           99.2       79.6       85.7       87.6          98.1       84.3
 MeLO                                  99.0       84.2       84.0       87.3          98.1       80.0
 Rosa (Sparse MLP 0.001%)              97.6       69.1       84.1       78.9          96.2       81.6
 RoSA Full                             99.4       79.1       85.2       87.4          97.9       82.6
 DoRA                                 99.02       86.4       84.7       87.6          98.2       80.0
 RECAST (Small ViT)                    98.6       72.5       84.3       79.1          95.7       80.5
 RECAST + AdaptFormer                  99.2       84.7       87.1       88.8          98.3       84.4
 RECAST + MeLO                         99.4       86.3       84.3       87.1          97.9       81.0
 RECAST (Sparse MLP 0.001%)            98.4       72.9       83.9       80.0          96.3       81.0
 RECAST + RoSA Full                    99.2       81.9       84.7       87.5          97.9       82.4
 Resnet34                             87.6        51.9      66.9           59.8       83.0       42.0
 EWC                                   2.6        12.1       9.0            1.7       42.2       65.4
 LWF                                   1.4        23.1       5.6            1.7       41.1       42.9
 GDUMB                                38.9        25.6      33.2            4.5       69.7       36.9
 DER++                                 1.3        12.5      26.1           53.9        0.7        2.5
 HAT                                  49.1        71.9      46.5            9.9       30.6       39.8
 PiggyBack                            93.9        85.4      74.4           82.6       96.6       65.0
 CLR                                  93.9        83.3      73.3           75.9       94.3       59.0
 RECAST (Resnet34)                    89.8        52.7      65.8           61.4       83.8       44.2
 RECAST + PiggyBack                   95.7        87.3      77.0           81.7       96.3       66.3
 RECAST + CLR                         94.7        83.7      72.1           77.4       95.6       62.1



     Table 5: Required runtime and hardware utilization to run Neural Mimicry (Section 3.2)

 Model Scale               Peak GPU          Average CPU        Per Epoch          Total       Wall Clock
                          Memory (GB)         Utilization    Processing (ms)      Epochs     Time (seconds)
 ViT Small (≈ 21M )            0.3              3.7%                36.2          1000            37.4
 ViT Base (≈ 86M )             1.2              3.7%                112           1000           102.3
 ViT Large (≈ 304M )           4.5              3.7%                340           1000           245.0


Resource Requirements The results in Table 5 demonstrate that Neural Mimicry has a modest
memory footprint (0.33-4.5GB GPU memory) with minimal CPU overhead ( 3.7%). It also linearly
scales with model size. Furthermore, the complete reconstruction is completed in minutes even for
large models. Notably, this step achieves 98-100% reconstruction accuracy (Table 6) and requires
significantly less resources than model pretraining.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RECAST is architecture and scale agnostic RECAST can reconstruct models across various
architecture and scales. In Table 6, we present the results of reconstructed models and the official
performance of these models on the Imagenet-1K (Deng et al., 2009) dataset. All reconstructed
models in the table have the same configuration - 6 groups, 2 layers in each group and 2 sets of
coefficients for each target module (except ViT-Large has 12 groups). The inference comparison on
Imagenet tells us that, RECAST can completely emulate the feature generation of any pretrained
weight. We also report the averaged best accuracy@top1 across the datasets in figure 3, for the
varying scales of the ViT models. In all cases, RECAST perfermos slightly better than baseline
without coefficient-tuning, and significantly better with coefficient-tuning.

              Model                                      Imagenet      Reconstruction
                                                         Acc@top1      Similarity
              Resnet-34                                  73.3          -
              Recon. Resnet-34                           73.0          99%
              ViT-Small                                  74.6          -
              Recon. ViT-Small (MLP)                     74.6          100%
              Recon. ViT-Small (Attention)               74.6          100%
              Recon. ViT-Small (MLP & Attention)         74.6          100%
              Recon. ViT-Small (VAE + MSE)               73.8          98.5%
              Recon. ViT-Small (VAE + SmoothL1)          73.0          98.6%
              ViT-Base                                   81.1          -
              Recon. ViT-Base                            81.0          100%
              ViT-Large                                  84.4          -
              Recon. ViT-Large                           84.4          100%
              DINO Small                                 77.0          -
              Recon. DiNO Small                          76.9          99%

Table 6: Accuracy comparison of reconstructed RECAST models over the ImageNet1k dataset,
against the original pretrained models from timm (Wightman, 2019) demonstrates that both back-
bones are empirically the same. Despite this similarity, RECAST provides reparameterization facil-
ities with < 0.0002% coefficients


Template diversity is important for better reparameterization In Section A.3, we empirically
showed that models with higher Frobenius norm value and higher entropy provides better task-
adaptable model. We further breakdown this analysis by first defining the metrics, and then analyz-
ing their layerwise trends for various reconstruction methods.

      • Frobenius Norm: Calculates the square root of the sum of the absolute squares of its
        elements. In the context of RECAST, the Frobenius norm is used to measure the di-
        versity among templates within a template bank for each group. For a template bank
        τg = {Tg,1 , Tg,2 , . . . , Tg,nP
                                        } in group g, the average Frobenius norm can be calculated as:
                                   1      n Pn
        avg frobeniusg = n(n−1)           i=1    j=i+1 ∥Tg,i − Tg,j ∥F . Squaring the differences makes
        the metric more sensitive to large deviations between templates. This property helps iden-
        tify when templates are significantly different, not just slightly varied.
      • Entropy Quantifies the average amount of information contained in a set of values. For
        each template bank τg , we calculate the entropy of singular values to measure the balance of
        importance among the components of the templates.PThe average entropy for the template
                                                                    n
        bank in group g is calculated as: avg entropyg = n1 i=1 H(Tg(l),i ), where H(Tg,i ) is the
        entropy for a single template Tg,i

The Frobenius norm helps ensure diversity among Tg,i , allowing for a wide range of possible Wl,m .
A higher score means more difference among the template. The entropy ensures that each Tg,i is
itself balanced and flexible, contributing to the adaptability of the reconstructed weights. A higher
entropy corresponds to better information quality within each group. Together, these metrics pro-
vide a comprehensive view of the template characteristics in RECAST, helping to optimize both
the diversity of the template bank and the flexibility of individual templates for efficient and ef-
fective weight reconstruction. In Figure 9a and 9b, we show the change of Frobenius norm and


                                                 18
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Entropy. The VAE models perform very low in terms of the Frobenius metric, although their pattern
   varies depending on the loss function. This is also true for the models generated through Neural
   Mimicry 3.2,i.e. models reconstructed with MSE loss and SmoothL1 loss performance almost sim-
   ilar on classification task but differs in entropy pattern and Frobenius norm. Another observation is
   that noise perturbations don’t seem to impact these two metrics at all.


                              102
                                                                                                             6.8 × 10 1
Average Frobenius Diversity


                                                                                        Average SV Entropy
                                                                                                             6.6 × 10 1
                                                                    SmoothL1
                                                                    MSE
                                                                    SmoothL1 + Noise
                                                                    VAE + MSE                                6.4 × 10 1
                                                                    VAE + SmoothL1

                                                                                                             6.2 × 10 1
                                                                                                                              SmoothL1
                                                                                                                              MSE
                                                                                                                              SmoothL1 + Noise
                              101                                                                             6 × 10 1        VAE + MSE
                                                                                                                              VAE + SmoothL1
                                    1        2     3          4     5            6                                        1           2          3         4    5   6
                                                   Group Number                                                                                  Group Number

                               (a) Change of Frobenius norm across the groups                                         (b) Change of Entropy across the groups

   Figure 9: Analyzing the strategies of changing reconstruction schemes by quantifying their respec-
   tive Frobenius Norm and Entropy metrics (as defined in A.3) across 6 groups of layers of a ViT. It
   can be observed that the VAE-reconstructed models generally demonstrate significantly low Group-
   wise Frobenius score and comparatively lower Entropy.


   We define another metric the intra-group coefficient similarity to measure how similar the coeffi-
   cient vectors are between different layers within the same group of RECAST model. For layers l1
   and l2 in the same group: sim(l1, l2) = cosine similarity(Cl1 , Cl2 ) Where Cl is the flattened and
   concatenated vector of all coefficients for layer l. If similarities are generally low within a group, it
   means each coefficient is using the shared templates in unique ways. This could indicate that each
   layer is capturing different features or transformations. The Figure 10, shows that the later groups in
   the VAE models share very high intra-group coefficient similarity indicating that layers within each
   group are using templates very similarly or there are redundancies in the network.

    A.4                                 RECAST A DAPTATION

    A.4.1                                RECAST- ADAPTED COMPONENTS
   Our framework can be adapted to various neural network components. Below we provide the details
   of how they may be implemented in Neural Networks.

   Fully-connected Layers We use RECAST here to generate the weights for the full-connected
   layers of a network. Here, Ti ∈ Rdout ×din . dout is the number of output features and din is the
   number of input features. Coefficient shape, Cij ∈ R1×1 , represents a scalar value for each template
   with additional broadcasting dimensions. After generating final weight using Eq. 2, it’s used as
   Y = f (X · Wf inal + b), where X ∈ Rbatch size×d in and Y ∈ Rbatch size×d out

   Attention QKV Matrices In attention mechanisms, RECAST generates a single matrix for the
   combined query, key, and value projections. This uses a template shape Ti ∈ R3d×d , where d is
   the embedding dimension and coefficient shape, Cij ∈ R1×1×1 . The weight generation process is
   similar to the FC layer case. The resulting Wf inal is then used to compute Q, K, and V . For input
   shape X ∈ Rbatch size×seq length×d we can obtain Q, K, V ∈ Rbatch size×seq length×d

   Convolution Kernels For convolutional layers, RECAST generates filter kernels that are applied
   across the input feature maps. Here, Ti ∈ Rcout ×cin ×K×K . cout is the number of output channels,
   cin is the number of input channels, and K is the kernel size. The weight generation process follows


                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                  SmoothL1 - group_0                                 SmoothL1 - group_1                                 SmoothL1 - group_2                                 SmoothL1 - group_3                                 SmoothL1 - group_4                                 SmoothL1 - group_5
                                             1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                 1.0


                                             0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                 0.8


       0


                                                          0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                 0.6
Layer Index


                                                   Layer Index


                                                                                                      Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                         Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Layer Index
                                             0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                 0.4
       1


                                                          1


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                             0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2


                                             0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                 0.0
                  0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1
                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index
                      MSE - group_0                                      MSE - group_1                                      MSE - group_2                                      MSE - group_3                                      MSE - group_4                                      MSE - group_5
                                             1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                 1.0


                                             0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                 0.8
       0


                                                          0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                 0.6
Layer Index


                                                   Layer Index


                                                                                                      Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                         Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Layer Index
                                             0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                 0.4
       1


                                                          1


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                             0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2


                                             0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                 0.0
                  0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1
                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index
               SmoothL1 + Noise - group_0                         SmoothL1 + Noise - group_1                         SmoothL1 + Noise - group_2                         SmoothL1 + Noise - group_3                         SmoothL1 + Noise - group_4                         SmoothL1 + Noise - group_5
                                             1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                 1.0


                                             0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                 0.8
       0


                                                          0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                 0.6
Layer Index


                                                   Layer Index


                                                                                                      Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                         Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Layer Index
                                             0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                 0.4
       1


                                                          1


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                             0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2


                                             0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                 0.0
                  0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1
                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index
                Encoder + MSE - group_0                            Encoder + MSE - group_1                            Encoder + MSE - group_2                            Encoder + MSE - group_3                            Encoder + MSE - group_4                            Encoder + MSE - group_5
                                             1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                 1.0


                                             0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                 0.8
       0


                                                          0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                 0.6
Layer Index


                                                   Layer Index


                                                                                                      Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                         Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Layer Index
                                             0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                 0.4
       1


                                                          1


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                             0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2


                                             0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                 0.0
                  0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1
                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index
              Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_0                       Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_1                       Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_2                       Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_3                       Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_4                       Encoder + SmoothL1 - group_5
                                             1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                1.0                                                 1.0


                                             0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                0.8                                                 0.8
       0


                                                          0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                0.6                                                 0.6
Layer Index


                                                   Layer Index


                                                                                                      Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                         Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer Index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Layer Index
                                             0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                0.4                                                 0.4
       1


                                                          1


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                             0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2


                                             0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                0.0                                                 0.0
                  0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1                              0                   1
                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index                                        Layer Index


Figure 10: Intra-group Coefficient Similarity across the groups of similar configuration models, that
have been reconstructed in different ways. The later groups in the VAE/Encoder models share very
high intra-group coefficient similarity and that layers within each group are using templates very
similarly or there are redundancies in the network.


the same pattern as before. The resulting Wf inal is then used as the convolution kernel:
Y      =     conv2d(X, Wf inal ), where X           ∈    Rbatch size×c in×h in×w in and Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ∈
  batch size×c out×h out×w out
R

A.4.2                            RECAST I NTEGRATION WITH E XISTING M ETHODS
RECAST complements existing incremental learning methods as a task-adaptable weight generation
backbone. For CNN architectures, RECAST generates base weights that PiggyBack’s (Mallya et al.,
2018) binary masks can modulate and provides primary convolution weights that CLR’s Ge et al.
(2023) Ghost modules can refine. In transformer architectures, RECAST produces core weight
matrices that methods like MeLO, AdaptFormer (for query/value and MLP components), DoRA
(for magnitude-direction decomposition), and RoSA (for sparse adaptations) can then modify.
For example, in standard LoRA, a weight matrix W ∈ Rdout ×din is modified by adding a low-rank
update:
                                       WLoRA = W0 + BA                                      (4)
             dout ×r       r×din
where B ∈ R          ,A∈R        , and r is the rank.
When integrating with RECAST, instead of using a fixed W0 , we use the dynamically generated
weight matrix from RECAST. From Equation 1
                                                                                                                                                   K                   n
                                                                                                                                                1 XX           k
                                                                                                WRECAST =                                              Tg,i · Cl,m,i                                                                                                                                        (5)
                                                                                                                                                K  i=1
                                                                                                                                                   k=1


                                                                                                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  k
where Tg,i are the templates and Cl,m,i are the coefficients. The final integrated approach combines
both methods:
                                   Wcombined = WRECAST + BA                                      (6)
The total trainable parameters for the combined approach are:

      • RECAST: O(nK) coefficients per module
      • LoRA: O(r(din + dout )) parameters per module

where n is the number of templates, K is the number of coefficient sets, and r is the LoRA rank.
Similar principles apply when integrating with other methods:
CLR (Channel-wise Lightweight Reprogramming) Ge et al. (2023):
                                 Y = Ghost(Conv(X, WRECAST ))                                    (7)
where Ghost(·) represents the lightweight channel-wise transformations through depthwise-
separable convolutions.
PiggyBack (Mallya et al., 2018):
                                    Wcombined = WRECAST ⊙ M                                      (8)
where M is a binary mask matrix.
DoRA (Liu et al., 2024b):
                                                        WRECAST + BA
                            Wcombined = ∥WRECAST ∥ ·                                             (9)
                                                       ∥WRECAST + BA∥
where ∥ · ∥ denotes the magnitude and BA is the LoRA update.
RoSA (Nikdan et al., 2024):
                         Wcombined = WRECAST + S ⊙ WRECAST + (BA)                              (10)
where S is a sparse binary mask applied to the LoRA update.


                                                21
