Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ISCRETIZATION - INVARIANCE ? O N THE D ISCRETI -
ZATION M ISMATCH E RRORS IN N EURAL O PERATORS

 Wenhan Gao1 Ruichen Xu1 Yuefan Deng1 Yi Liu1,2∗
 1
   Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony Brook University
 2
   Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University



                                               A BSTRACT
             In recent years, neural operators have emerged as a prominent approach for learn-
             ing mappings between function spaces, such as the solution operators of paramet-
             ric PDEs. A notable example is the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), which models
             the integral kernel as a convolution operator and uses the Convolution Theorem
             to learn the kernel directly in the frequency domain. The parameters are decou-
             pled from the resolution of the data, allowing the FNO to take inputs of different
             resolutions. However, training at a lower resolution and inferring at a finer res-
             olution does not guarantee consistent performance, nor can fine details, present
             only in fine-scale data, be learned solely from coarse data. In this work, we ad-
             dress this misconception by defining and examining the discretization mismatch
             error: the discrepancy between the outputs of the neural operator when using dif-
             ferent discretizations of the input data. We demonstrate that neural operators may
             suffer from discretization mismatch errors that hinder their effectiveness when in-
             ferred on data with resolutions different from that of the training data or when
             trained on data with varying resolutions. As neural operators underpin many criti-
             cal cross-resolution scientific tasks, such as climate modeling and fluid dynamics,
             understanding discretization mismatch errors is essential. Based on our findings,
             we propose a Cross-Resolution Operator-learning Pipeline that is free of aliasing
             and discretization mismatch errors, enabling efficient cross-resolution and multi-
             spatial-scale learning, and resulting in superior performance. The code is publicly
             available at https://github.com/wenhangao21/ICLR25-CROP.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In diverse fields across science and engineering, researchers aim to investigate the behavior of phys-
ical systems under different parameters, such as different initial conditions or forcing functions.
Traditional numerical approaches often prove to be excessively time-consuming for simulating para-
metric physical systems. Data-driven surrogate models, known as neural operators (NOs), present
an efficient alternative (Anandkumar et al., 2019; Raonic et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2021). Neural op-
erators learn the mapping from parameter function space to the solution function space. After the
training phase, performing inference only necessitates a forward pass of the network, which can be
several orders of magnitude faster than traditional numerical methods. A particular example is the
Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2021), which models the integral kernel as a convolution
operator and employs the Convolution Theorem to learn the kernel directly in the frequency domain
to decouple the parameters from the resolution of the data.
However, there is a long-standing misconception in the operator learning community: It is widely
believed that training an FNO on one resolution allows inference on another without degrading its
performance, since FNO operates and parameterizes the kernel in the Fourier space. In reality, it still
exhibits a strong bias toward the training resolution. We attribute this inconsistency across different
resolutions to discretization error. Traditionally, in numerical methods, discretization error refers to
the discrepancy between continuous mathematical models and their discrete approximations, which
arises due to the finite resolution of computational systems. In the context of neural operators, the
continuous mathematical model is represented when the neural operator G(·; θ), parameterized by
network parameters θ, takes a continuous function a as input: G(a; θ). In contrast, the discrete
    ∗
        Correspondence to yi.liu.4@stonybrook.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



        Continuous Functions   Fine-scale Discretization   Coarse Discretization            Difference between the Inputs


             Neural                    Neural                    Neural
             Operator                  Operator                  Operator


                                                                                   Difference between the Output Predictions
                                Discretization Mismatch Error                      Caused by Discretization Mismatch Error


Figure 1: Neural operators map between function spaces and can handle different discretizations.
However, their architectures still introduce discretization errors. In computational math, researchers
analyze the discrepancies between continuous processes and their discrete approximations. In the
case of FNOs, we never have the continuous model that is trained with continuous data. In-
stead, we define discrepancies between two discrete approximations as discretization mismatch er-
rors (DMEs) in Sec. 4.1. Minimizing DMEs is crucial in cross-resolution tasks.
approximations occur when the neural operator takes a discretization of the continuous function
as input: Ĝ(a|ΩJ ; θ), where a|ΩJ denotes a discretization of J observation points of the function
a. In practice, network parameters are optimized on discretizations of functions; therefore, we
argue that for neural operators, it is essential to minimize the discrepancy between different discrete
representations. We will refer to this type of error as the discretization mismatch error (DME).
DMEs are caused by the network architectures; a simple example is Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), which are generally not considered discretization-invariant models. When the resolution
of the input data converges to infinity, discrete convolution, whose kernel remains fixed in size, con-
verges to a point-wise operation (Liu-Schiaffini et al., 2024). In this work, we analyze the DME in
FNO, which is the most popular discretization-invariant neural operator. This work is a prototypi-
cal analysis of DMEs in neural operators, especially for mesh-based neural operators. We refer to
tasks where the inference resolutions differ from the training resolution as cross-resolution tasks for
the reasons given in Sec. 4.1, and the analysis of DMEs is pivotal for such tasks. As an integral
neural operator, the mathematical formulation of FNO operates in the continuum, representing a
groundbreaking approach to function space mappings via neural networks. However, the realization
of FNO is still at a discrete level as the inputs and intermediate outputs are discrete; thus, we ar-
gue that FNO suffers from DMEs. Our work does not seek to criticize FNO in any way but rather
builds upon this revolutionary framework while highlighting the issue of DMEs for the community’s
consideration to advance the designs of neural operators.
In this work, we study and locate the sources of DMEs. Both theoretical analysis and empirical
evaluation are provided to convey our findings. Moreover, neural operators may suffer from alias-
ing errors that stem from inadequate sampling of high-frequency contents introduced by the neural
operator (Raonic et al., 2023). To mitigate these issues, we propose the Cross-Resolution Operator-
learning Pipeline (CROP); CROP is free of both DMEs and aliasing errors. We summarize and
compare several popular neural operators in Table 1. Our contributions can be summarized in
four parts: (1) We address this important, yet often overlooked, issue of the accumulation of DMEs
in neural operators. (2) We provide mathematical analysis and empirical evaluation to identify the
sources and accumulation of DMEs. (3) We design CROP components that capture global patterns
and are robust in cross-resolution tasks. (4) CROP represents a general pipeline in which the in-
termediate neural operator can be freely chosen to map the feature functions between band-limited
function spaces, such as CNN-based networks for fine-grained feature extraction.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Over the past few years, neural PDE solvers have emerged as a promising alternative to conventional
numerical methods for solving PDE problems across various domains in practical engineering and


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 1: A comparison of various popular architectures for learning function space mappings.
                     Discretization           Free of            Free of
  Architecture                                                                         Efficiency
                      Invariance           Aliasing Error         DME
  FNO                      ✓                     ✗                  ✗                      ✓
  U-Net                    ✗                     ✗                  ✗                      ✓
  CNO                     ✓*                     ✓*                ✓                       ✗*
  DeepONet                ✓!                     ✓                 ✗!                      ✓
  CROP (ours)              ✓                     ✓                 ✓                       ✓
 In Sec. 4.1, the notions of discretization invariance and discretization mismatch error are introduced.
 The notion of aliasing error (continuous-discrete equivalence) is introduced in Raonic et al. (2023).
 *
   Interpolation is employed for resolution independence and being free of discretization mismatch errors.
 *
   Interpolation operations in up and down samplings for activation functions can be computationally costly.
 !
   DeepONet is only resolution independent on the output.

life sciences (Sirignano et al., 2020; Pathak et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Azizzadenesheli et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2023). Traditionally, solving a PDE involves seeking a smooth function satis-
fying the derivative constraints imposed by the equations. From this perspective, Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) have been developed to approximate solutions of
PDEs individually. An alternative perspective views differential operators as mappings between
function spaces, where the solution operators are the inverses of these mappings. Building upon this
viewpoint, neural operators have been introduced as a method for solving a family of parametric
PDEs (Anandkumar et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022; Fanaskov & Oseledets,
2024; Raonic et al., 2023). Neural operators parameterize solution operators with neural networks to
map the input parameter functions to their respective solutions directly. More generally, beyond the
solution operators of PDEs, neural operators can approximate other function-to-function mappings,
including derivative operators, integral operators, etc..
Integral neural operator is a general framework that parameterizes the operator as a sequence of ker-
nel integrals and nonlinear activations (Kovachki et al., 2023; Anandkumar et al., 2019). FNO is a
type of integral neural operator in which the kernel integral is imposed to be a convolution (Li et al.,
2021). Global convolution is performed via Fourier layers in the frequency domain. By leverag-
ing low-frequency modes and truncating high-frequency modes, FNO captures global information
while incurring low computational costs and achieving discretization invariance. Although FNO is
discretization-invariant, its inconsistent performance in super-resolution tasks has been noted in sev-
eral works (Raonic et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022). Mesh-based neural operators including FNO, GNO
(Anandkumar et al., 2019), CNO (Raonic et al., 2023), and DeepONet (Lu et al., 2021) either are
not completely discretization-invariant or suffer from DMEs. While function-basis models, such as
SNO (Fanaskov & Oseledets, 2022), may not suffer from DMEs, they might be inferior in capturing
spatial information and dependencies. In this work, we specifically analyze the DMEs in FNO, a
model that is not intuitively expected to encounter such issues.
Relations with Prior Work. In Li et al. (2022), the inconsistent super-resolution performance
has been noted and the authors propose to mitigate this issue by using physics-informed constraints
to fine-tune the neural operator. However, this method is limiting, as different physics-informed
constraints (losses) can be difficult to optimize and balance (McClenny & Braga-Neto, 2020; Gao &
Wang, 2023; Wang et al., 2023), and in practical applications, we might have only data available, not
the governing PDEs. In Raonic et al. (2023); Bartolucci et al. (2023), aliasing errors in neural op-
erators have been investigated. The notion of continuous-discrete equivalence (CDE) is formalized
to study whether there is an equivalence between their continuous and discrete representations in
neural operators, i.e., whether the outputs of the neural operator reside in the band-limited function
space of interest. Based on CDE, Convolutional Neural Operators are proposed to be an operator
adaptation of the widely used U-Net architecture. Their views on aliasing errors in neural operators
are constructive and critical. However, while aliasing error is a very important perspective on the
design of neural operators, we note that anti-alias activation functions do not overcome the afore-
mentioned issues; this will be discussed further in Sec. 5.1. We provide a different explanation as to
why FNO is not robust across different resolutions. In this work, DMEs are defined and analyzed;
we propose the Cross-Resolution Operator-learning Pipeline that minimizes DMEs to achieve robust
performance across different resolutions. Our CROP components can be seamlessly used in FNO or
CNN-based architectures such as CNO to enable efficient learning of both global features and local
details while decoupling the network parameters from discretizations of the input data.

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     BACKGROUND
3.1 O PERATOR L EARNING
Operator learning refers to the use of neural networks to approximate or learn an operator, G, map-
ping between function spaces (Kovachki et al., 2023). Neural operators are particularly relevant in
the field of scientific computing, where complex mathematical operators are often involved in solv-
ing partial differential equations (PDEs). A particular and commonly seen example of operators is
for the solution operator of parametric PDEs. Consider a parametric PDE of the form:
                                    N (a, u)(x) = f (x), x ∈ Ω
                                           u(x) = 0,      x ∈ ∂Ω
where Ω ⊂ Rd is a bounded open set, N is a, possibly non-linear, differential operator, a is the
parametric input function, f is a given fixed function in an appropriate function space determined
by the structure of N , and u is the PDE solution. The PDE solution operator is defined as G(a) = u.
In practice, for appropriate function spaces A and U, we are interested in learning an operator
G : A 7→ U with a neural operator G(·; θ) through a finite collection of observations of input-output
                Ndata
pairs {aj , uj }j=1   , where θ ∈ Θ is a set of network parameters and aj ∼ µ are i.i.d. samples drawn
from some probability measure µ supported on A. We aim to control the L2µ (A; U) Bochner norm
of the approximation on average with respect to µ:
                   min ∥G(·) − G(·; θ)∥2L2µ (A;U ) = Ea∼µ ∥G(a) − G(a; θ)∥2U
                   θ∈Θ
                                                     Z
                                                   =    ∥G(a) − G(a; θ)∥2U dµ(a)
                                                          A
                                                               Ndata
                                                          1 X                       2
                                                     ≈               ∥uj − Gθ (aj )∥U .
                                                         Ndata j=1

Practically, each aj and uj are functions that come with a discretization (function values at some
sensor points), one could seek to approximately solve the empirical-risk minimization problem di-
rectly at those sensor points.
3.2   F OURIER N EURAL O PERATORS
 Inspired by the kernel method for PDEs, each integral neural operator layer consists of a fixed non-
Rlinearity and a kernel integral operator K modeled by network parameters, defined as (Kv)(x) =
    κ(x, y)v(y)dy. All operations in integral neural operators are defined on functions; thus, integral
neural operators are understood as function space architectures.
As a natural choice inspired by CNNs and the perspective of fundamental solutions, FNO imposes
the integral kernel to be translation invariant, κ(x, y) = κ(x − y). Thus, the kernel integral operator
becomes a convolution operator, and FNO performs global convolution in the frequency domain.
Each Fourier layer in FNO consists of a fixed non-linearity and a convolution operator K modeled
by network parameters:                           Z
                                    (Kv)(x) =       κ(x − y)v(y)dy.                                 (1)
                                                Rd
Convolution can be efficiently carried out as element-wise multiplication in the frequency domain:
                                  (Kv)(x) = F −1 (Fκ · Fv)(x),                                   (2)
                −1
where F and F are the Fourier transform and its inverse, respectively. FNO directly learns Fκ
in the frequency domain instead of learning the kernel κ in physical space. The Fourier transform
captures global information effectively and efficiently, leading to superior performance for FNO.

4     C ROSS -R ESOLUTION O PERATOR -L EARNING P IPELINE
In this section, we delve into the following questions: (1) Do neural operators exhibit robustness
across different resolutions? (2) If not, what factors contribute to this instability? (3) Based on
the analysis, how can we improve the resilience of neural operators across various resolutions and
potentially achieve additional benefits? We first define DMEs in Sec. 4.1; we answer the first two
questions in Sec. 4.2 and the last question in Sec. 4.3. We will use FNO as an example for the
analysis of DMEs; however, the concepts and analysis can be extended to other mesh-based neural
operators, such as the Wavelet neural operator (Gupta et al., 2021).

                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   D ISCRETIZATION E RROR AND D ISCRETIZATION M ISMATCH E RROR
                                               ′
For simplicity, we consider H s Td and H s Td as the input-output function spaces, a unit torus
Ω = Td = [0, 1)d as the domain, and equidistant (uniform) grids as the form of our discretization.
The FNO architecture is usually applied to such discretizations to harness the power of the Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT). The operations in FNO are mainly defined on general geometries and
discretization. The FNO architecture is not limited to rectangular domains, periodic functions, or
uniform grids. Likewise, our analysis is not limited by these constraints; however, the derivation can
become considerably more tedious; thus, we adopt this simplification.
                                                       ∞
Definition 4.1. A uniform discrete refinement (ΩJ )J=1 of the domain Ω = Td is a sequence of
nested sets of equidistant grids Ω1 ⊂ Ω2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Ω with |ΩJ | = Jd for any J ∈ N such that, for
any h > 0, there exists a number J = ⌈ h1 ⌉ ∈ N such that
                                      [
                                Ω⊆         y ∈ Rd : ∥y − x∥2 < h .
                                    x∈ΩJ

Any member ΩJ is called a discretization of the domain Ω. Note that, for an Rm -valued function
a : Ω → Rm defined on Ω, we call the pointwise evaluation of the function on ΩJ , a|ΩJ = {a (xj ) :
xj ∈ ΩJ }, a discretization of the function a(x). Notice that a|ΩJ can be viewed as a vector in RJd .
Therefore, an FNO that takes discrete inputs can be viewed as a mapping Ĝ : RJd × Θ → U, in
contrast to its continuous counterpart G : A × Θ → U. Here, Ĝ indicates a pseudo-FNO that handles
discrete data inputs. For simplicity, we will omit the ˆ· notation as the context will make it clear.

As we assume uniform grids, storing the sensor point coordinates, xj , is unnecessary; thus, a|ΩJ
can be directly used as input to the Fourier neural operator. While including coordinates as input
to the neural network may sometimes improve performance, as noted in Kovachki et al. (2023).
Nevertheless, our analysis still applies if we consider coordinate inputs as the identity function (the
function’s output at point xj is xj itself). For the purposes of discussion in this work, we will treat
a|ΩJ as a vector in RJd . For a discretization of size N , we will view it as a function reconstructed
by the N Fourier coefficients. This view is natural from the perspective of the orthogonal Fourier
projection operators.
It is well known in the field of operator learning that FNO is regarded as a discretization-invariant
model. We herein present the definition of discretization invariance as given in Kovachki et al.
(2023), with slight modifications related to our notations and conventions.
Definition 4.2 (Kovachki et al. (2023)). Let Θ ⊆ Rp be a finite-dimensional parameter space and
G : A × Θ → U a map representing a parametric class of operators with parameters θ ∈ Θ. Given
                            ∞
a discrete refinement (ΩJ )J=1 of the domain Ω ⊂ Rd , we say G is discretization-invariant if there
exists a sequence of maps G1 , Ĝ2 , . . ., where ĜJ : RJd × Θ → U, such that

                              lim sup G a|ΩJ ; θ − G(a; θ) U = 0,
                             J→∞ a∈K

for any θ ∈ Θ and any compact set K ⊂ A.

Generally speaking, discretization invariance defined in Kovachki et al. (2021) refers to the property
that a neural operator taking discrete data as input converges to the continuum operator taking con-
tinuous functions as input as the discretization becomes finer. However, this does not necessarily
imply that the neural operator’s performance is consistent regardless of the input data’s discretiza-
tion, which is a common misconception within the operator learning community. We note that this
property implies convergence to the continuum, rather than the ability to achieve cross-resolution
tasks. Instead, throughout this paper, we will refer to discretization invariance as the property that
the neural operator’s parameters remain decoupled from the resolution of the data and that the neu-
ral operator can take inputs of different discretizations directly without sacrificing its performance.
Many in the operator learning community interpret this as the meaning of discretization invariance,
often conducting zero-shot super-resolution tests in their research. To avoid confusion with the
discretization (or resolution) invariance as defined in Kovachki et al. (2021), we will use the term
“cross-resolution”. To this end, we introduce DMEs, a key concept for cross-resolution pipelines.
Definition 4.3. Let Θ ⊆ Rp be a finite dimensional parameter space and G : A × Θ → U a map
representing a parametric class of Fourier neural operators with parameters θ ∈ Θ. Given a uniform


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          ∞
discrete refinement (ΩJ )J=1 of the domain Ω ⊂ Rd , the discretization mismatch error between the
Fourier neural operator taking two different discretizations of the function a is defined as

                              EM N := Gθ a|ΩM − Gθ a|ΩN U .
4.2   T HE ACCUMULATION OF DISCRETIZATION MISMATCH ERROR
To provide a detailed analysis of discretization errors in FNOs, we formally and mathematically
outline the full FNO architecture in Appendix A.1 and present Proposition 4.4.

Proposition 4.4. Let Θ ⊆ Rp be a finite dimensional parameter space, A = H s Td ; Rda ,
          ′
U = H s Td ; Rdu , and G : A × Θ → U a map representing a parametric class of Fourier
neural operators with parameters θ ∈ Θ with L Fourier layers. Consider σ(x) as the activation
function that is (globally) ω-Lipschitz continuous for all layers. Given a discretization a|ΩN , then
the discretization mismatch error between the Fourier
                                                       neural operator
                                                                       taking a|ΩN and another dis-
cretization a|ΩM , given by EM N = Gθ a|ΩM − Gθ a|ΩN with M > N , will increase as M
increases. Additionally, the discretization mismatch error might increase as L and ω increase.

Proposition 4.4 indicates that DMEs propagate and accumulate across the intermediate Fourier lay-
ers, and as a straightforward extension from the continuity property of G, the DMEs also propagate
over time in autoregressive tasks. The training resolution can be M or N , so this bound suggests
that as long as the inference resolution differs from that of the training, it will suffer from DMEs;
nevertheless, it is a super-resolution or sub-resolution (lower resolution) task. We demonstrate this
empirically in Sec. 5.1. The proof for this proposition and formal statements on the upper bound
is given in Appendix B. We experimentally verify our findings in Sec. 5.1. These findings suggest
that neural operators may struggle to perform cross-resolution tasks. Therefore, we propose the
Cross-Resolution Operator-learning Pipeline to address this issue.
4.3   CROP: M INIMIZING THE D ISCRETIZATION M ISMATCH E RROR
As shown in Sec. 4.2, the DMEs arise in neural operators, limiting their ability to perform cross-
resolution tasks. To address
                             this, we propose
                                              the CROP lifting and projection  layers:
     PCROP : H s Td ; Rda → Bw Td ; Rd0         and QCROP : Bw Td ; RdL → H s Td ; Rda .


The CROP lifting layer, PCROP , maps the input function to a band-limited, usually high-dimensional,
latent feature function
                  R     through a global convolution with a band-limited convolution kernel C(x−y).
Hence, v0 (x) = Td C(x − y)a(x)dy, and the resulting latent feature function v0 (x) will be band-
limited as well. As we consider a band-limited function space, we can fix the discretization of the
latent feature function in accordance with the band-limit we choose. Since the discretization is fixed
for the latent feature functions, any intermediate neural operator architecture L can be chosen to
learn the mapping between latent feature functions,
                                                   including those   that are mesh-dependent:
                                 L : Bw Td ; Rd0 7→ Bw Td ; RdL .
Moreover, because the latent discretizations are fixed, CROP does not suffer from the DME, and we
can interpret the intermediate neural operator as an operation on these discretizations. As a result, it
will not introduce high-frequency components beyond the established band-limit that the discretiza-
tion can accommodate. Therefore, the intermediate neural operator satisfies the Continuous-Discrete
Equivalence (Raonic et al., 2023).
Similarly, the CROP projection layer, QCROP , consists of a global band-limited kernel convolution
combined with a fully connected point-wise network to map the band-limited latent feature function
to an output function with frequencies that can exceed the band-limit in the appropriate function
space. The high-frequency information beyond the band-limit is learned in the CROP projection
layer through a fully connected point-wise network, potentially augmented by a residual connection
to the input, as tolerated by the refined discretization.

Remark 4.5. Let v(x) ∈ Bw Td ; RdL be a band-limited function, and let an analytic non-linear
function σ(·) be the fixed activation function in the fully connected point-wise network. Then the
resulting function may not be band-limited anymore. Additionally, the high frequencies of the re-
sulting function is determined by both the fully connected point-wise network and the learned latent
feature function v(x).
The proof of this remark is given in Appendix C. This remark suggests that the high-frequency com-
ponents beyond the band-limit are determined by both the fully connected point-wise network and v.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Intermediate Latent Band-limited Feature Functions

     Input Function with                                                                                   Output Function with
      Any Discretization                                                                                    Any Discretization


                           CROP                     Intermediate Neural                         CROP
                           Lifting                       Operator                             Projection


Figure 2: Cross-Resolution Operator learning Pipeline: Firstly, a CROP lifting layer maps the input
parametric function to a latent feature function in a band-limited function space with a fixed dis-
cretization. Consequently, an intermediate neural operator that operates on band-limited function
spaces is applied to process the latent feature function. This intermediate neural operator does
not necessarily have to be discretization invariant, so we can choose models of local features
such as the U-Net. Finally, a CROP projection layer will map the latent feature function to final
output function in the appropriate function space. A Fully connected, point-wise network is incor-
porated in the CROP projection layers to learn higher frequency information beyond the band-limits.

The intermediate neural operator is tasked to learn an appropriate latent feature function v to capture
high-frequency components in conjunction with the fully connected point-wise network. The key
ideas of CROP is to have the latent feature functions to be in a band-limited function space so that
they can be processed by an intermediate neural operator that can be more freely chosen; for exam-
ple, we can use mesh-dependent architectures such as CNNs. This process, however, will “CROP”
out high frequencies, we utilize the CROP projection layer to recover such frequencies. We provide
a spectral comparison between FNO and CROP in Appendix C.1. The CROP lifting and projection
layers are able to capture global information efficiently; thus, we can select an intermediate neural
operator of the local nature, such as U-Nets, without sacrificing the ability to learn global features.
Overall, this framework is more robust for cross-resolution tasks by having an intermediate neural
operator that maps between band-limited function spaces and we can choose appropriate intermedi-
ate neural operators to efficiently learn the multi-spatio-scale nature of many problems in physical
modeling (Gupta & Brandstetter, 2022).
5   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to substantiate our claims and demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed CROP components. In Sec. 5.1, we conduct experiments on the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equation to showcase the accumulation of DMEs and verify our CROP components’
ability to perform cross-resolution tasks. In Sec. 5.2, we conduct experiments to demonstrate the
efficient multi-spatio-scale learning capability of our CROP components.
5.1 C ROSS - RESOLUTION T ESTS
In this example, we demonstrate the DME in neural operators as discussed in Sec. 4.2 and then
explore the ability of CROP components for cross-resolution tasks.
Description. We consider the 2D Navier-Stokes equation for a viscous, incompressible fluid in
vorticity form, as described in Li et al. (2021):
            ∂t w(x, t) + u(x, t) · ∇w(x, t) = ν∆w(x, t) + f (x), x ∈ (0, 1)2 , t ∈ (0, T ]
                                     ∇ · u(x, t) = 0,                                    x ∈ (0, 1)2 , t ∈ [0, T ]                (3)
                                                                                                      2
                                        w(x, 0) = w0 (x),                                x ∈ (0, 1)

                          r

where u ∈ C [0, T ]; Hper      (0, 1)2 ; R2 for any r > 0 is the velocity field, w = ∇ × u is the

vorticity, w0 ∈ L2per (0, 1)2 ; R is the initial vorticity, ν = 1e − 3 is the viscosity coefficient, and

f ∈ L2per (0, 1)2 ; R is the forcing function. We are interested in learning the operator that maps
the vorticity up to time 10 to the vorticity up to a later time T = 50 in an auto-regressive manner for
all the intermediate time steps with a step size of 1 following Li et al. (2021). More details on the
experimental setups can be found in Appendix D.1.1 and D.1.2.

                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1.1     T HE ACCUMULATION OF D ISCRETIZATION M ISMATCH E RROR
First, we recognize that neural operators may not be robust across different resolutions. In Figure
3 (a), we present results from a well-trained FNO on 200 testing input parametric functions and
plot the average relative ℓ2 error under different resolutions; we can clearly observe the impacts
of the DME. Even at the very first time step when the error has not propagated through time yet,
inferences at 128 × 128 (0.66%) are three times as high as those at the training resolution (0.22%),
and inferences at other resolutions are even worse.


                          (a)                                               (b)
Figure 3: (a): The relative ℓ2 error during inference for the Navier-Stokes equation across different
input resolutions. We can clearly observe the effects of DME on performance, even at the very
first time step. Unsurprisingly, this effect propagates through the auto-regressive time steps. (b):
The growth in relative DME with respect to increasing numbers of layers. This highlights our
observation that DMEs propagate through the Fourier layers.
As shown in Figure 3 (b), there is a clear trend: as the network stacks more layers, the DME in-
creases. As significant discretization errors exist within the network architecture, their impact on the
overall performance of super-resolution tasks is profound. Therefore, based on both experimental
observations and mathematical analysis, we conclude that FNO is not suited for cross-resolution
tasks (inference on resolutions different from that of the training). However, we emphasize again
that the formulation of FNO is revolutionary and lays the foundation for function space mappings.
Philosophically, since the training data lacks high-resolution information, it remains unclear whether
neural operators can learn what they have not seen (high-resolution information) to achieve zero-
shot super-resolution without the inclusion of specific designs, such as transfer learning, physics-
informed loss (Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021), conservation laws (Liu et al., 2024), symmetries
(Helwig et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024), etc.. However, we believe that FNO offers great potential to
achieve data-driven super-resolution tasks; we will discuss this further in Appendix E.

5.1.2     CROP: M INIMIZING THE D ISCRETIZATION M ISMATCH E RROR
We demonstrate that CROP can achieve robust performance across different resolutions of inference.
We compare the CROP-enhanced FNO model with the plain FNO and the FNO with anti-alias
activation functions (Raonic et al., 2023).
Table 2: The mean and standard deviation of relative ℓ2 error over 10 runs during inference are re-
ported for the Navier-Stokes Equation with varying resolutions of input parametric functions. CROP
is consistent across all resolutions. Baseline models continue to show a strong bias toward the train-
ing resolution. The DME is obviously shown when inferred on data with different resolutions.
                                   256 × 256      128 × 128         64 × 64♢           32 × 32
             FNO                  4.65(±1.47)    3.35(±0.97)       0.58(±0.04)       9.45(±2.92)
     Alias-free FNO (2×)          6.91(±2.73)    6.18(±3.01)       0.61(±0.04) 39.74(±14.11)
    Alias-free FNO (Fixed)        6.95(±2.60)    7.40(±3.49)       0.61(±0.04) 42.08(±15.03)
   CNO (with interpolation) 4.17(±1.46)          2.95(±1.06)       1.98(±0.14)       7.69(±1.69)
         CROP (ours)             0.54(±0.05) 0.54(±0.05) 0.54(±0.05) 0.54(±0.05)
  ♢
      Training resolution is 64 × 64.

We present the results in Table 5.1.2 as percentages. It is clear that FNOs exhibit a strong bias
toward the training resolution, regardless of whether upsampling and downsampling are used to


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mitigate aliasing issues (Raonic et al., 2023). We additionally include the cross-resolution results
for CNO (Raonic et al., 2023) with downsampling and bicubic interpolation to illustrate that relying
on explicit up/downsampling may degrade performance. Therefore, we assert that alias-free activa-
tion functions cannot fully enable FNO to succeed in cross-resolution tasks. The major challenge
we need to solve is the discretization error inherent in the realization of neural operators at a discrete
level. Clearly, CROP minimizes the DME and achieves the best results on cross-resolution tasks.
Moreover, CROP exhibits superior performance compared to other baselines even when inferring at
the same resolution of the training data. This can be attributed to the fact that CROP is continuous-
discrete-equivalent; FNO truncates some high-frequency modes in each layer for efficiency and re-
duction of the number of parameters, but this truncation will break continuous-discrete-equivalence.
Moreover, such truncations are necessary if we aim to train at a lower resolution and infer at a
different resolution. CROP strictly adheres to the band-limits in accordance with the truncation;
thus, CROP improves the overall results. Additionally, as CROP does not suffer from DMEs in any
autoregressive time step, CROP is stable for long-term roll-outs in terms of cross-resolution abilities.
5.2     L EARNING C APABILITY T EST
In this example, we explore the learning capabilities of CROP components. We demonstrate that
CROP achieves superior performance compared to the baselines. This performance gain can be
attributed to factors such as exceptional multi-spatio-scale abilities while being free from aliasing
and DMEs, as outlined in Sec. 4.3. Additionally, we include the results of cross-resolution tests in
Appendix D.5 to showcase CROP’s cross-resolution capabilities.
5.2.1    NAVIER -S TOKES E QUATION WITH H IGH R EYNOLDS N UMBER
Description. We examine the same Navier-Stokes equation discussed in Section 5.1, but with an
increased Reynolds number. High Reynolds numbers pose significant learning challenges due to
the turbulent characteristics and small-scale features of the flow (Liu-Schiaffini et al., 2024). We
conduct experiments at Reynolds numbers of 5, 000 and 10, 000, respectively. As higher Reynolds
numbers lead to more complex problems, we utilize a larger training dataset for Re = 10, 000. More
details can be found in Appendix D.1.3.

Table 3: Results on the Navier-Stokes equation with high Reynolds numbers are presented. The
mean and standard deviation of the relative ℓ2 error over 10 inference runs are provided. Timing
results are also included as a reference. Clearly, CROP outperforms all baselines.
                                                        Re = 5000          Re = 10000
                          #Par. (M) BPS           IT     Test (%)            Test (%)
               FNO           2.27∗      18.47 3.39 7.25(±0.38)             8.35(±0.55)
              CNO            2.61        1.64 9.73 5.77(±0.19)             4.66(±0.07)
              U-Net          7.76       34.54 1.56 8.96(±0.06)             8.75(±0.22)
             ResNet          23.50       2.01 6.73 57.79(±2.11)           53.01(±0.96)
           DeepONet          4.89       50.35 0.89 16.93(±0.40)           17.60(±0.37)
          CROP (ours)        4.03∗      12.70 4.69 3.84(±0.09)            4.06(±0.22)
          BPS (Batch per Second): The number of batches processed per second during training.
          IT (Inference Time): The time, in milliseconds, it takes to infer on a batch of 16 samples.
          ∗
            : Each complex parameter (which is twice the size of a real parameter) is counted as 2.

Results and Discussion. The results clearly demonstrate that CROP exhibits exceptional learning
capabilities, effectively capturing both fine-scale and global features. While Fourier Neural Operator
(FNO) performs well at low Reynolds numbers, as shown in Sec. 5.1, it tends to over-smooth
fine-scale details, leading to degraded performance. Although the Convolutional Neural Operator
(CNO) can learn global features through its U-path, it excels primarily in local contexts due to
its convolutional nature, making it less effective at capturing long-range dependencies compared
to our CROP components. Similarly, U-Net and ResNet also struggle with learning long-range
dependencies. We recognize that DeepONet is a groundbreaking framework that performs well
in various applications; however, like FNO, it may also over-smooth fine-scale details. Overall,
CROP’s ability to effectively learn complex patterns results in superior performance compared to
the baselines. An interesting phenomenon is that FNO performs worse while CNO performs better
under higher Reynolds numbers. Our hypothesis is that as the Reynolds number increases, fine-scale
details become more crucial to learn due to the increased chaos. CROP consistently performs well
under both Reynolds numbers due to the multi-spatio-scale learning capabilities it offers.

                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2.2 DARCY F LOW, H ELMHOLTZ , AND P OISSON E QUATIONS
Description: Darcy Flow. We consider the steady-state of the 2D Darcy flow equation from Li
et al. (2021); Hasani & Ward (2024). We learn both the nonlinear operator mapping the diffusion
coefficient to the solution function, a 7→ u, following the same setup and data as in Li et al. (2021),
and the operator mapping the forcing function to the solution function, f 7→ u, following the same
generation setup in Hasani & Ward (2024).
Description: Helmholtz. We consider the 2D Helmholtz equation from De Hoop et al. (2022). We
learn the nonlinear operator mapping the wave-speed field to the solution function, c 7→ u, following
the same setup and data as in De Hoop et al. (2022) with normalization on the data.
Description: Poisson. We consider the 2D Poisson equation from Raonic et al. (2023) and learn
the operator mapping the forcing function to the solution function, f 7→ u, following the same setup
and data as in Raonic et al. (2023). More details about these equations, data generation, and setups
are provided in Appendix D.
Table 4: Results for the Darcy flow, Helmholtz, and Poisson equations are presented. Nonlinear
Darcy denotes the non-linear mapping a 7→ u. It is evident that CROP achieves competitive perfor-
mance with multi-spatio-learning capabilities while maintaining the cross-resolution property.
                       Nonlinear Darcy      Darcy Flow        Helmholtz         Poisson
          FNO            0.68(±0.03)        1.58(±0.14)      0.68(±0.01)      7.21(±0.74)
          CNO            0.59(±0.04)       1.32 ± (0.33) 0.87(±0.02)          1.67(±0.56)
          U-Net          1.34(±0.03)        2.68(±0.17)      1.51(±0.06)      1.40(±0.21)
         ResNet          7.26(±0.59)        9.85(±0.68) 14.86(±0.53) 5.64(±0.34)
        DeepONet         2.99(±0.10)        1.36(±0.16)      3.03(±0.08) 12.26(±1.48)
       CROP (ours)      0.51(±0.01)        1.11(±0.08) 0.52(±0.02) 0.80(±0.13)
Results and Discussion. The findings clearly indicate that CROP demonstrates outstanding learn-
ing abilities because we can freely choose an intermediate operator while maintaining properties
such as resolution-invariance, discrete-continuous equivalence, and freedom from DMEs. This flexi-
bility enables us to select a suitable intermediate neural operator that focuses on local details. For the
Darcy tasks, as this is a relatively easy learning task, all models, except ResNet, perform well; how-
ever, CROP still shows improvement over all baselines. We additionally include the cross-resolution
performance for CROP and FNO on nonlinear Darcy in Appendix D.2. A similar trend is observed
for the Helmholtz equation, where all models perform well except ResNet, and CROP outperforms
all baselines. For the Poisson equation, we note that architectures with local characteristics, includ-
ing CNO, U-Net, and ResNet, all perform better than FNO. CROP, as a multi-spatio-scale learning
paradigm with both local and global learning capabilities, outperforms all baselines by attending to
global patterns while focusing on local structures.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have explored the challenges posed by discretization mismatch errors (DMEs) in
neural operators. Despite FNO’s advantages in formulating the kernels in the Fourier domain to
capture global features and learn dynamic physical phenomena, its performance is not consistent
across different resolutions. Moreover, FNO tends to over-smooth fine-scale details. We identified
the sources of these discrepancies and introduced a Cross-Resolution Operator-learning Pipeline
(CROP) designed to mitigate DMEs. Our proposed method not only succeeds in cross-resolution
tasks but also outperforms baselines in learning complex dynamics, as it upholds continuous-discrete
equivalence and efficiently learns both global and local features through CROP designs.
Limitations and Future Work. First, like FNO, CNO, and other CNN-based architectures, our
CROP components perform optimally with rectangular domains and uniform grids. We acknowl-
edge that this limitation may affect the applicability of CROP. Efforts have been made to address
these drawbacks in FNO and CNN-based architectures (Liu et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2021). While
these concepts may be adapted for CROP, we plan to explore this in the future. Second, although
our method can capture high-frequency information using both the learned feature function and the
fully-connected pointwise network, further investigation into the expressive power and universality
of these components would enhance our understanding and inform better designs for intermediate
neural operators and activation functions in operator learning.



                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work has used the computational equipment supported by the US Army Research Office under
the award W911NF-20-10159. Y. Liu and W. Gao would like to thank Dr. Xiaolin Li at Stony Brook
University for providing this computational equipment.

E THICS S TATEMENT

This research focuses on the development and evaluation of neural operators, which are mathemati-
cal and deep learning tools designed to model complex systems. The study does not involve human
subjects, personal data, or sensitive information that could raise privacy, security, or fairness con-
cerns. No potential conflicts of interest, legal compliance issues, or harmful applications have been
identified in this work.

R EPRODUCIBILITY

All baseline models used in this work were adopted with minimal or no modifications from their
original implementations. The datasets utilized are either open-source or generated using pub-
licly available code, as described in detail in the appendix. We provide the source code, datasets,
pre-trained models, and configuration necessary to replicate the key experiments at https:
//github.com/wenhangao21/ICLR25-CROP. Comprehensive instructions for training and
evaluation will also be included. Additionally, all theoretical claims are accompanied by proofs in
the appendix, which have been empirically verified through experiments.

R EFERENCES
Anima Anandkumar, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi
  Li, Burigede Liu, and Andrew Stuart. Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differ-
  ential equations. In ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential
  Equations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fg2ZFmXFO3.

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Miguel Liu-Schiaffini, Jean Kossaifi, and
  Anima Anandkumar. Neural operators for accelerating scientific simulations and design. Nature
  Reviews Physics, Apr 2024. ISSN 2522-5820. doi: 10.1038/s42254-024-00712-5. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1038/s42254-024-00712-5.

Francesca Bartolucci, Emmanuel de Bezenac, Bogdan Raonic, Roberto Molinaro, Siddhartha
  Mishra, and Rima Alaifari. Representation equivalent neural operators: a framework for alias-
  free operator learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7LSEkvEGCM.

Johannes Brandstetter, Daniel E. Worrall, and Max Welling. Message passing neural PDE solvers. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=vSix3HPYKSU.

Maarten De Hoop, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Elizabeth Qian, and Andrew M Stuart. The cost-
 accuracy trade-off in operator learning with neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13181,
 2022.

Chao Dong, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, and Xiaoou Tang. Image super-resolution using deep
  convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 38(2):
  295–307, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2015.2439281.

V. Fanaskov and I. Oseledets. Spectral neural operators, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.10573.

Vladimir Fanaskov and I. Oseledets. Spectral neural operators. ArXiv, abs/2205.10573, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248986643.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Han Gao, Luning Sun, and Jian-Xun Wang. Phygeonet: Physics-informed geometry-adaptive
  convolutional neural networks for solving parameterized steady-state pdes on irregular domain.
  Journal of Computational Physics, 428:110079, 2021. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.110079. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0021999120308536.
Wenhan Gao and Chunmei Wang. Active learning based sampling for high-dimensional non-
 linear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 475:111848, 2023.
 ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111848. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999122009111.
Wenhan Gao, Ruichen Xu, Hong Wang, and Yi Liu. Coordinate transform fourier neural operators
 for symmetries in physical modelings. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN
 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pMD7A77k3i.
Gaurav Gupta, Xiongye Xiao, and Paul Bogdan. Multiwavelet-based operator learning for differen-
  tial equations. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 24048–24062. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2021/file/c9e5c2b59d98488fe1070e744041ea0e-Paper.pdf.
Jayesh K Gupta and Johannes Brandstetter. Towards multi-spatiotemporal-scale generalized pde
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15616, 2022.
Erisa Hasani and Rachel A. Ward. Generating synthetic data for neural operators, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02398.
Jacob Helwig, Xuan Zhang, Cong Fu, Jerry Kurtin, Stephan Wojtowytsch, and Shuiwang Ji. Group
  equivariant Fourier neural operators for partial differential equations. In Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Nikola Kovachki, Samuel Lanthaler, and Siddhartha Mishra. On universal approximation and error
  bounds for fourier neural operators. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):13237–
  13312, 2021.
Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces
  with applications to pdes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(89):1–97, 2023. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/21-1524.html.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede liu, Kaushik Bhat-
  tacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial
  differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=c8P9NQVtmnO.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu,
  Andrew Stuart, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural op-
  erator for learning partial differential equations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=dtYnHcmQKeM.
Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Guolei Sun, Kai Zhang, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Swinir:
   Image restoration using swin transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10257, 2021.
Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep resid-
  ual networks for single image super-resolution. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, July 2017.
Ning Liu, Siavash Jafarzadeh, and Yue Yu. Domain agnostic fourier neural operators. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ubap5FKbJs.
Ning Liu, Yiming Fan, Xianyi Zeng, Milan Klöwer, Lu Zhang, and Yue Yu. Harnessing the power of
  neural operators with automatically encoded conservation laws, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2312.11176.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Miguel Liu-Schiaffini, Julius Berner, Boris Bonev, Thorsten Kurth, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Neural operators with localized integral and differential kernels. In Forty-
 first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.
 net/forum?id=vl9GB3fbht.
Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, Guofei Pang, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning
  nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(3):218–229, March 2021. ISSN 2522-5839.
Levi McClenny and Ulisses Braga-Neto. Self-adaptive physics-informed neural networks using a
  soft attention mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.04544, 2020.
Shaowu Pan, Steven L. Brunton, and J. Nathan Kutz. Neural implicit flow: a mesh-agnostic dimen-
  sionality reduction paradigm of spatio-temporal data. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24
  (41):1–60, 2023. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-0365.html.
Jaideep Pathak, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Sanjeev Raja, Ashesh Chattopadhyay,
   Morteza Mardani, Thorsten Kurth, David Hall, Zongyi Li, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Pedram
   Hassanzadeh, Karthik Kashinath, and Animashree Anandkumar. Fourcastnet: A global data-
   driven high-resolution weather model using adaptive fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2202.11214, 2022.
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning
 framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equa-
 tions. Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, 2019. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.
 org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/S0021999118307125.
Bogdan Raonic, Roberto Molinaro, Tobias Rohner, Siddhartha Mishra, and Emmanuel de Bezenac.
  Convolutional neural operators. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Physics for Machine Learning, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GT8p40tiVlB.
Justin Sirignano, Jonathan F. MacArt, and Jonathan B. Freund. DPM: A deep learning PDE aug-
  mentation method with application to large-eddy simulation. Journal of Computational Physics,
  423:109811, 2020. ISSN 0021-9991.
Makoto Takamoto, Timothy Praditia, Raphael Leiteritz, Dan MacKinlay, Francesco Alesiani, Dirk
 Pflüger, and Mathias Niepert. Pdebench: An extensive benchmark for scientific machine learning,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07182.
Alasdair Tran, Alexander Mathews, Lexing Xie, and Cheng Soon Ong. Factorized fourier neural
  operators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=tmIiMPl4IPa.
Sifan Wang, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. Learning the solution operator of parametric par-
   tial differential equations with physics-informed deeponets. Science Advances, 7(40):eabi8605,
   2021. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abi8605. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.
   1126/sciadv.abi8605.
Sifan Wang, Shyam Sankaran, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. An expert’s guide to training
   physics-informed neural networks, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08468.
Min Wei and Xuesong Zhang. Super-resolution neural operator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18247–18256, June 2023.
Mingrui Zhang, Jianhong Wang, James B Tlhomole, and Matthew Piggott. Learning to estimate and
 refine fluid motion with physical dynamics. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
 on Machine Learning, 2022.
Xuan Zhang, Limei Wang, Jacob Helwig, Youzhi Luo, Cong Fu, Yaochen Xie, Meng Liu, Yuchao
  Lin, Zhao Xu, Keqiang Yan, Keir Adams, Maurice Weiler, Xiner Li, Tianfan Fu, Yucheng Wang,
  Haiyang Yu, YuQing Xie, Xiang Fu, Alex Strasser, Shenglong Xu, Yi Liu, Yuanqi Du, Alexandra
  Saxton, Hongyi Ling, Hannah Lawrence, Hannes Stärk, Shurui Gui, Carl Edwards, Nicholas Gao,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Adriana Ladera, Tailin Wu, Elyssa F. Hofgard, Aria Mansouri Tehrani, Rui Wang, Ameya Daiga-
  vane, Montgomery Bohde, Jerry Kurtin, Qian Huang, Tuong Phung, Minkai Xu, Chaitanya K.
  Joshi, Simon V. Mathis, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Ada Fang, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Erik Bekkers,
  Michael Bronstein, Marinka Zitnik, Anima Anandkumar, Stefano Ermon, Pietro Liò, Rose Yu,
  Stephan Günnemann, Jure Leskovec, Heng Ji, Jimeng Sun, Regina Barzilay, Tommi Jaakkola,
  Connor W. Coley, Xiaoning Qian, Xiaofeng Qian, Tess Smidt, and Shuiwang Ji. Artificial intelli-
  gence for science in quantum, atomistic, and continuum systems, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     ACCUMULATION OF D ISCRETIZATION E RROR IN FNO
A.1    M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATION OF THE FNO A RCHITECHTURE

To give a detailed analysis of discretization errors in FNOs,  we first formally  and mathematically
lay out the most common FNO architecture. Let A Ω, Rda and U Ω, Rdu be two appropriate
function spaces defined on bounded domain Ω ⊂ Rd . The Fourier neural operator G : A → U is
defined as a compositional mapping between function spaces:
                              G(a) := Q ◦ LL ◦ LL−1 ◦ · · · ◦ L1 ◦ P (a).                        (4)
The input function a ∈ A is lifted to the latent space of Rdv0 -valued (usually dv0 > da ) functions
through a lifting layer acting locally:
                              P : a : Ω → Rda 7→ v0 : Ω → Rdv0 .


Lifting layer usually is implemented as a linear layer represented by a matrix P ∈ Rdv ×da or as a
point-wise multi-layer perceptron (1 by 1 convolution layers) with activation function σ.
Then the result goes through L Fourier layers:

                 Lℓ (v)(x) = σ Wℓ v(x) + bℓ (x) + Kℓ v(x) ,          ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L,           (5)

where, σ is a non-linear activation  function, Wℓ acts locally and can be represented by a matrix
   dvℓ−1 ×dvℓ                   dv
∈R            , bℓ (x) ∈ U Ω; R      is the bias function (usually a constant function for easy imple-
mentation), and
                              Kℓ v(x) = F −1 Pℓ (k) · F(v)(k) (x)
is a linear but non-local convolution operator carried out in the Fourier space with Pℓ : Zd →
Cdv ×dv being the Fourier coefficients of the convolution kernels. We will denote the output of the
ℓ-th Fourier layer by vℓ .
The output function is obtained from the projection layer acting locally, similar to the lifting layer:
                            Q : vL : Ω → RdvL 7→ u : Ω → Rdu .


For simplicity, we will assume that all the inputs and outputs to the Fourier layers have the same
channel dimension, i.e., dv0 = dv1 = . . . dvL = dc .
In practice, the FNO, as well as all the intermediate layers, takes discretizations of functions as
inputs and produces discretizations of functions as outputs. Therefore, this discrete implementation
is termed the Pseudo Fourier Neural Operators; readers are referred to Kovachki et al. (2021) for
more details.

B     P ROOF TO P ROPOSITION 4.4
We first present the following lemma for the discretization error of L Fourier layers and with only
a single hidden channel. We will later extend this result to the full FNO architecture and with dc
hidden channels in general. In this section, all norms are ℓ2 norms unless specified otherwise.
Lemma B.1. Let Θ ⊆ Rp be a finite-dimensional parameter space, and let s > 2 be an integer.
Consider L : H s (T; R) × Θ → H s (T; R) being the composition of L parametric Fourier layers
with parameters θ ∈ Θ and a hidden channel dimension of one. Assume the activation function
σ : R → R is ω-Lipschitz continuous. Given a discretization v|ΩN , the discretization mismatch
error between the Fourier layers L taking v|ΩN and another discretization v|ΩM is bounded by
 EN M = ∥L (v|ΩN ) − L (v|ΩM )∥L2 (T)
                  L
                        ! N −1 "                  N                         M
                                                                                                  #
                 Y        X 2π|N − M | X                           n
                                                                           X                  n
             L                                                −i2π N ξ                   −i2π M ξ
        ≤ω           Cℓ                       ξ      v(xn )ne          +         v(xn )e            ,
                                    NM           n=1
                ℓ=1       ξ=0                                               n=N +1
                                                                                              (6)
where without the loss of generality we assume M > N , Cℓ = ∥Wℓ ∥ + Cκℓ , with ∥Wℓ ∥ being the
operator norm of the linear operator Wℓ in the ℓ-th layer, and Cκℓ is a constant depending on the
ℓ-th layer’s kernel κℓ .


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We aim to establish a bound on the discretization mismatch error EM N between the outputs
of L = LL ◦ LL−1 ◦ · · · ◦ L1 applied to the input function at different discretizations ΩN and ΩM ,
where each layer Lℓ is defined as Lℓ (f (x)) = σ (Wℓ f (x) + bℓ (x) + Kℓ (f (x))). We view vN and
vM as functions through their Fourier coefficients that are approximated numerically.
Applying L1 to vN and vM , we have:
                                L1 (vN )(x) = σ (W1 vN (x) + b1 (x) + K1 (vN )(x)) ,
                                L1 (vM )(x) = σ (W1 vM (x) + b1 (x) + K1 (vM )(x)) .

Let the difference between the outputs be ∆1 (x) = L1 (vN )(x) − L1 (vM )(x).
By the Lipschitz continuity of σ, we have:
                |∆1 (x)| ≤ ω |(W1 vN (x) + K1 (vN )(x)) − (W1 vM (x) + K1 (vM )(x))|
                         = ω (|W1 (vN (x) − vM (x))| + |K1 (vN )(x) − K1 (vM )(x)|) .                               (7)

Assuming that W1 is a bounded linear operator with operator norm ∥W1 ∥, we have:
                                |W1 (vN (x) − vM (x))| ≤ ∥W1 ∥ |vN (x) − vM (x)| .

Moreover, the convolution difference is:
                                                                   Z
                          K1 (vN )(x) − K1 (vM )(x) =                   κ1 (x − y) (vN (y) − vM (y)) dy.
                                                                   T


The difference after the ℓ-th layer is:
                                                                       (ℓ)     (ℓ)
                                                      ∆(ℓ) = vN − vM .
Using the Lipschitz continuity of σ with constant ω and the boundedness of Wℓ and Kℓ , we have:

                                   ∆(ℓ)             ≤ ω (∥Wℓ ∥ + Cκℓ ) ∆(ℓ−1)                        ,
                                           L2 (T)                                          L2 (T)
                  R
where Cκℓ =           T
                          |κℓ (z)|dz. By induction over L layers, it follows that:
                                                     L
                                                                         !
                                                    Y
                                   (L)           L
                                ∆       2
                                            ≤ω          (∥Wℓ ∥ + Cκℓ )      ∆(0)                            .
                                        L (T)                                                      L2 (T)
                                                             ℓ=1

We now estimate ∆(0) L2 (T) . Let the difference between the Fourier coefficients be

                                            N                                      M
                                                                 n           n                   n
                                            X                                      X
     ∆(ξ)
     b    = vbN (ξ) − vbM (ξ) =                     v(xn ) e−i2π N ξ − e−i2π M ξ −   v(xn )e−i2π M ξ ,
                                            n=1                                                n=N +1
               n                  n
          −i2π N ξ           −i2π M ξ
where e               −e    can be approximated using a Taylor expansion:

             n           n              1     1           n            N − M −i2π n ξ
       e−i2π N ξ − e−i2π M ξ ≈ −i2πn       −      ξe−i2π N ξ = −i2πn        ξe    N .
                                        N    M                          NM
It follows that
                                    N                                                 M
                         |N − M | X                 n
                                                                                      X                         n
               ∆(ξ)
               b    ≤ 2π         ξ     v(xn )ne−i2π N ξ +                                     v(xn )e−i2π M ξ .
                           NM      n=1                                               n=N +1

Using Parseval’s identity, we can sum over the relevant frequencies:
                                                             N
                                                             X −1
                                        ∆(0)             ≤                  ∆(ξ)
                                                                            b    + ∆(−ξ)
                                                                                   b           .
                                                L2 (T)
                                                             ξ=0


                                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Substituting the estimate of ∆(ξ)
                             b    , we obtain:

                               −1
                             N
                                    "             N                                 M
                                                                                                                 #
                             X         |N − M | X                 n
                                                                                    X                      n
      ∆   (0)
                         ≤          2π         ξ     v(xn )ne−i2π N ξ +                     v(xn )e   −i2π M ξ
                                                                                                                     .
                L2 (T)                   NM      n=1
                             ξ=0                                                   n=N +1

Therefore, combining the above estimates and simplify, we have:
 EN M = ∥L (v|ΩN ) − L (v|ΩM )∥L2 (T)
              L
                    ! N −1 "             N                                              M
                                                                                                                         #
             Y        X 2π|N − M | X                     n
                                                                                        X                     n
      ≤ω L
                Cℓ                    ξ     v(xn )ne−i2π N ξ +                                 v(xn )e   −i2π M ξ
                                                                                                                             ,
                               NM       n=1
                   ℓ=1             ξ=0                                                n=N +1
                                                                                           (8)
where without the loss of generality we assume M > N , Cℓ = ∥Wℓ ∥ + Cκℓ , with ∥Wℓ ∥ being the
operator norm of the linear operator Wℓ in the ℓ-th layer.

Intepretation of this bound: When N = M , clearly this bound will be 0. Without loss of general-
ity, we assume M > N , when N is fixed, |NN−M   |
                                             M gradually increases to 1, and as M increases, this
                            PN −1 PM                       n
                                                      −i2π M ξ
bound increases. Moreover, ξ=0         n=N +1 v(xn )e          behaves as a term that quantifies the
difference between the input functions. The errors will propagate through the layers.
Now, we are ready to prove Proposition 4.4, which has been written to help readers better under-
stand our results. We begin by proving the following lemma concerning the error bound of the
discretization error for the full FNO, which implies Proposition 4.4.

Lemma B.2. Let Θ ⊆ Rp be a finite-dimensional parameter space, A = H s Td ; Rda , U =
   ′
H s Td ; Rdu , and G : A × Θ → U a map representing a parametric class of Fourier neural
operators with parameters θ ∈ Θ with L Fourier layers and dc hidden channels. Consider σ(x) as
the activation function that is (globally) ω-Lipschitz continuous. Given a discretization a|ΩN , then
the discretization mismatch error between the Fourier neural operator taking a|ΩN and another
discretization a|ΩM , given by
EN M = ∥G (a|ΩN ) − G (a|ΩM )∥L2 (Td )
               L
                     ! N −1 "             N                                             M
                                                                                                                         #
              Y        X 2π|N − M | X                     n
                                                                                        X                      n
     ≤ Cω L
                  Cℓ                   ξ     a(xn )ne−i2π N ξ +                                 a(xn )e   −i2π M ξ
                                                                                                                                 .
                                 NM      n=1
                     ℓ=1            ξ=0                                                n=N +1
                                                                                                                         (9)
where both C and Cℓ are constants independent of N , M , and L.

Proof. We aim to establish the bound equation 9 on the discretization mismatch error EM N by
extending Lemma B.1 to the composite mapping G = Q ◦ L ◦ P with dc hidden channels. Without
the loss of generality, we assume s = min{s, s′ }.
Let aN = a|ΩN and aM = a|ΩM denote the discretizations of the input function a.
Applying the lifting layer P to aN and aM , we obtain
                                           a0N = P (aN ),     a0M = P (aM ),
where the superscript denotes the number of Fourier layers that the latent feature functions have
gone through.
By the linearity of P , Q, and the channel mixing of intermediate layers, and a ∈ H s (Td ; Rda ), we
have:
                           EN M = ∥G (a|ΩN ) − G (a|ΩM )∥L2 (Td ;Rda )
                                 ≤ ∥Q∥ · ∥P ∥ · L a0N − L a0M L2 (T)

                                                                                                 (10)
                                          = C · ∥L′ (a) − L′ (a)∥L2 (Td ;Rdc ) ,
where C is a constant depends on all the linear channel mixings and independent of N, M , and L,
and L′ is the induced single channel operator of Fourier layers.


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To estimate the error propagation through L, we utilize Lemma B.1, which provides an error bound
for a single-channel case on T. We extend this result to the multi-channel, dc -dimensional setting
by considering each channel separately and summing the contributions. The error in each channel
propagates similarly due to the Lipschitz continuity of σ and the boundedness of the operators Wℓ
and Kℓ . We can bound the error after L layers by:
EN M = ∥G (a|ΩN ) − G (a|ΩM )∥L2 (Td )
               L
                     ! N −1 "             N                                        M
                                                                                                               #
              Y        X 2π|N − M | X                     n
                                                                                   X                     n
     ≤ Cω L       Cℓ                   ξ     a(xn )ne−i2π N ξ +                           a(xn )e   −i2π M ξ
                                                                                                                   .
                                 NM      n=1
                  ℓ=1       ξ=0                                                  n=N +1
                                                                                                           (11)
This completes the proof.



Now, Proposition 4.4 follows immediately. The interpretation of this bound is similar to that of
Lemma B.1. Note that we can fix N or M to be the training resolution; thus, this bound suggests
that as long as the inference resolution deviates from that of the training, DMEs arise. In the main
text, we use plain language to ensure easier interpretation for the readers.

C    F ULLY CONNECTED POINT- WISE NETWORK AND BAND - LIMITS

For the definition of band-limited function spaces, we refer readers to Raonic et al. (2023). Once the
latent feature function is obtained, a fully connected point-wise network (implemented as a 1 × 1
convolution with non-linear activations) is applied to capture information beyond the band-limit.

Remark 4.5. Let v(x) ∈ Bw Td ; RdL be a band-limited function, and let an analytic non-linear
function σ(·) be the fixed activation function in the fully connected point-wise network. Then the
resulting function may not be band-limited anymore. Additionally, the high frequencies of the re-
sulting function is determined by both the fully connected point-wise network and the learned latent
feature function v(x).

Proof. As point-wise linear transforms will only result in a linear transform of the feature func-
tion. Thus, it does not introduce any high frequency information nor does it involve any interaction
between different frequency modes. Without loss of generality, consider only one layer of fully
connected point-wise network, and we analyze the non-linear activations. Let v̂(ξ) = F[v(x)](ξ)
denote the Fourier transform of v(x), defined by
                                                 Z
                                       v̂(ξ) =       v(x)e−2πiξx dx.
                                                 Ω

If σ(x) is a smooth function of x, we can expand σ as follows:

                                                     1 ′′        1
                     σ(x) = σ(0) + σ ′ (0)x +           σ (0)x2 + σ ′′′ (0)x3 + . . . .
                                                     2!          3!
Thus, we can express σ ◦ v(x) as:

                                                              1 ′′
                        σ ◦ v(x) = σ(0) + σ ′ (0)v(x) +          σ (0)v(x)2 + . . . .
                                                              2!
Now, performing the Fourier transformation, we obtain:
                                                                     Z
                                                          1             dξ0
        F[σ ◦ v(x)](ξ) = 2πσ(0)v(ξ) + σ ′ (0)v̂(ξ) + σ ′′ (0)                v̂ (ξ0 ) v̂ (ξ − ξ0 ) dξ0
                                                          2!          Ω 2π
                           ZZ
                 1              dξ0 dξ1
               + σ ′′′ (0)              v̂ (ξ0 ) v̂ (ξ1 − ξ0 ) v̂ (ξ − ξ1 ) dξ0 dξ1 + . . . .
                 3!           Ω 2π 2π


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We observe that, without loss of generality, if there exists n > 1 such that σ (n) (0) ̸= 0, σ ◦ v(x)
may introduce frequencies beyond the band-limit of v(x).


It is important to note that, based on the formulation, the high-frequency components beyond the
band-limit are determined by both the fully connected point-wise network and the latent feature
function v learned by the intermediate neural operator. The intermediate neural operator is tasked to
learn an appropriate latent feature function to capture high-frequency components together with the
fully connected point-wise network. Whether or not this structure can be proven to have universality
is of interest to future exploration.

C.1   S PECTRAL C OMPARISON : FNO AND CROP

In Figure 4, we present a spectral comparison between FNO and CROP on the Burgers example,
adapted directly from Li et al. (2021). Both FNO and CROP demonstrate the ability to learn high-
frequency information beyond their truncation or band-limit when performing inference at the same
resolution as training. However, under super-resolution inference, high frequencies show a slight
deviation from the ground truth. Notably, CROP consistently performs better at higher frequencies
in both scenarios. It should be mentioned that this plot is in semilog scale, which visually amplifies
the error for high frequencies.


                       (a)                                                (b)

Figure 4: (a): Illustration of the magnitude spectra of CRNO and FNO for inference at the same
resolution as training. (b): Illustration of the magnitude spectra of CRNO and FNO for super-
resolution inference.

Most importantly, the issue with DMEs is not just on the ability to recover unseen high frequencies.
Instead, DMEs cause significant errors in the low-frequency range. We demonstrate this with the
spectral error plot for low frequencies, shown in Fig. 5, for the results in Table 5.1.2 (the Navier-
Stokes equation). It is evident that DMEs cause high errors in low frequencies. At the training res-
olution, both FNO and CROP exhibit minimal errors in low frequencies; however, FNO introduces
substantial errors in low frequencies during super-resolution inferences, whereas CROP remains
consistent.


D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

All the experimental results, especially the timing results, are recorded on NVIDIA RTX A6000
with 48 GB GDDR6.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Illustration of the magnitude spectra of the error for FNO and CRNO at a training resolu-
tion of 64 × 64. It is evident that DMEs cause significant inaccuracies in the low-frequency range.


D.1     T HE NAVIER -S TOKES E QUATION

We consider the 2D Navier-Stokes equation for a viscous, incompressible fluid in vorticity form
from Li et al. (2021):

           ∂t w(x, t) + u(x, t) · ∇w(x, t) = ν∆w(x, t) + f (x),         x ∈ (0, 1)2 , t ∈ (0, T ]
                               ∇ · u(x, t) = 0,                         x ∈ (0, 1)2 , t ∈ [0, T ]   (12)
                                                                                   2
                                     w(x, 0) = w0 (x),              x ∈ (0, 1)
                          r

where u ∈ C [0, T ]; Hper      (0, 1)2 ; R2 for any r > 0 is the velocity field, w = ∇ × u is the

vorticity, w0 ∈ L2per (0, 1)2 ; R is the initial vorticity, ν is the viscosity coefficient, and f ∈

L2per (0, 1)2 ; R is the forcing function.

D.1.1    T HE ACCUMULATION OF D ISCRETIZATION E RRORS IN S EC . 5.1
For Sec. 5.1, ν is set to 1e − 3. We are interested in learning the operator mapping the vorticity
up to time 10 to the vorticity up to a later time T = 50 in an auto-regressive manner for all the
intermediate time steps with a step size of 1 as in Li et al. (2021). This dataset is generated using
the data generation scripts provided by the authors of Li et al. (2021) in their GitHub repository.
The PDE is solved using numerical solvers on a 256 × 256 grid. The training dataset contains
1,000 trajectories (input-output function pairs), while the testing dataset includes 200 trajectories.
Following the setups in Li et al. (2021), we downsample the training dataset to 64 × 64; the FNO
model is fully trained on this data and evaluated on the testing data at different resolutions, namely
256 × 256, 128 × 128, 64 × 64, and 32 × 32, also obtained through downsampling.
For Figure 3 (a), the FNO architecture is followed exactly as provided by the authors of Li et al.
(2021) in their GitHub repository (4 Fourier Layers and a hidden channel dimension of 20) except
that the teacher forcing training strategy from Tran et al. (2023) is adopted. The FNO model is
trained on 64 × 64 data and we make inferences on different resolutions mentioned above.
The relative ℓ2 error is given by
                                                          ∥uθ − u∥2
                                    relative ℓ2 error =             ,
                                                            ∥u∥2

                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where uθ is the prediction and u is the label produced by numerical solvers. Since the obtained
results are discrete, the 2-norm is calculated as the 2-norm of vectors. We report the relative ℓ2 error
for all results in this paper unless otherwise specified. The experiment is repeated 10 times, and we
record the mean.
In Figure 3 (b), we consider the same Navier-Stokes Equation and generated data. Due to the
tremendous computational resources it might take, we are only interested in learning the mapping
G : u10 7→ u11 without auto-regressive time steps, where ut denotes the vorticity at time t. The
FNO is trained on data at 64 × 64, and we compare the difference between the FNO output when
taking input data of resolution 64 × 64 and that of 256 × 256. The relative DME is given by

                                   Gθ u10 |Ω64 − Gθ u10 |Ω256 2
                                                                     ,
                                               ∥u11 ∥2
where the numerator is the DME and the denominator ∥u11 ∥2 is applied to help the readers to
compare the
            DME relative to the label solution to which the neural operator is trained to map. As
Gθ a|Ω64 and Gθ a|Ω256 practically have different resolutions, the 2-norm is calculated using the
                                 d P
                                                 2
Parsevals identity: ∥v∥2 := (2π)
                               2      k∈Zd |bvk | for a mapping v : Td 7→ Rd , where vbk = F(v)(k)
denotes the k-th Fourier coefficient of v for any k ∈ Zd .
The experiment is repeated 20 times; the mean and standard deviation are reported in Table 5.
In addition, we observe that for different datasets and different settings of FNO, the DME might
fluctuate or not increase much after a few layers (potentially due to residual connections). As we are
interested in the upper bound, we report one set of results that clearly reflects our findings. However,
for all the experiments we have conducted, DME clearly exists, even with only 2 to 3 Fourier layers.


Table 5: The growth in relative discretization mismatch error (in percentage) with respect to increas-
ing numbers of layers. This highlights our observation that discretization mismatch errors propagate
through Fourier layers.
  Number of Layers           1               2               3               4                5
     Mean (Std)        0.28(±0.09) 0.45(±0.09) 0.43(±0.07) 0.46(±0.11) 0.43(±0.13)
 Number of Layers           6                7                8               9               10
   Mean (Std)          0.46(±0.12)      0.52(±0.13)      0.65(±0.26)     0.91(±0.45)     1.55(±0.69)
 Number of Layers           11               12               13              14              15
   Mean (Std)          1.90(±0.76)      2.73(±0.77)      3.30(±0.88)     3.93(±0.70)     4.19(±0.62)


D.1.2    C ROSS R ESOLUTION T EST IN S EC . 5.1
For the cross-resolution test of different models in Sec. 5.1, the experiment is repeated 10 times and
the mean and standard deviation of the average relative ℓ2 error over 40 auto-regressive time steps
are plotted and also given in Table 8 in percentage.
We implemented two versions of the alias-free activation functions. For the 2× upsampling im-
plementation, which is directly taken from Raonic et al. (2023), we increase the spatial grid size
by a factor of two by bicubic spline interpolation, e.g. 64 × 64 to 128 × 128, apply the activation
functions on higher-resolution grids, then downsample to the original grid size by, again, bicubic
spline interpolation. For the fixed upsampling implementation, inputs of different grid sizes are all
interpolated to the same size (e.g. 128 × 128) to apply the activation functions, and then interpolated
back to their original grid sizes. The main difference between these two is that, during inference,
the grid sizes also increase by a factor of two in the 2× upsampling implementation while they are
fixed in the fixed upsampling implementation.

D.1.3    T HE NAVIER -S TOKES E QUATION WITH H IGH R EYNOLDS N UMBERS
In Sec. 5.2.1, ν is set to 5e − 4 and 1e − 4, respectively for Reynolds numbers 5, 000 and 10, 000.
We are interested in learning the operator mapping the vorticity from time 0 to the vorticity at
time T = 10 and T = 5 for Reynolds numbers 5, 000 and 10, 000, respectively. This dataset


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Average ℓ2 error during inference for the Navier-Stokes Equation under different resolutions
of input parametric functions. CROP result with more significant digits. We can rarely observe any
difference between inferences at different resolutions.
                256 × 256              128 × 128              64 × 64♢              32 × 32
   CROP 0.54137(±0.0529) 0.54140(±0.0527) 0.54154(±0.0527) 0.54142(±0.0526)
  ♢
      Training resolution is 64 × 64.


is generated using the data generation scripts provided by the authors of Li et al. (2021) in their
GitHub repository. The PDE is solved using numerical solvers on a 256 × 256 grid. For Reynolds
numbers 5, 000, the dataset contains 1, 024 trajectories and follows a 768/128/128 split. As higher
Reynolds number leads to a more difficult learning task, for Reynolds numbers 10, 000, the dataset
contains 2, 048 trajectories and follows a 1792/128/128 split.

D.2     T HE DARCY F LOW E QUATION

We consider the steady-state of the 2D Darcy Flow equation given by:
                                 −∇ · (a(x)∇u(x)) = f (x) x ∈ (0, 1)2
                                                 u(x) = 0       x ∈ ∂(0, 1)2
where a(x) is the coefficient function and f (x) is the forcing function. We learn the non-linear
operator mapping a 7→ u following the exact same setup and data as in Li et al. (2021) and the
operator mapping f 7→ u following the generation setup in Hasani & Ward (2024), where the
diffusion coefficient, a(x), that accounts for anisotropy in the flow is taken as

                                                x21    sin (x1 x2 )
                                  a(x) =                              ,
                                             x1 + x2        x2

where x1 and x2 are the two dimensions of x. We are interested in learning the solution operator,
G : f 7→ u, mapping the source term f (x) to the solution u(x). 1000 input-output pairs of resolution
256 × 256 are generated based on Hasani & Ward (2024) and the program provided in their GitHub
repository. The data is downsampled to 64 × 64 for training, and the train/val/test data follows a
800/100/100 split.
Cross-Resolution Results on the Non-linear Mapping a 7→ u. In Table 7, we present the com-
parison of cross-resolution tasks between CROP and FNO. Clearly, CROP remains consistent under
different resolutions of inference, while FNO suffers from DMEs. This is not an autoregressive task,
so the DMEs do not propagate through time; however, we still observe a significant downgrade in
performance for FNO.
Table 7: The mean and standard deviation of relative ℓ2 error over 10 runs during inference are
reported for the nonlinear operator a 7→ u on the Darcy flow equation with varying resolutions of
input parametric functions. CROP is consistent across all resolutions. FNO shows a strong bias
toward the training resolution. The DME is obviously shown when inferred on data with different
resolutions.
                            421 × 421      141 × 141        85 × 85♢         43 × 43
              FNO         0.87(±0.04)     0.75(±0.03)      0.68(±0.03)    0.97(±0.03)
         CROP (ours) 0.52(±0.01) 0.51(±0.01) 0.51(±0.01) 0.57(±0.01)
           ♢
               Training resolution is 85 × 85.


D.3     T HE P OISSON E QUATION

We consider a prototypical 2D Poisson equation with a classical Dirichlet boundary condition from
Raonic et al. (2023) given by
                                        −∆u(x) = f (x),      x ∈ (0, 1)2
                                                                                                (13)
                                                   u(x),    x ∈ ∂(0, 1)2

                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The solution operator, G : f 7→ u, maps the source term f (x) to the solution u(x). The source term
is given by
                              K
                          π X                     −r
             f (x, y) =    2
                                  aij · i2 + j 2     sin(πix) sin(πjy),       ∀(x, y) ∈ D,
                          K i,j=1

with r = −0.5, the corresponding exact solution can be analytically computed by

                                      K
                                   1 X                   l−1
                     u(x, y) =      2
                                         aij · i2 + j 2      sin(πix) sin(πjy).
                                  πK i,j

The data is generated by fixing K = 16 and choosing aij to be i.i.d. uniformly distributed from
[−1, 1]. We directly use the data provided by Raonic et al. (2023) and follow their setups.

D.4   T HE H ELMHOLTZ E QUATION

We consider the 2D Helmholtz equation from De Hoop et al. (2022) given by
                                 ω2

                         −∆ − 2          u=0     in Ω,
                                c (x)
                                       ∂u                                                         (14)
                                          =0     on ∂Ω1 , ∂Ω2 , ∂Ω4 ,
                                       ∂n
                                       ∂u
                                          = uN on ∂Ω3 ,
                                       ∂n
where Ω = [0, 1]2 and {Ωi }4i=1 are the four edges of the square domain. ω is set to 103 , c : Ω → R
is the wave-speed field, and u : Ω → R is the excitation field that solves the equations. The
Neumann boundary condition imposed on ∂Ω is non-zero only on the top edge Ω3 . Throughout the
experiments presented in this work, uN is fixed at 1{0.35≤x≤0.65} following De Hoop et al. (2022).
The wave-speed field c(x) is assumed to be
                                       c(x) = 20 + tanh(c̃(x)),
where c̃ is a centered Gaussian
                                                                     −d
                             c̃ ∼ N(0, C)    and    C = −∆ + τ 2          .

Here −∆ denotes the Laplacian on Du subject to homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions on
the space of spatial-mean zero functions with d = 2 and τ = 3. We are interested in the operator
mapping the wave-speed field c to the solution u. The dataset is provided by De Hoop et al. (2022)
directly, where this PDE is solved using a finite element method on a 100 × 100 grid. We take the
first 800 data samples as the training data and the next 200 data samples as the testing. Additionally,
the data is normalized to [0, 1] based on the training data.

D.5   A DDITIONAL C ROSS -R ESOLUTION R ESULTS
Table 8: The Relative ℓ2 error for varying resolutions of input parametric functions. In the Navier-
Stokes example, the 256 × 256 data does not contain more high-frequency information. We can
clearly see that CRNO performs consistently.
                          Navier-Stokes (Re = 10, 000)            Darcy Flow
                          256 × 256        64 × 64♢         256 × 256 64 × 64♢
                  FNO     8.903623          5.789168         3.636376 1.281445
                  CROP 2.466607             2.466613         2.804997 1.096139

We provide the cross-resolution results for FNO and CROP in Table D.5. Other models either cannot
directly perform cross-resolution tasks (e.g., DeepONet) or exhibit dramatically poor performance
(e.g., CNN-based models), which leads us to omit their comparison.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We test the cross-resolution performance for both models using the first batch of data from the test
dataset. In the Navier-Stokes example, the 256 × 256 data does not contain more high-frequency
information than the 64 × 64 data. We can clearly see that CRNO performs consistently during
inference at different resolutions. In the Darcy flow (linear operator f 7→ u) example, however, the
256 × 256 data does contain more high-frequency information, resulting in a degradation for both
models. This again demonstrates our concerns about zero-shot super-resolution tasks, which we will
discuss further in Appendix E.

D.6   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Model details:

      • FNO (Li et al., 2021): Adopted from the code provided by the authors in their GitHub
        repository with no change to their architecture except that we increase the modes to 24
        with a width of 16.
      • CNO (Raonic et al., 2023): Adopted from the code provided by the authors in their GitHub
        repository with no change to their architecture.
      • U-Net: Adopted from the code provided by PDEBench (Takamoto et al., 2024) with no
        change to their architecture at all.
      • ResNet: Adopted from the well-known ResNet50 architecture, we made minor adjustments
        to adapt it for our function mapping tasks instead of classification tasks. Specifically, we
        removed the final pooling and linear layers, and we used a padding of 1 and a stride of 1 to
        ensure that all channels maintain the same spatial size as the input. Finally, we employed a
        1 × 1 convolutional layer to project the feature maps into the final output.
      • DeepONet: Adopted from the code provided by the authors of Raonic et al. (2023) in their
        GitHub repository, we made some corrections to make it runnable on our end. Specifially,
        a CNN-based network is used as the branch network and an MLP is used as the trunk
        network.
      • CROP (ours): For the Navier Stokes equation with a Reynold number of 1, 000, we apply
        the FNO as the intermediate neural operator as the pattern is rather global. For all other ex-
        periments, we use a U-Net or FNO with local 3 × 3 convolution kernels as the intermediate
        neural operator to capture fine details. Additionally, we find that for some problems, such
        as the nonlinear Darcy problem and the Navier Stokes equation with low Reynolds num-
        ber, applying learnable convolution kernels in the CROP lifting and projection layers is
        prone to overfitting; band-limited identity kernels (i.e. Fourier projection and interpolation
        operators) are applied.

All models are trained using the hyperparameters in Table 9, except the ones that the original work
provides the hyperparameter settings, such as FNO with the Darch flow and the Navier Stokes
equation with low Reynolds number, with early stopping implemented if the validation error does
not improve over a specified number of epochs. One exception in which we do not apply early
stopping is the nonlinear Darcy example, the Helmholtz example, and the Navier Stokes equation
with low Reynolds number; we follow the original setups from Li et al. (2021), and there is no
validation set. However, for baseline methods, a grid search over the hyperparameter space is still
conducted based on test error, which solely benefits the baselines.


                               Table 9: Training Hyper-parameters
          Hyper-parameter               Value
          Learning Rate                  0.001; 0.0005 for ResNet; 0.0001 for DeepONet
          Weight Decay                   1e − 6
          Scheduler Step                 10
          Scheduler Gamma                0.98
          Epochs                         1000; 2000 for DeepONet
          Batch Size                     16
          Patience for Early Stopping    100; 500 for DeepONet



                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    S UPER - RESOLUTION AND Z ERO - SHOT SUPER - RESOLUTION
Zero-shot super-resolution refers to performing super-resolution without prior training on high-
resolution target data. For FNO (Li et al., 2021), this concept suggests that the model can be trained
on lower-resolution data (e.g., 64 × 64) and applied to higher-resolution inference (e.g., 256 × 256).
However, as demonstrated in this work, FNO fails to achieve zero-shot super-resolution due to dis-
cretization mismatch errors. Philosophically, without high-resolution information in the training
set, it is questionable whether neural operators can infer unseen high-resolution features without
leveraging techniques like transfer learning, physics-informed losses, conservation laws, or Hamil-
tonian principles. Therefore, we encourage the community to shift focus from super-resolution tests
for neural operators toward fundamentally improving their design, incorporating physics and prior
knowledge about the operator. Despite these challenges, we believe FNO offers strong potential for
data-driven super-resolution tasks.
Super-resolution, on the other hand, typically relies on training a model on a dataset that contains
high-resolution target data, learning to predict high-resolution details from lower-resolution inputs
(Dong et al., 2016; Lim et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2021). The main difference between zero-shot
super-resolution and data-driven super-resolution is that high-resolution images are actually seen
by the model during training of the model. Interestingly, neural operators recently have been in-
vestigated and applied for such tasks; for example, Wei & Zhang (2023) employs a deep operator
learning framework for super-resolution tasks in computer vision, specifically targeting natural im-
age applications, and has achieved notable results.
A key task in physical models is reconstruction with limited sensors, which can be framed as a super-
resolution problem. The objective is to infer missing information and enhance resolution or fidelity
by leveraging underlying physical principles or learned patterns. Specifically, this task involves
reconstructing a high-resolution or fine-scale field f ∈ Rh from coarse-grained or limited sensor
measurements s ∈ Rl , where l < h, and often l ≪ h. The goal is to learn a mapping F : Rl → Rh
from data, such that F(s) ≈ f . Neural operators extend this approach by mapping from fixed-size
vectors to continuous functions, i.e., F : Rl → U for some appropriate function space U. This task
aligns well with the DeepONet paradigm (Lu et al., 2021). Indeed, Neural Implicit Flow (Pan et al.,
2023), which differs from but shares similarities with DeepONet, has been proposed in this context.
We believe that FNO holds strong potential for such tasks as well, especially for applications with
symmetries such as modeling climate dynamics on spherical geometries. Although some innovation
may be needed to adapt FNO for these applications, it is a very interesting future work to explore.


                                                 25
