Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ZETA: L EVERAGING Z- ORDER C URVES FOR
E FFICIENT T OP -k ATTENTION
 Qiuhao Zeng♠ Jerry Huang♡♢ Peng Lu♡ Gezheng Xu♠
 Boxing Chen♣ Charles Ling♠⋆ Boyu Wang♠⋆∗
 ♠
   University of Western Ontario ♡ Université de Montréal ♢ Mila
 ♣
   Noah’s Ark Lab ⋆ Vector Institute



                                               A BSTRACT
            Over recent years, the Transformer has become a fundamental building block for
            sequence modeling architectures. Yet at its core is the use of self-attention, whose
            memory and computational cost grow quadratically with the sequence length N ,
            rendering it prohibitively expensive for long sequences. A promising approach is
            top-k attention, which selects only the k most relevant tokens and achieves per-
            formance comparable to vanilla self-attention while significantly reducing space
            and computational demands. However, causal masks require the current query
            token to only attend to past tokens, preventing existing top-k attention method
            from efficiently searching for the most relevant tokens in parallel, thereby limiting
            training efficiency. In this work, we propose ZETA, leveraging Z-Order Curves
            for Efficient Top-k Attention, to enable parallel querying of past tokens for entire
            sequences. We first theoretically show that the choice of key and query dimensions
            involves a trade-off between the curse of dimensionality and the preservation of
            relative distances after projection. In light of this insight, we propose reducing
            the dimensionality of keys and queries in contrast to values and further leverage
            Z-order curves to map low-dimensional keys and queries into one-dimensional
            space, which permits parallel sorting, thereby largely improving the efficiency for
            top-k token selection. Experimental results demonstrate that ZETA matches the
            performance of standard attention on the synthetic M ULTI -Q UERY A SSOCIATIVE
            R ECALL task and outperforms attention and its variants on L ONG R ANGE A RENA
            and W IKI T EXT-103 language modeling.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become indispensable for sequence modeling across var-
ious domains (OpenAI et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024a;b; 2023; Fang et al., 2022; 2025), including
natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI et al., 2024;
Jiang et al., 2024), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; Brooks et al.,
2024), etc. The foundation of Transformer models is the self-attention mechanism. This mecha-
nism (Bahdanau et al., 2015), inspired by recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their ability to con-
struct representations from all elements in a sequence, has revolutionized numerous fields, enabling
breakthroughs in tasks such as language modeling (Radford et al., 2019), machine translation (Ott
et al., 2018), text generation (Brown et al., 2020), image classification (Touvron et al., 2021) and
video generation (Brooks et al., 2024). However, self-attention has a quadratic complexity in both
memory and computation as the sequence length N increases, which presents a significant challenge
when scaling to long sequences (Child et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020). This makes the direct ap-
plication of self-attention in large-scale problems computationally prohibitive for many real-world
applications, particularly when long sequences are involved (Tay et al., 2021).
Recent advances have explored strategies to mitigate the inefficiencies of vanilla self-attention. One
such approach is top-k attention, which focuses computation on a subset of the most relevant to-
kens, significantly reducing memory and computation costs while maintaining competitive perfor-
mance (Kitaev et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021; Bertsch et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2024). However,
    ∗
        Corresponding author: Boyu Wang.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


existing top-k attention methods (Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhuoran et al., 2021) typically apply causal
masking after selecting the top-k tokens, causing earlier tokens (i ≪ N ) to often attend to nothing
as their top-k relevant tokens may include future tokens that are masked out by the causal mask.
Alternatively, Mao et al. (2024) process input tokens by token to exclude masked-out keys from
the k-nearest neighbors search, preventing future tokens from influencing currently generated ones.
Consequently, with causal masks, current top-k attention approaches fail to fully leverage the paral-
lel computation abilities of modern accelerators, limiting their efficiency in long-sequence modeling.
To overcome the limitations of existing top-k attention methods, we introduce ZETA, a novel model
designed to search for the top-k tokens within chunked one-dimensional (one-dimensional) sorted
key sequences projected via Z-order curves. Specifically, our approach strikes a balance between
mitigating the ”curse of dimensionality” and preserving the relative distance of token represntations
after projection by carefully selecting a lower dimensionality for keys and queries in contrast to
values. This reduction allows the query and key to map to a one-dimensional space using Z-order
curves, preserving proximity. As a result, ZETA efficiently performs top-k token selection in paral-
lel within this one-dimensional space with accelerators. Additionally, since the aforementioned top-
k search is based on the Euclidean metric for low dimensional data, directly applying the traditional
dot-product based softmax function is not appropriate. To address this, we propose an Adaptive
Cauchy-Softmax mechanism that replaces the exponential function in the attention operation with
a trainable Cauchy kernel (Billingsley, 1986). This enables dynamic adjustment of receptive fields
across layers, providing greater flexibility in capturing both short and long-range dependencies.
Extensive empirical evaluations show that ZETA matches the performance of standard self-attention
on the Associative Recall task and consistently outperforms existing attention variants on the Long-
Range Arena (LRA) and WikiText-103 datasets. We summarize our key contributions as follows:

       • Efficient Parallel Top-k Attention: We introduce ZETA, a novel model that enables top-k
         attention to operate in parallel across entire sequences, significantly improving training and
         inference efficiency with a time complexity of O(N log N ).
       • Dimensionality Selection for Key and Query Pairs: We theoretically show that the di-
         mensionality of keys and queries decides the trade-off between the curse of dimensionality
         and the preservation of relative distances for keys and queries.
       • Z-order Curve Integration: By leveraging Z-order curves, we enable efficient top-k to-
         ken selection in one-dimensional space, allowing the use of parallel sorting algorithms on
         GPUs for faster attention computation.
       • Adaptive Cauchy-Softmax Mechanism: We introduce Adaptive Cauchy-Softmax, a Soft-
         max variant with trainable parameters based on the Cauchy kernel, dynamically adjusting
         receptive fields to enhance attention’s flexibility.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Efficient Transformer The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) is foundational for se-
quence modeling, but its quadratic complexity limits efficiency with long sequences. Various ef-
ficient variants (Tay et al., 2022; 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2024)
have been proposed as alternatives, mainly categorized into sparse, low-rank, and linear transform-
ers. Sparse transformers, such as BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) and Longformer (Beltagy et al.,
2020), restrict attention to local windows or global tokens to achieve linear complexity. SparseAx-
ial (Ho et al., 2020) further enhances this by combining sparse attention with axial mechanisms
for high-dimensional inputs. Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) locality-sensitive hashing to handle
variable-length sequences efficiently. Low-rank transformers like Linformer (Wang et al., 2020) re-
duce the attention matrix to a lower-dimensional space, reducing memory and computation costs.
Linear transformers such as Performer (Choromanski et al., 2021) use kernel-based approximations
for linear-time complexity, while Nyströmformer (Xiong et al., 2021) leverages Nyström decompo-
sition for near-linear performance.
Top-k Attention (Gupta et al., 2021) falls under the category of sparse attention, reducing atten-
tion complexity by selecting only the top-k most relevant tokens at each layer, thereby focusing
computational resources on the most critical interactions. Unlimiformer (Bertsch et al., 2023) en-
ables transformers to handle arbitrarily long sequences by chunking inputs and using a retrieval


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mechanism to attend to relevant past contexts. Similarly, IceFormer (Mao et al., 2024) improves
transformer efficiency by integrating a k-nearest-neighbor (K NN) search mechanism that focuses
on the K NN results as the most relevant tokens during inference, bypassing the need to compute the
full attention matrix. However, with causal masks, these approaches can not compute the outputs
of a long sequences in parallel, making them less efficient for training models from scratch by not
fully exploiting the parallel computing power of GPUs. In contrast, ZETA performs K NN-based
searches for relevant tokens in parallel across the entire sequence on GPUs using chunking tech-
niques, enabling efficient training and inference with a time and space complexity of O(N log N ).


3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Attention has proven to be a fundamental building block in modern deep learning, particularly in
natural language processing and sequence modeling tasks. It allows a model to focus on specific
parts of the input sequence, thereby capturing dependencies within the sequence more effectively.
In the standard formulation of attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), given a set of queries Q ∈ RN ×dQ ,
keys K ∈ RN ×dK , and values V ∈ RN ×dV , the attention scores are computed as
                                                                   p
                        Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax QK T / dK V ,                             (1)

where dK , dQ and dV is the dimension of the keys, queries and values, respectively. It is common
to use the same value for all three.
Top-k Attention approaches aim to enhance the efficiency and flexibility of traditional self-attention
mechanisms by focusing attention to only the most relevant tokens in a sequence. Both methods
reduce the computational overhead associated with self-attention, especially for long sequences, by
selectively attending to the most important tokens rather than computing attention scores across the
entire sequence. This process lowers the computational complexity from O(N 2 ) in traditional self-
attention to O(N · k), where N is the sequence length and k is the number of selected tokens. The
top-k highest scores are selected for each query:
                                         n          p           o
                                    Iq = i | qKiT / dK ≥ τk                                        (2)

where Iq represents the set of indices corresponding to the top-k highest attention scores for the
query q, τk is the threshold defined as the k-th highest attention score. The attention is then re-
stricted to the tokens in this subset, reducing the number of operations required for long sequences.
Specifically, the attention score for the top-k tokens is recalculated using the self-attention mecha-
nism but limited to the selected indices:
                                                   X                    p
                      Attentiontop-k (q, K, V ) =      softmax qKiT / dK Vi                        (3)
                                                       i∈Iq

where q denotes the query vector, Ki and Vi denote the key and value vectors corresponding to the
top-k relevant tokens, respectively.
Z-order Curves (Dugundji, 1966), also known as Morton codes, provide a way to map multi-
dimensional data into a one-dimensional space while preserving locality, whereas other dimension-
ality reduction methods (Abdi & Williams, 2010; McInnes et al., 2018) are not designed for map-
ping data to a 1D space. This approach is valuable in tasks that require efficient spatial indexing
or key-query matching, such as attention. By maintaining the relative proximity of data points after
projection, Z-order curves ensure that points that are close together in the original multi-dimensional
space remain close in the projected one-dimensional space.
The Z-order curve interleaves the binary representations of each coordinate in a multi-dimensional
point. For a point in the d-dimensional space with coordinates x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ), where each
xi is a binary number, the Z-order curve computes a scalar value Z by interleaving the bits of each
coordinate. Given the binary representation of xi as bi1 bi2 . . . bin , the Z-order curve is expressed as:
                          Z = b11 b21 . . . bd1 b12 b22 . . . bd2 . . . b1n b2n . . . bdn              (4)


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where n refers to the number of bits used to represent each coordinate xi in its binary form. Through
this interleaving of bits, the Z-order curve creates a scalar value that allows efficient sorting or
indexing of points while approximately maintaining their original spatial relationships.
The primary advantage of Z-order curves is their ability to preserve locality. In other words,
nearby points in the original multi-dimensional space have similar Z-values in the projected one-
dimensional space. This property enables efficient search and selection processes in attention mech-
anisms or spatial indexing, where key-query pairs can be processed more efficiently in the one-
dimensional space without significantly losing the locality information from the higher-dimensional
space. Z-order curves are designed to preserve locality, and hence not suitable for dot-product
similarity measures, which does not reflect locality.

3.2     S EARCHING FOR THE T OP -k ATTENDED T OKENS IN O NE -D IMENSIONAL S PACE

Since we project key and query vectors into a one-dimensional space using Z-order curves, using
a large dK can still distort locality (as shown in Figure 3) and compromise the preservation of
relative distances. Thus we ask whether dK can be reduced in a way such that even after mapping
to one dimension, relative distances between tokens are maintained. Importantly, the key and query
dimensions dK and dQ do not have to match the dimension of the values dV . This is because
dV should remain large to capture more semantic information, as seen with Gaussian distributions,
where higher dimensionality increases the measure of information entropy (Cover & Thomas, 2006).
Hence, as long as the relative distances between queries and keys are preserved, dK and dQ can be
reduced. The following theoretical analysis provides insights into the selection of dK .

3.2.1    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS ON dK
We first introduce the Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma (Johnson et al., 1986), which states that data
in high-dimensional space can be projected into a much lower-dimensional subspace using random
projections while approximately preserving the pairwise distances between the points. Since random
projections can preserve locality, this provides justification for setting a smaller dK with trainable
projection functions for keys and queries, which could also preserve locality.
Lemma 3.1. (Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma) For any 0 < ϵ < 1 and any integer m, let d be a
positive integer such that d = Ω( lnϵ2m ). Then for any set x of m points in RD , there exists a map
f : RD → Rd such that for all xi , xj ∈ X ,

                   (1 − ϵ)∥xi − xj ∥2 ≤ ∥f (xi ) − f (xj )∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ)∥xi − xj ∥2                  (5)

The following assumption then provides a mathematical depiction that attention weights are con-
strained within an m-dimensional simplex, and the learnable similarity function Γ outputs the atten-
tion scores, ensuring the most relevant tokens are emphasized during the information aggregation
process. This reflects the primary goal of attention: to aggregate critical information for more accu-
rate predictions.
Assumption 3.2. Let α ∈ ∆         Pm−1   be an element of the m-dimensional simplex, defined as
                                    m
∆m−1 ≜ {α ∈ Rm | αi ≥ 0, i=1 αi = 1}. Assume that hattn equipped with α can achieve
an optimal learnable similarity critic function Γ, where the attention scores are given by α =
softmax (Γ (fk (xi ), fq (x))), such that Γ is trained to be optimal to have the minimal expected risk:
minα ∥hattn (x, Sx ; α) − y∥, where hattn denotes the attention-based hypothesis, x is the input, and
Sx is the context.

Theorem 3.3 highlights the importance of choosing dK carefully, as it controls for a trade-off be-
tween locality preservation and the curse of dimensionality. Larger dK allow for more detailed
feature capture at the cost of the high-dimensional curse, leading to increased complexity. On the
other hand, a smaller dK loses locality between tokens, which is crucial for efficient query. The
bounds provided give valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms of attention and can guide
future designs of more efficient attention models. For simplicity, we assume WLOG that keys and
queries share the same projection functions, as Kitaev et al. (2020).
Theorem 3.3. Let X ∈ Rd , Y ∈ RD , and D be a distribution over X × Y for which the conditional
probability function, h : Rd → RD , is a l-Lipschitz function. Let h denote a hypothesis, and hattn


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


denote the one-layer attention model to aggregate the predictions of a sample set S ∼ Dm to predict
for another i.i.d sample x. Specifically, here we assume the same linear map for a key mapping fk
and a query mapping fq as f : Rd → [−B, B]dK where B is the bound of projection of x by f ,
and we assume the value mapping fv be the Bayes optimal rule h∗ = E[Y |X = x], which is the
hypothesis that minimizes LD (h) over all functions. Then, the expected risk of the regression tasks
LD (h) = E(x,y)∼D ∥h(x) − y∥ with h as hattn can be upper bounded by
                                                          √
                                                  ∗    4lc dK Bm−1/(dK +1)
                        E [LD (hattn )] ≤ LD (h ) +        r
                      S∼D m                                       q
                                                             1 − CdlnKm

This indicates that dK should be carefully chosen rather than simply being set as equal to dV (as is
common practice). Empirically, we show that the dimension of query and key can decreased without
degrading performance, more specifically in Figure 2b in Section 4.2 which we later discuss.

3.2.2    T OP -k S EARCH IN O NE D IMENSION
As the sequence length becomes extremely large, iterating through the entire context history to
search for the top k tokens becomes infeasible. Ideally, searching should be efficient and aim to
achieve the optimal time complexity of O(N log N ), similar to general sorting problems with arbi-
trary inputs. To achieve this, we map both keys and queries into a one-dimensional space using the
Z-order curve and sort them with a sorting operation that can be executed in parallel on an accelera-
tor, e.g. the torch.sort operator in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). The insertion position of a query
in the key sequence can then be found using a binary search (e.g. with torch.searchsorted),
allowing us to retrieve the top-k attended tokens using a window centered on the insertion position.
Specifically, the key and query dimensions are set to be significantly smaller than that of the values,
i.e. dK = dQ ≪ dV . While values need a high dimensionality to carry rich semantic information,
keys and queries primarily serve to preserve relative distances, which can be achieved with much
lower dimensionality as argued by Lemma 3.1. To facilitate the fast retrieval of queries from keys,
we leverage sorting, which can be efficiently parallelized, after mapping queries and keys into one-
dimensional space via the Z-order curve. We define Q, K ∈ RB×N ×dK , where B is the batch size
and N is the sequence length. The Z-order transformation is applied as follows:
                              Qz = Z-order(Q),         Kz = Z-order(K)
where Qz and Kz are the one-dimensional representations of Q and K, respectively.
With causal masks, directly collecting the top-k tokens from the entire sequence is not guaranteed
to have plenty of tokens to make inference. For instance, for a query at position 32 in a sequence of
length 2048, selecting the top 16 tokens from the entire sequence followed by causal masking would
                       32
leave approximately 2048   × 16 = 14 tokens to attend to, effectively leaving no tokens available for
the query. Consequently, the query at this position would not attend to anything, rendering top-k
attention ineffective. To enable parallel k-nearest neighbors (kNN) searching considering causal
masks, we first sort the Z-order keys and divide them into chunks. For query i in the m-th chunk
(where m = ⌊i/M ⌋ and M is the chunk size), we restrict search to the first m chunks, indexing
the original unsorted keys from 0 to m × M − 1 in the sorted list. This ensures that future keys
j ∈ {j : j > m × M } are excluded, in accordance with the causal mask requirements. This process
is performed in parallel for every query.
Next, we perform the nearest neighbor search in these one-dimensional Z-order spaces. For each
query, the insertion position is first found using a binary search and followed by selecting the nearest
keys using a window of size K centered around the insertion point to collect top-k tokens as Iq ,
denoting the indices of the k-nearest neighbors. This ensures efficient and accurate retrieval while
maintaining the constraints imposed by causal masking.

3.3     A DAPTIVE C AUCHY-S OFTMAX

Top-k token searching relies on a similarity metric between data points, and we prefer the
Euclidean metric for top-k attention with small dK for two main reasons. First, as illus-
trated in Figure 1, Euclidean distance is more effective for low-dimensional data in top-k


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods: it reliably identifies the correct class in one-dimensional classification tasks, lead-
ing to accurate predictions, whereas the dot product can be misleading (samples in the
 misclassified area will be classified as “+1” using             Class: -1               Class: +1
the dot-product metric). Second, k-NN search is typ-                 Misclassified
ically based on the Euclidean metric, while using the                    Area

dot-product requires normalization that loses token                 0
magnitudes.                                             Figure 1: Illustration of attention using Eu-
                                                        clidean distance vs. dot product. Eu-
To better align with the Euclidean measure for low- clidean distance correctly classifies points
dimensional representations, we propose the Adap- into classes ±1, while the dot product leads
tive Cauchy Softmax function, to replace the expo- to a misclassified area.
nential function in traditional attention mechanisms.
The Cauchy kernel, with its heavier tails, ensures
that distant tokens retain influence, overcoming the limitations of the exponential function, which
suppresses distant tokens (Shen et al., 2023). This allows the attention mechanism to capture both
local and global dependencies, with the shape of the kernel determining how key vectors influence
the query. Specifically, the Adaptive Cauchy-Softmax between a query vector q and keys K is
computed as:
                                                    2 −1
                                  γ
                                              2
                                                                                       −1
                                  π ∥q − Ki ∥ + γ                    ∥q − Ki ∥2 + γ 2
         softmaxc (q, K) = P                                 =P                                    (6)
                                      γ           2    2 −1                        2      2 −1
                                 j∈Iq π [∥q − Kj ∥ + γ ]           j∈Iq [∥q − Kj ∥ + γ ]

where γ is a trainable parameter that controls the shape of the distribution. By training a task-specific
γ for each attention layer, the model adjusts receptive fields dynamically. We define γ 2 as the output
of a sigmoid function applied to a trainable parameter, to ensure a range of [0, 1], with smaller values
sharpening attention and improving focus on relevant inputs (Qin et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2024),
while larger values allow for smoother attention. The adaptive Cauchy softmax effectively handles
long-range dependencies, preventing entropy collapse (Zhai et al., 2023) or explosion (Zhang et al.,
2024) and adaptively balancing attention across the sequence.

3.4   S PARSE ATTENTION WITH Z- ORDER C URVE FOR E FFICIENT K NN R ETRIEVAL

Instead of calculating full attention scores, which is computationally expensive and memory in-
tensive, we compute sparse attention scores by leveraging the Z-order curve for efficient nearest
neighbor retrieval. ZETA is then computed as below, according to Equation 6:
                                                   X
                      AttentionZETA (Q, K, V ) =        softmaxc (Q, Ki ) Vi                  (7)
                                                       i∈Iq

where Ki and Vi are the corresponding keys and values for the indices i ∈ Iq . As a result of
the sparsity of top-k, most of the tokens will not join the predictions, which stops the gradient
back-propagated through the low-probabilities tokens and fails to leverage this current prediction’s
information. We append the mean vector of the history tokens to the top-k tokens matrix using
cumsum function in Iq , to keep the attention from assigning zero probability, which can be regarded
as smoothing in n-gram language model (Jurafsky & Martin, 2024).

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We evaluate ZETA’s performance on several aspects: ZETA’s ability to solve the synthetic M ULTI -
Q UERY A SSOCIATIVE R ECALL (MQAR) task (Arora et al., 2024a), long sequence modeling abil-
ity on the L ONG R ANGE A RENA (LRA) benchmark and auto-regressive language modeling on
W IKI T EXT-103. Then we conduct extensive analysis experiments: an ablation study examining
the influence of dimensionality on attention model performance (Section 4.2), ablations on various
Euclidean-based Softmax operators (Section 4.3), the empirical results of locality preservation using
Z-order curves (Section 4.4) and an ablation study over the number of k in ZETA (Section 4.5).

4.1   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION

Associative Recall. Associative recall tasks (Arora et al., 2024a) have been popular for testing the
ability of language models to look up information in their context. Broadly, they involve feeding


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Experiments on Associative Recall: (a) Model Accuracy (b) Performance of Transformer
with varying dK across different model dimensions; even with low dK , the model achieves near-
perfect performance (c) Comparison of different Euclidean-based Softmax operators across varying
key-query dimensions dK (d) Ablation on k in ZETA.


auto-regressive model pairs of key-value associations and then prompting the model to produce the
correct completion upon being shown a previously seen key. The M ULTI -Q UERY A SSOCIATIVE
R ECALL (MQAR) task is a particular formulation of this task that requires the model to memorize
multiple associations (Arora et al., 2024a). We evaluate the performance of various models on the
Associative Recall task, a classical sequence-to-sequence task that requires the model to recall the
first token associated with a target token after processing a long sequence. The task is tests the
ability of models to capture long-range dependencies and to maintain information over time.
We compare the performance of four models: a vanilla Transformer, Performer (Choromanski et al.,
2021), BASED (Arora et al., 2024b), and ZETA, with different model dimensions (32, 64, 128, and
256). As illustrated in Figure 2a, accuracy increases as the model dimension grows. Attention and
Based models show strong performance with higher dimensions, achieving nearly perfect accuracy
for dimensions larger than 64. ZETAfollows a similar trend and achieves competitive performance,
especially for larger model dimensions, with perfect accuracy at dimension 256. In contrast, the
Performer struggles, showing significantly lower accuracy across all dimensions.


Long Range Arena (LRA). The L ONG R ANGE A RENA (LRA) benchmark (Tay et al., 2021) is
a comprehensive suite designed to evaluate the performance of models on long sequence tasks. It
includes tasks that span across multiple domains, such as natural language processing, image classi-
fication, and mathematical reasoning. LRA focuses on sequence classification, challenging models
to efficiently process longer input sequences while capturing long-range dependencies, providing an
ideal testbed for Transformer models and their efficient variants.
LRA consists of five key tasks: L IST O PS, T EXT, Table 1: Test perplexity (lower is better) on
R ETRIEVAL, I MAGE, and PATH F INDER. Each W IKI T EXT-103.
task evaluates different aspects of long-range de-
pendency handling such as the ability to handle         Model               Params Test PPL
mathematical reasoning tasks on long sequences of       Vanilla Transformer  125M      26.2
operations (L IST O PS), capture dependencies over      Performer            125M      26.8
long textual inputs (T EXT), retrieve relevant ele-     Reformer             125M      25.6
ments from a long sequence (R ETRIEVAL) and cap-        AFT-conv             125M      28.2
ture spatial dependencies (I MAGE). PATH F INDER        Linear Transformer   125M      30.2
presents a difficult problem where models must dis-     RFA-Gaussian         125M      27.5
tinguish between connected and disconnected paths       CosFormer            125M      23.1
within maze-like patterns. A modified version of        ZETA                 124M      26.3
PATH F INDER, called PATH F INDER -X, is also in-
cluded where the patterns are presented in a larger image (256×256 compared to 32×32) but has
yet to be solved by existing attention-based methods.
We evaluate various Transformer-based models, including several linear and efficient variants,
trained from scratch on the LRA sequence classification tasks. For each model, we adopt the same
hyperparameter settings provided by the official LRA benchmark (Tay et al., 2021) to ensure a fair
comparison. Results are summarized in Table 2, which compares the performance of the models
across all five tasks, along with their average accuracy, showing that ZETA significantly outper-
forms other attention-based models.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Results of the Transformer and various variants on LRA. We consistently outperform the
next closest competitor (Zhu & Soricut, 2021).
              Model                ListOps    Text    Retrieval   Image    Pathfinder   Average
              Transformer           36.37     64.27     57.46     42.44       71.40       54.39
              Reformer              37.27     56.10     53.40     38.07       68.50       50.67
              Sparse Trans          17.07     63.58     59.59     44.24       71.71       51.24
              Sinkhorn Trans        33.67     61.20     53.83     41.23       67.45       51.29
              Linformer             35.70     53.94     52.27     38.56       76.34       51.36
              BigBird               36.05     64.02     59.29     40.83       74.87       55.01
              Linear Trans.         16.13     65.90     53.09     43.40       75.30       50.76
              Performer             18.01     65.40     53.82     42.77       77.05       51.41
              Nyströmformer        41.28     58.38     65.40     37.54       71.76       54.87
              H-Transformer-1D      49.53     78.69     63.99     46.05       68.78       61.41
              Top-k Attention       38.12     63.72     59.14      ×           ×          53.66
              IceFormer             41.53     60.01     66.02     40.46       74.42       56.49
              cosFormer             37.90     63.41     61.36     43.17       70.33       55.23
              Skyformer             39.25     64.70     82.06     40.77       70.73       59.50
              Hedgehog              37.15     64.60     82.24     40.15       74.16       59.66
               ZETA                 42.52     64.52     77.92     64.39       68.20       63.51



Autoregressive Language Modeling. Furthermore, we evaluate several models on the
W IKI T EXT-103 (Merity et al., 2017), a widely used benchmark for language modeling containing
over 100 million tokens extracted from high-quality Wikipedia articles characterized by a large vo-
cabulary and long-range dependencies. This makes it a challenging benchmark for testing a model’s
ability to predict the next token in a sequence. We use perplexity (PPL) as the primary evaluation
metric, where lower scores indicate a better ability to capture the sequential structure within natural
language text. Table 1 shows a vanilla Transformer1 to achieve a test perplexity of 26.2. How-
ever, linear approximation models such as the Linear Transformer (Qin et al., 2022a) struggle to
compete, with higher perplexity values of 30.2 on the test set. The table further compares several
other models, including efficient attention mechanisms like Performer (Choromanski et al., 2021),
Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020), and CosFormer (Qin et al., 2022b). Notably, CosFormer achieves the
lowest perplexity on the test set with a score of 23.1, outperforming all other models. Reformer also
shows competitive results, achieving a perplexity of 25.6, improving on the Vanilla Transformer.
ZETA achieves a perplexity of 26.3, comparable to the Vanilla Transformer.
The results highlight the trade-offs between using conventional transformers, linear transformers,
and models adopting approximate attention mechanisms like ZETA. It reinforces the importance
of balancing computational efficiency with model performance, particularly in the context of long-
sequence language modeling tasks, especially as the information necessary to solve a task becomes
sparsely located within long contexts.

4.2      E FFECT OF VARYING dK ON A SSOCIATIVE R ECALL TASK

We next evaluate the effect of different key-query dimensions dK on the Transformer model’s per-
formance for MQAR. The model dimensions are varied between {32, 64, 128, 256} while adjusting
dK to values {1, 2, 3, 8, 32}. As shown in Figure 2b, the performance remains near-perfect even
with low dK values, such as dK = 2. The model achieves close to 100% accuracy across all model
dimensions, except for the smallest dimension (dK = 1), where performance slightly drops for
lower model dimensions. This demonstrates that the Transformer is capable of handling long-range
dependencies in the Associative Recall task, even with relatively low key-query dimensionality.
These results suggest that reducing dK does not significantly impair the model’s ability to recall in-
formation in sequence tasks. In fact, maintaining a low dK can provide computational savings with-
out sacrificing performance, especially when model dimensions are large. This indicates that while
random projections—such as those used in the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma—approximately pre-
serve distances, trainable projection networks fk and fq can better adapt to task-specific data and
more effectively retain locality even with a low dK . For instance, by setting dK as low as 3, we
   1
       We use an auto-regressive Transformer based on Biderman et al. (2023) for comparision.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reduce it from the typical head dimension (normally 32, i.e. feature dimension as 512 with 8 heads).
We can further mitigate information loss by configuring fk and fq as two-layer neural networks
rather than single-layer ones.

4.3   P ERFORMANCE OF E UCLIDEAN -BASED S OFTMAX O PERATORS

We further evaluate the performance of transformers with various Euclidean-based Softmax op-
erators on MQAR. Specifically, we compare Negative Euclidean, Cauchy Softmax (our proposed
method), and Inverse Euclidean operators. The goal of this experiment is to test how these different
formulations of Softmax handle varying key-query dimensions dK in terms of accuracy.
As shown in Figure 2c, the proposed Cauchy Softmax consistently outperforms the other operators
across all values of dK . It achieves near-perfect accuracy for dK ≥ 2, whereas Negative Euclidean
shows a drop in accuracy for lower dK values. Inverse Euclidean, while performing comparably at
higher dimensions, struggles significantly at lower values of dK (e.g., dK = 1).
These results highlight the advantage of using the Cauchy distribution for a smaller dK , as it allows
for better handling of long-range dependencies and achieves more stable performance across various
key-query dimensions. The heavier tails of the Cauchy distribution enable distant tokens to retain
non-negligible influence, which is crucial for tasks like Associative Recall where long-range token
relationships are important.

4.4   L OCALITY P RESERVATION AFTER Z- ORDER C URVE P ROJECTION

Next, we evaluate how well Z-order curve projections
preserve locality across different dimensions and sam-
ple sizes. Specifically, we test the locality preserva-
tion by measuring the overlap between the top-64 nearest
neighbors before and after projection, with sample sizes
N ∈ {512, 1024, 2048}.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between locality preser-
vation and the dimensionality dK . As dK increases,
the overlap between the top-64 nearest neighbors dimin-
ishes for all sample sizes, indicating a decrease in locality
preservation. Lower dK values exhibit a higher level of         Figure 3: The effect of dimensional-
locality preservation across all sample sizes. However,         ity reduction before and after Z-order
for larger sample sizes, such as N = 2048, the drop in          curves projection on locality preserva-
locality preservation is more pronounced as the dimen-          tion for different sample sizes.
sionality increases. We select dK = 3 for ZETA.
These results highlight the importance of choosing an appropriate dK for maintaining locality, es-
pecially for larger datasets where higher dimensionality can lead to distortions in spatial proximity
after a projection.

4.5   T HE E FFECTS OF k IN ZETA

As an ablation study, we explore the effect of varying k in the attention mechanism of ZETA. The
goal of this experiment is to analyze how different values of k influence the model’s performance on
the associative recall task across different model dimensions.
Figure 2d shows ZETA to achieve near-perfect accuracy across all model dimensions (32, 64, 128,
and 256) for different values of k ranging from 16 to 48. In most of our experiments, we set k = 32,
as it provides a good balance between performance and computational efficiency. Interestingly,
there is little variation in accuracy between different values of k, indicating that ZETA is robust to
changes in this parameter.

4.6   E FFICIENCY B ENCHMARKING

In order to better understand the effectiveness of ZETA, we further conduct an experimental study to
demonstrate its computational efficiency in comparison to existing attention methods. In particular,


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we compare with a naive attention implementation from PyTorch (based on Vaswani et al. (2017))
as well as an IO-aware Flash-Attention (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2024). Our implementation is based
on Triton.
Table 3: Time (in milliseconds) for different operations to compute for a fixed-sized batch of varying
sequence length. Our method outperforms a naive attention implementation across all lengths while
also outperforming Flash-Attention by a signficant margin as the sequence length increases.
             Method        Torch Attention            Mamba        Flash Attention             ZETA
           Input Length     FWD      FWD+BWD    FWD     FWD+BWD     FWD     FWD+BWD     FWD     FWD+BWD
              4096          44.3       117.9    7.1        14.0     3.4        29.2      5.6          38.2
              8192         OOM         OOM     11.8        23.0    12.8       111.5     11.0          76.4
              16384        OOM         OOM     23.5        45.7    50.4       437.7     21.7         152.6
              32768        OOM         OOM     47.3        91.8   198.2      1733.5     43.0         304.8
              65536        OOM         OOM     94.0       183.7   805.3      7044.1     85.8         608.2

Table 4: Memory consumption (in MB) for different operations to compute for a fixed-sized batch
of varying sequence length. Our method outperforms a naive attention implementation across all
lengths while only marginally trailing a highly optimized Flash Attention implementation.
        Method         Torch Attention           Mamba             Flash Attention               ZETA
      Input Length        FWD   FWD+BWD        FWD     FWD+BWD       FWD     FWD+BWD           FWD     FWD+BWD
         4096         17268.1      25972.1    574.2      632.2      886.1      1784.1     1314.1         1926.1
         8192           OOM          OOM      904.2     1020.2     1528.1      3324.1     2382.1         3606.1
         16384          OOM          OOM     1564.2     1776.2     2812.1      6404.1     4520.1         6968.2
         32768          OOM          OOM     2884.2     3200.2     5380.1     12564.1     8796.2        13692.2
         65536          OOM          OOM     5524.2     6048.2    10516.1     24884.1    17348.2        27140.3


Table 3 indicates the time required for both a forward pass as well as a forward-backward pass using
our efficient ZETA implementation as well as the aforementioned attention implementations. We
observe that our implementation significantly outspeeds a naive implementation of attention and do
not suffer from out of memory issues while also outperforming Flash-Attention for long sequences,
with a widening gap as the sequence length increases. This indicates both the computational effi-
ciency of our method as well as serves as an empirical validation of the O(N log N ) complexity of
ZETA which we previously justify theoretically. Furthermore, if we compare with Mamba (Gu &
Dao, 2024), we demonstrate that ZETA has a faster forward pass while the forward-backward pass
maintains a similar relative performance as the sequence length increases.
Table 4 meanwhile shows that ZETA uses less memory than a naive attention implementation while
also only slightly utilizing more memory than a highly optimized Flash Attention implementation.
Nevertheless, in comparison to a sequence model such as Mamba, all attention models predictably
use more memory due to the use of softmax-type operations.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented ZETA, a model designed to enhance the efficiency of top-k attention by
leveraging Z-order curves for parallel token selection in one-dimensional space, reducing both time
and space complexity to O(N log N ). By carefully selecting the dimensionality of key and query
pairs, ZETA effectively preserves relative distances, improving both locality and computational effi-
ciency. Our comprehensive experiments on synthetic associative recall, LRA, and W IKI T EXT-103
demonstrate that ZETA consistently matches or outperforms traditional attention mechanisms, mak-
ing it particularly well-suited for long-sequence tasks that demand scalability and efficiency. Addi-
tionally, the introduction of the Adaptive Cauchy-Softmax mechanism enhances ZETA’s flexibility,
enabling it to handle long-range dependencies more effectively and efficiently. Overall, ZETA offers
a robust, scalable, and efficient solution for sequence modeling, combining adaptive token selection
with dynamic softmax to optimize performance across a range of tasks and datasets.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We appreciate constructive feedback from anonymous reviewers and meta-reviewers. This work is
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Discov-
ery Grants program.

R EFERENCES
Hervé Abdi and Lynne J Williams. Principal component analysis. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews:
  computational statistics, 2(4):433–459, 2010.
Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Aman Timalsina, Isys Johnson, Michael Poli, James Zou, Atri
  Rudra, and Christopher Re. Zoology: Measuring and improving recall in efficient language
  models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=LY3ukUANko.
Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Michael Zhang, Aman Timalsina, Silas Alberti, James Zou, Atri
  Rudra, and Christopher Re. Simple linear attention language models balance the recall-throughput
  tradeoff. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Amanda Bertsch, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Matthew R. Gormley. Unlimiformer: Long-range
 transformers with unlimited length input. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lJWUJWLCJo.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Patrick Billingsley. Probability and Measure. John Wiley and Sons, second edition, 1986.
Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr,
  Joe Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh.
  Video generation models as world simulators, 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the
  34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook,
  NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Yifan Chen, Qi Zeng, Heng Ji, and Yun Yang. Skyformer: Remodel self-attention with gaussian
  kernel and nyström method. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=pZCYG7gjkKz.
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea
  Gane, Tamas Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Quincy Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser,
  David Benjamin Belanger, Lucy J Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with
  performers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Ua6zuk0WRH.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Tri Dao. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and
  memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
  Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
James Dugundji. Topology. Allyn and Bacon, 1966.
Ruiyi Fang, Liangjian Wen, Zhao Kang, and Jianzhuang Liu. Structure-preserving graph represen-
  tation learning. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 927–932.
  IEEE, 2022.
Ruiyi Fang, Bingheng Li, Zhao Kang, Qiuhao Zeng, Ruizhi Pu, Nima Hosseini Dashtbayaz, Boyu
  Wang, and Charles Ling. On the benefits of attribute-driven graph domain adaptation. The Thir-
  teenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. In
  First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  tEYskw1VY2.
Ankit Gupta, Guy Dar, Shaya Goodman, David Ciprut, and Jonathan Berant. Memory-efficient
  transformers via top-k attention. In Nafise Sadat Moosavi, Iryna Gurevych, Angela Fan, Thomas
  Wolf, Yufang Hou, Ana Marasović, and Sujith Ravi (eds.), Proceedings of the Second Work-
  shop on Simple and Efficient Natural Language Processing, pp. 39–52, Virtual, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.sustainlp-1.5. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.sustainlp-1.5.
Jonathan Ho, Nal Kalchbrenner, Dirk Weissenborn, and Tim Salimans. Axial attention in multidi-
  mensional transformers, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1e5GJBtDr.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
  Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gi-
  anna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
  Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le
  Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
  Mixtral of experts. CoRR, abs/2401.04088, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.04088. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.04088.
William B Johnson, Joram Lindenstrauss, and Gideon Schechtman. Extensions of lipschitz maps
 into banach spaces. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 54(2):129–138, 1986.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Nat-
  ural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition with Language
  Models. Pearson, 3rd edition, 2024. URL https://web.stanford.edu/∼jurafsky/slp3/.
Nikita Kitaev, Lukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=rkgNKkHtvB.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuzhen Mao, Martin Ester, and Ke Li. Iceformer: Accelerated inference with long-sequence trans-
  formers on CPUs. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6RR3wU4mSZ.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, Nathaniel Saul, and Lukas Grossberger. Umap: Uniform manifold
  approximation and projection. The Journal of Open Source Software, 3(29):861, 2018.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mix-
  ture models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Byj72udxe.

OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. Scaling neural machine translation.
 In Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Graham, Barry
 Haddow, Matthias Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri,
 Aurélie Névéol, Mariana Neves, Matt Post, Lucia Specia, Marco Turchi, and Karin Verspoor
 (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 1–9,
 Brussels, Belgium, October 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 W18-6301. URL https://aclanthology.org/W18-6301.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
  Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chil-
  amkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An impera-
  tive style, high-performance deep learning library. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC,
  Canada, pp. 8024–8035, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Abstract.html.

Zhen Qin, Xiaodong Han, Weixuan Sun, Dongxu Li, Lingpeng Kong, Nick Barnes, and Yiran
  Zhong. The devil in linear transformer. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing, EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 7-11, 2022, pp. 7025–7041.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022a. doi: 10.18653/V1/2022.EMNLP-MAIN.473.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.473.

Zhen Qin, Weixuan Sun, Hui Deng, Dongxu Li, Yunshen Wei, Baohong Lv, Junjie Yan, Ling-
  peng Kong, and Yiran Zhong. cosformer: Rethinking softmax in attention. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Bl8CQrx2Up4.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July
  2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8821–8831.
  PMLR, 2021. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ramesh21a.html.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014.

Kai Shen, Junliang Guo, Xu Tan, Siliang Tang, Rui Wang, and Jiang Bian. A study on relu and
  softmax in transformer. CoRR, abs/2302.06461, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.06461. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.06461.

Yi Tay, Dara Bahri, Liu Yang, Donald Metzler, and Da-Cheng Juan. Sparse Sinkhorn attention.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9438–9447.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/tay20a.html.

Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao,
  Liu Yang, Sebastian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena : A benchmark for efficient
  transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=qVyeW-grC2k.

Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. Efficient transformers: A survey.
  ACM Comput. Surv., 55(6), December 2022. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3530811. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3530811.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Herve Jegou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In Ma-
  rina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/touvron21a.html.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
  Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon,
  U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2017/file/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Yunyang Xiong, Zhanpeng Zeng, Rudrasis Chakraborty, Mingxing Tan, Glenn Fung, Yin Li, and
  Vikas Singh. Nyströmformer: A nyström-based algorithm for approximating self-attention. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago
 Ontanon, Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, and Amr Ahmed. Big bird: Trans-
 formers for longer sequences. 33:17283–17297, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper files/paper/2020/file/c8512d142a2d849725f31a9a7a361ab9-Paper.pdf.
Qiuhao Zeng, Wei Wang, Fan Zhou, Charles Ling, and Boyu Wang. Foresee what you will learn:
  data augmentation for domain generalization in non-stationary environment. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11147–11155, 2023.
QIUHAO Zeng, Long-Kai Huang, Qi Chen, Charles X Ling, and Boyu Wang. Towards understand-
  ing evolving patterns in sequential data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
  132747–132773, 2024a.
QIUHAO Zeng, Changjian Shui, Long-Kai Huang, Peng Liu, Xi Chen, Charles Ling, and Boyu
  Wang. Latent trajectory learning for limited timestamps under distribution shift over time.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=bTMMNT7IdW.
Shuangfei Zhai, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Etai Littwin, Dan Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, Yizhe
  Zhang, Jiatao Gu, and Joshua M. Susskind. Stabilizing transformer training by preventing atten-
  tion entropy collapse. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
  Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 40770–40803.
  PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/zhai23a.html.
Michael Zhang, Kush Bhatia, Hermann Kumbong, and Christopher Re. The hedgehog & the porcu-
 pine: Expressive linear attentions with softmax mimicry. In The Twelfth International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4g02l2N2Nx.
Zhenhai Zhu and Radu Soricut. H-transformer-1D: Fast one-dimensional hierarchical attention
  for sequences. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 3801–3815, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.294. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.294.
Shen Zhuoran, Zhang Mingyuan, Zhao Haiyu, Yi Shuai, and Li Hongsheng. Efficient attention:
  Attention with linear complexities. In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision (WACV), 2021.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

The recent paper, Reformer, proposed the Shared-QK Transformer that shares the linear projection
layer for keys and queries. It reduces the number of parameters and memory space while not affect-
ing the model performance. https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.0445a very simple but efficient technique.
Lemma A.1 (Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma). For any 0 < ϵ < 1 and any integer m, let d be a
positive integer such that d = Ω( lnϵ2m ). Then for any set x of m points in RD , there exists a map
f : RD → Rd such that for all xi , xj ∈ X ,
                  (1 − ϵ)∥xi − xj ∥2 ≤ ∥f (xi ) − f (xj )∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ)∥xi − xj ∥2 .                (8)
Assumption A.2. Let α ∈ ∆m−1 be an element of the m-dimensional simplex, defined as
                                Pm
∆m−1 ≜ {α ∈ Rm | αi ≥ 0, i=1 αi = 1}. Assume that hattn equipped with α can achieve
an optimal learnable similarity function Γ, where the attention scores are given by α =
softmax(Γ(fk (xi ), fq (x))), such that Γ is trained to be optimal to have the minimal expected risk:
minα ∥hattn (x, Sx ; α) − y∥, where hattn denotes the attention-based hypothesis, x is the input, and
Sx is the context.
Lemma A.3. Let α ∈ Rm , ∀h1 : Rm → R and ∀h2 : Rm → R. Assume that h1 (α) ≤ h2 (α). Then
minα h1 (α) ≤ minα h2 (α).

Proof. Let α1 = arg minα h1 (α) and α2 = arg minα h2 (α). Then, h1 (α2 ) ≤ h2 (α2 ) due to
condition h1 (α) ≤ h2 (α). We also have h1 (α1 ) ≤ h1 (α2 ) due to condition α1 achieving the
minimum of h1 . To sum up, we have h1 (α1 ) ≤ h2 (α2 ).


Lemma A.4. (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014) Let C1 , . . . , Cr be a collection of subsets of
some domain set, X . Let S be a sequence of m points sampled i.i.d. according to some probability
distribution, D, over X . Then,
                                                      
                                            X                r
                                ES∼Dm           P[Ci ] ≤      .
                                                           me
                                              i:Ci ∩S=∅


Proof.    From the linearity of expectation, we can rewrite
                                            
                                 X                Xr
                        ES            P[Ci ] =      P[Ci ]ES [1Ci ∩S=∅ ] .
                                i:Ci ∩S=∅            i=1


Next, for each i we have
                  ES [1Ci ∩S=∅ ] = PS [Ci ∩ S = ∅] = (1 − P[Ci ])m ≤ e−P[Ci ]m .

Combining the preceding two equations, we get
                                
                     X               X r
              ES          P[Ci ] ≤     P[Ci ]e−P[Ci ]m ≤ r max P[Ci ]e−P[Ci ]m .
                                                                   i
                    i:Ci ∩S=∅               i=1


Finally, by elementary calculus, max ae−ma ≤ me
                                             1
                                                , concluding the proof.
                                    a

Theorem A.5. Let X ∈ R , Y ∈ RD , and D be a distribution over X × Y for which the conditional
                           d

probability function, h : Rd → RD , is a l-Lipschitz function. Let h denote a hypothesis, and hattn
denote the one-layer attention model to aggregate the predictions of a sample set S ∼ Dm to predict
for another i.i.d sample x. Specifically, here we assume the same linear map for a key mapping fk
and a query mapping fq as f : Rd → [−B, B]dK where B is the bound of projection of x by f ,
and we assume the value mapping fv be the Bayes optimal rule h∗ = E[Y |X = x], which is the


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


hypothesis that minimizes LD (h) over all functions. Then, the expected risk of the regression tasks
LD (h) = E(x,y)∼D ∥h(x) − y∥ with h as hattn can be upper bounded by
                                                         √
                                                 ∗    4lc dK Bm−1/(dK +1)
                    ES∼D [LD (hattn )] ≤ LD (h ) +
                          m                               r      q            .
                                                             1 − CdlnKm


Proof. ES [LD (h)] is the root mean square error (RMSE) between the prediction and y conditioned
on a sampled set S and an additional example (x, y), such that the label of π1 (x) is different from
y. In other words, we first sample m examples, Sx = {x1 , . . . , xm }, according to DX , and an
additional example, (x, y). It follows that
   ES [LD (hattn )] = ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min ∥hattn (x, Sx ; α) − y∥
                                                        α
                                                                m
                                                                X
                    = ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min ∥                    αi h∗ (xi ) − y∥
                                                        α
                                                                i=1
                                                      "           m
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                 X
                                                                              ∗             ∗            ∗
                    ≤ ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min ∥                        αi h (xi ) − h (x)∥ + ∥h (x) − y∥
                                                            α
                                                                    i=1
                                                                                  m
                                                                                  X
                    = LD (h∗ ) + ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min ∥                           αi h∗ (xi ) − h∗ (x)∥,
                                                                          α
                                                                                  i=1

where αi is the attention score between xi and x. The inequality follows the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality and Lemma A.3.
                                    m
                                    X                                                                          m
                                                                                                               X
ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min ∥              αi h∗ (xi ) − h∗ (x)∥ ≤ ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min                         αi ∥h∗ (xi ) − h∗ (x)∥
                            α                                                                              α
                                    i=1                                                                        i=1
                                                                                                                                             
                                "          m
                                                                #                             m
                                           X                                                X      ∥f (xi ) − f (x)∥ 
≤ ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X l · min               αi ∥xi − x∥ ≤ ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X l · min     αi r                 
                                      α                                                  α                 q         
                                           i=1                                               i=1       1 − CdlnKm
                                                              
                                   m
                                 X        ∥ki − q∥ 
= ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X l · min     αi r              
                              α              q         
                                  i=1            C ln m
                                           1−     dK

The first inequality follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality; the second inequality follows from
the l-Lipschitzness of h∗ ; the third inequality follows from the qJohnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma,
                                                                                        C ln m
where we define ϵ in the Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma as ϵ =                              dK , where C is a constant;
ki = f (xi ) and q = f (x). It is obvious that
                                          m
                                          X
                                    min         αi ∥ki − q∥ = ∥kπ1 (q) − q∥
                                     α
                                          i=1

where kπ1 (q) is the closest ki to q. Thus we have
                                                                                                                                 
                                    m
                                    X                                                       ∥kπ1 (q) − q∥ 
                                        αi h∗ (xi ) − h∗ (x) = ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X 
                                                                                      
ESx ∼DXm ,x∼DX Ey∼DY|X min
                            α                                                         l · r      q         .
                                                                                                             
                                    i=1                                                              C ln m
                                                                                             1−        dK

Fix some ζ = 2B/T . For some integer T , let r = T dK and C1 , . . . , Cr be the cover of the set X
using boxes of length ζ. Namely, for every (ξ1 , . . . , ξd ) ∈ [T ]d , there exists a set Ci of the form
{k : ∀j, kj ∈ [2B(ξj − 1)/T, 2Bξj /T ]}.
                                                          √                                       √
For each k, q in the same box we have ∥k − q∥ ≤ dK B ζ. Otherwise, ∥k − q∥ ≤ dK B.
Therefore,


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    
                                                [              p             [                    p
     ESx ,x       kπ1 (q) − q       ≤ ES P              C i  dK B + P               Ci  Bζ       dK  ,
                                            i:Ci ∩Sx =∅                  i:Ci ∩Sx ̸=∅

and by combining Lemma A.4 with the trivial bound
                                          [
                                   P[           Ci ] ≤ 1,
                                                i:Ci ∩Sx ̸=∅

we get that
                                                p           r
                          Ex,Sx ∥kπ1 (q) − q∥ ≤ dK B          +ζ .
                                                           me
                                      dK
Since the number of boxes is r = (1/ζ) , it follows that
                                                         dK −dK
                                            p            2 ζ
                      ESx ,x kπ1 (q) − q ≤ dK B                 +ζ .
                                                           me
Setting ζ = 2m−1/(dK +1) and noting that
                    2dK ζ −d        2dK 2−dK mdK /(dK +1)
                             +ζ =                           + 2m−1/(dK +1)
                       me                     me
                                                    1
                                 = m−1/(dK +1)        + 2 ≤ 4m−1/(dK +1) ,
                                                    e
then combining the preceding with previous results, we obtain
                                                       √
                                              ⋆     4lc dK Bm−1/(dK +1)
                     ES [LD (hattn )] ≤ LD (h ) +      r      q          .
                                                          1 − CdlnKm


B    A N I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLE OF E FFICIENT T OP -k S ELECTION VIA
     Z- ORDER C URVE C HUNKING
In ZETA, the chunking process is a crucial step for efficient key-query matching in large-scale
attention mechanisms. The process begins by projecting the high-dimensional keys into a one-
dimensional space using Z-order curves, which preserve spatial locality. These projections create a
linear representation of the keys, as shown in the second row of the figure.
After projection, the keys are radix sorted in O(N ) into ascending order of their Z-order integer val-
ues, enabling efficient binary searching in O(N ) for the most relevant keys in the one-dimensional
space. Sorting ensures that keys that are spatially close in the original multi-dimensional space
remain close in the projected space, making the retrieval process computationally efficient.
Next, the sorted keys are partitioned into chunks. Each chunk contains a fixed number of keys,
and queries are matched with the keys within their respective chunks. This chunk-based structure
facilitates parallel processing, where each query can efficiently search for its top-k nearest keys
within a local subset of the sorted key space. For instance, in the figure, the 5th query retrieves its
top-4 keys from the chunks containing its most relevant keys.
This chunking approach significantly reduces the computational overhead compared to searching
the entire key space for each query, while leveraging the locality-preserving properties of Z-order
curves. The result is a scalable and efficient mechanism for top-k selection in ZETA, ensuring both
speed and accuracy for attention-based tasks.
The pseudo-code in Algorithm 1 outlines the ZETA Top-k Attention mechanism, which combines
Z-order curve projections with chunk-based sorting to efficiently identify and retrieve the top-k
nearest neighbors while maintaining causal constraints. It provides a structured approach to reduce
computational overhead by limiting the search space to relevant chunks, ensuring both efficiency
and adherence to sequence masking requirements.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Illustration of the chunking process in ZETA: Keys are projected into one-dimensional
space using Z-order curves, sorted, and partitioned into chunks for efficient retrieval of top-k keys
for each query.


C    E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS


The ZETA model configuration generally involves setting the number of chunks to values such as
4, 8, 16, 32 depending on the sequence length, which provides a flexible way to handle different
input scales effectively. This chunking strategy facilitates parallelism in processing, allowing for ef-
ficient memory use and computational speedup during attention operations. The hidden dimension,
dV , is typically set to 256 or 512 with 8 attention heads when working with LRA datasets. However,
for larger and more complex datasets such as W IKI T EXT-103, the hidden dimension is increased to
dV = 768 with 12 attention heads to ensure that the model has sufficient capacity to learn intricate
long-range dependencies effectively. Additionally, the dimensions of keys and queries are kept sig-
nificantly lower at dK = dQ = 3, which aids in reducing the computational burden and mitigates
the “curse of dimensionality” while still preserving enough information for efficient attention com-
putation. This choice of dimensions strikes a balance between model efficiency and effectiveness,
making ZETA well-suited for long-sequence modeling tasks.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: ZETA Top-k Attention Using Z-order Curves and Chunking
Data: Keys K of size M × d, sequence length N , chunk size M , query index i, top-k value k
Result: Top-k nearest keys for each query
Step 1: Z-order Curve Projection;
for each key vector in K do
    Project each d-dimensional key vector into a one-dimensional representation using Z-order
     curve projection;
end
Step 2: Sorting of Keys;
Sort the projected one-dimensional keys in ascending order;
Step 3: Chunk Division;
Divide the sorted keys into multiple chunks based on the chunk size M ;
Step 4: Chunk-wise Causal Masking;
for each query at position i do
    Determine chunk index m = Mi ;
    Search only in the first m chunks for the top-k keys to attend to;
    Exclude keys from positions j > m × M ;
end
Step 5: Nearest Neighbor Search;
for each query do
    Perform nearest neighbor search within the selected chunks to find top-k tokens;
    Collect the indices of the nearest neighbors Iq while maintaining causal constraints;
end
return Top-k nearest keys for each query



D    I/O-AWARE ZETA O PTIMIZED WITH T RITON

Our Triton implementation of ZETA focuses on improving the efficiency of sparse attention through
customized kernel programming. We leverage Triton to create specialized GPU kernels for top-k
sparse attention. The sparse topk attention kernel and its corresponding backward pass kernel
sparse topk attention backward kernel are implemented using the Triton JIT (Just-In-Time)
compiler. This approach allows for significant speedup by optimizing memory access patterns and
reducing I/O overhead during the computation. The kernel is tuned to different configurations,
like “block size” and “num warps”, which directly influence how GPU resources are allocated.
Especially, we compute the mean vector of history tokens in the block of the current kernel, instead
of computing global mean vectors, which effectively reduce overheads. he @triton.autotune
decorator is used to evaluate multiple kernel configurations for optimal performance, making sure
that GPU resources are well-utilized depending on sequence length and other parameters.
One key challenge addressed is efficient indexing for large tensors in the backward and forward
computations. In Triton, indexing is achieved via program IDs, tl.program id(), that are used to
identify which part of the workload is being computed by each block or thread, ensuring that paral-
lelism is effectively exploited. The Triton kernel computes Cauchy Softmax for top-k KV pairs for
each query, employing a specialized kernel to access only the most relevant k keys during the atten-
tion process. This reduces the computational complexity compared to a full attention mechanism,
and Triton’s low-level bit manipulation operations (tl.load and tl.store) are used for fast data
retrieval.
The sparse Attention Mechanism is computed by considering only the top-k keys per query, which
significantly reduces the computational load. The sparse topk attention kernel involves effi-
cient gathering of keys and values based on top-k indices. The indices are pre-computed in a sorted
order, which enables efficient retrieval without scanning the entire key space.
The Triton kernel also includes custom backward functions to handle the gradient flow. The back-
ward kernel sparse topk attention backward kernel computes gradients for each parameter in-
volved in the sparse attention operation, including q, k, v and the learnable parameter γ. Triton’s


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tl.atomic add is used to accumulate gradients, ensuring that all updates to shared memory locations
are synchronized.
During the forward pass, intermediate values such as the Euclidean distances and normalization
constants are stored. These values are reused in the backward pass, which reduces redundant com-
putations and accelerates the training process.
By using Triton, we managed to reduce the I/O overhead that traditional PyTorch operations faced,
especially during backward computations. Furthermore, we used fused kernels to mitigate the over-
head associated with multiple indexing operations. This fusion helps in reducing the number of
kernel launches, which translates to reduced latency and faster execution, as Triton allows more
control over memory coalescing and efficient block-wise operations.
Overall, the Triton-based implementation in ZETA allows for a more scalable sparse attention mech-
anism that retains the benefits of locality preservation through Z-order Curves while significantly
reducing computational and I/O bottlenecks. This makes the ZETA attention more suitable for long-
sequence tasks where traditional transformers are too resource-intensive.

E     G RADIENT D ERIVATION FOR THE BACKWARD PASS OF T RITON ZETA
E.1   U PDATED ATTENTION M ECHANISM WITH S PARSE ATTENTION

We introduce sparse attention by computing values and keys from an index set Ii of top-k tokens
specific to each query qi . The unnormalized attention scores are defined as:

                                                 1
                                      Sij =           ,       for j ∈ Ii                           (9)
                                              Dij + ε
where:

         • Dij = ∥qi − kj ∥2
         • ε = γ 2 is a trainable scalar parameter

Define:

                                              δij = Dij + ε                                       (10)

The steps of the attention mechanism are:

      1. Compute Pairwise Distances:
                                         Dij = ∥qi − kj ∥2 ,           for j ∈ Ii                 (11)
      2. Compute Unnormalized Attention Scores:
                                            1
                                    Sij =      , for j ∈ Ii                                       (12)
                                           δij
      3. Normalize Attention Weights:
                                                      X
                                              Zi =           Sij                                  (13)
                                                      j∈Ii
                                                      Sij
                                              Aij =       ,        for j ∈ Ii                     (14)
                                                      Zi
      4. Compute Output:                                   X
                                                 oi =             Aij vj                          (15)
                                                           j∈Ii

Our goal is to compute the gradients of the output oi with respect to qi , kj , vj , and ε, considering
the sparse attention.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   G RADIENTS WITH R ESPECT TO Q, K, V, AND ε

The gradient of the output oi with respect to vj is:

                                      ∂oi         Aij , if j ∈ Ii
                                          =                               (16)
                                      ∂vj         0,    otherwise

Derivative of Dij with respect to qi and kj :


                                 ∂Dij
                                      = 2(qi − kj ), for j ∈ Ii           (17)
                                  ∂qi

                                 ∂Dij     −2(qi − kj ), if j ∈ Ii
                                      =                                   (18)
                                 ∂kj      0,             otherwise

Derivative of Sij :
First, compute the derivative of Sij with respect to δij :

                                      ∂Sij    1
                                           =− 2 ,          for j ∈ Ii     (19)
                                      ∂δij   δij

Compute the derivative of δij with respect to Dij and ε:


                                         ∂δij
                                               = 1,      for j ∈ Ii       (20)
                                         ∂Dij
                                          ∂δij
                                               = 1,      for j ∈ Ii       (21)
                                           ∂ε
Now, compute the derivative of Sij with respect to Dij and ε:


                                      ∂Sij    1
                                           =− 2 ,          for j ∈ Ii     (22)
                                      ∂Dij   δij
                                      ∂Sij    1
                                           =− 2 ,          for j ∈ Ii     (23)
                                       ∂ε    δij

Derivative of Sij with respect to qi and kj :


                                  ∂Sij     2(qi − kj )
                                       =−         2     , for j ∈ Ii      (24)
                                  ∂qi           δij
                                         ( 2(q −k )
                                              i     j
                                  ∂Sij          2
                                              δij
                                                      , if j ∈ Ii
                                       =                                  (25)
                                  ∂kj     0,            otherwise

Derivative of Zi with respect to Sij :

                                         ∂Zi
                                              = 1,       for j ∈ Ii       (26)
                                         ∂Sij
Derivative of Aij with respect to Sij :

                                    ∂Aij   Zi − Sij
                                         =          ,        for j ∈ Ii   (27)
                                    ∂Sij      Zi2

                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Derivative of Aij with respect to Sil for l ̸= j:

                                            
                                     ∂Aij   − Sij , if l ∈ I
                                                              i
                                          =      Zi2                                           (28)
                                     ∂Sil   
                                              0,     otherwise

Gradient of oi with respect to Sil :


                                      ∂oi    X ∂Aij
                                           =  vj                                               (29)
                                      ∂Sil       ∂Sil
                                                   j∈Ii
                                                   v l − oi
                                              =             ,        for l ∈ Ii                (30)
                                                       Zi

Gradient with Respect to qi :


                                  ∂oi   X ∂oi ∂Sil
                                      =       ·                                                (31)
                                  ∂qi     ∂Sil ∂qi
                                            l∈Ii
                                                   X vl − oi              (qi − kl )
                                        = −2                          ·                        (32)
                                                             Zi              δil2
                                                   l∈Ii


Gradient with Respect to kj :

                                        ( v −o (q −k )
                                ∂oi      2 jZi i · iδ2 j , if j ∈ Ii
                                    =                           ij                             (33)
                                ∂kj         0,                              otherwise

The total gradient with respect to kj is:

                                                                                           !
                             ∂L    X               ∂L vj − oi (qi − kj )
                                 =               2     ·     ·    2                            (34)
                             ∂kj                   ∂oi   Zi      δij
                                     i:j∈Ii


Gradient with Respect to ε:


                                       ∂oi   X ∂oi ∂Sil
                                           =          ·                                        (35)
                                       ∂ε         ∂Sil ∂ε
                                             l∈Ii
                                               X v l − oi 1
                                           =−             · 2                                  (36)
                                                      Zi   δil
                                                      l∈Ii


The total gradient with respect to ε is:

                                                                                       !
                                ∂L    X              ∂L X vl − oi 1
                                   =−                            · 2                           (37)
                                ∂ε    i
                                                     ∂oi     Zi   δil
                                                             l∈Ii


E.3   S UMMARY OF G RADIENT C OMPUTATIONS
      1. Compute Dij , δij , Sij , Zi , Aij , and oi :


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Dij = ∥qi − kj ∥2 , for j ∈ Ii                            (38)
                                      δij = Dij + ε, for j ∈ Ii                                 (39)
                                             1
                                      Sij =     , for j ∈ Ii                                    (40)
                                            δij
                                            X
                                       Zi =      Sij                                            (41)
                                                j∈Ii
                                             Sij
                                      Aij =      , for j ∈ Ii                                   (42)
                                             Zi
                                             X
                                        oi =      Aij vj                                        (43)
                                                j∈Ii

      2. Compute Gradient with Respect to V:

                                           ∂L    X ∂L
                                               =       · Aij                                    (44)
                                           ∂vj     ∂oi
                                                       i:j∈Ii

      3. Compute Gradient with Respect to Q:

                            ∂L          ∂L X vj − oi (qi − kj )
                                = −2                ·    2                                      (45)
                            ∂qi         ∂oi    Zi       δij
                                                        j∈Ii

      4. Compute Gradient with Respect to K:
                                                                            !
                                ∂L    X            ∂L vj − oi (qi − kj )
                                    =            2     ·     ·    2                             (46)
                                ∂kj                ∂oi   Zi      δij
                                       i:j∈Ii

      5. Compute Gradient with Respect to ε:
                                                         
                              ∂L      X ∂L X vj − oi 1
                                 =−                 · 2                                       (47)
                              ∂ε        i
                                             ∂oi Z i  δij
                                                           j∈Ii


E.4    I MPLEMENTATION N OTES
       • Sparse Attention Index Set Ii :
           – Ii is the set of indices that query qi attends to, which is collected from Z-order Curve
              projected sequences.
           – The attention computations and gradient updates are performed only over j ∈ Ii .
       • Numerical Stability:
           – The addition of ε ensures that δij > 0 if ε > 0, preventing division by zero.
           – Ensure that ε remains positive during training, possibly by parameterizing ε = exp(θ)
              where θ is unconstrained.
       • Efficient Computation:
           – Utilize sparse matrix representations to handle the index sets Ii efficiently.
           – Use vectorized operations and appropriate masking to perform computations only over
              the valid indices.

F     L IMITATIONS
Given that our method is a top-k attention mechanism, there are some shared limitations between our
method and that of prior work that deals with attention, such as there still potentially being higher
chances to ignore attention to important information (with low attention scores) than full attention
methods given the use of only the top-k tokens.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
G.1   A BLATION ON ATTENTION P ERFORMANCE WITH VARYING dK ON LRA

We expand on the ablation study presented in Figure 2(b), focusing on the ListOps and Image tasks
from the Long Range Arena (LRA) benchmark. Specifically, we examine the impact of varying the
dimensionality of the keys and queries (dK ) on attention performance. The results are summarized
in Table 5.
Our experimental findings indicate that the performance remains relatively consistent for dK ≥ 3,
whereas a noticeable decline is observed for dK < 3. This supports our hypothesis that, unlike value
vectors, the keys and queries predominantly encode positional information rather than intricate se-
mantic features. As such, reducing dK to a small value allows us to effectively lower computational
costs without incurring a significant loss in performance. This insight guided our selection of dK
values in subsequent experiments.
                      dK          1        2       3      32       64       128
                    ListOps    31.04    34.79    36.06    36.19    36.32   36.37
                     Image      37.6    40.23    42.64    42.72    42.51   42.44
                      Table 5: Performance metrics for different values of dK .

G.2   P ERFORMANCE OF ZETA USING DIFFERENT SIMILARITY METRIC

We utilize Euclidean distance for k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) searches to identify the top-k attended
tokens, as it is particularly well-suited for this purpose. In contrast, dot-product similarity cannot
be directly employed for k-NN searches without normalization, as highlighted in (Mao et al., 2024).
Our experimental results also indicate that normalized dot-product similarity performs worse than
Euclidean distance, as demonstrated in additional MQAR experiments below.
Specifically, Euclidean distance-based methods, such as Negative Euclidean with traditional softmax
and Cauchy Softmax, consistently outperform dot-product-based methods for top-k attention when
using a small dimensionality (dk ≤ 4), which is the setting adopted in ZETA.
                                  dk              1       2      3      4
                         Negative Euclidean      64.6    99.4     99.4   99.3
                         Inverse Euclidean       22.9    81.3     99.6   99.9
                          Cauchy Softmax         74.5    99.6     99.5   99.2
                        Normalized Dot Prod      62.6    92.6     99.3   99.1
                  Table 6: Performance using various different similarity metrics


                                                 25
