Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OMPETITIVE FAIR S CHEDULING WITH P REDICTIONS
 Tianming Zhao                       Chunqiu Xia                        Xiaomin Chang
 School of Computer Science          School of Computer Science         School of Computer Science
 The University of Sydney            The University of Sydney           The University of Sydney

 Chunhao Li                         Wei Li                             Albert Y. Zomaya
 School of Computer Science         School of Computer Science         School of Computer Science
 The University of Sydney           The University of Sydney           The University of Sydney



                                            A BSTRACT

         Beyond the worst-case analysis of algorithms, the learning-augmented framework
         considers that an algorithm can leverage possibly imperfect predictions about the
         unknown variables to have guarantees tied to the prediction quality. We consider
         online non-clairvoyant scheduling to minimize the max-stretch under this frame-
         work, where the scheduler can access job size predictions.
                                                              √      We present a family of
         algorithms: Relaxed-Greedy (RG) with an O(η 3 · P ) competitive ratio, where
         η denotes the prediction error for job sizes and P√ the maximum job size ratio;
         Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy with an O(λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P ) competitive ratio, where λ
                                        √ job size; Predictive Relaxed-Greedy with an
         denotes the error for the minimum
         O(λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P ) competitive ratio, where φ denotes the error for
         the maximum job size. We also present RGx , an algorithm that represents a trade-
         off between consistency and smoothness, with an O(η 2+2x · P 1−x ) competitive
         ratio. We introduce a general method using resource augmentation to bound √ robust-
         ness, resulting in RR-augmented RG, with a (1 + ϵ)-speed O(min{η 3 P , nϵ })
         competitive ratio. Finally, we conduct simulations on synthetic and real-world
         datasets to evaluate the practical performance of these algorithms.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In classic online scheduling, algorithms are designed to have worst-case guarantees under incomplete
information. However, this conservative approach often results in suboptimal performance, especially
compared to where full information is available. Given the rapid advancements in Machine Learning
(ML) predictive models, the need for worst-case guarantees under incomplete information may be
too pessimistic. Beyond worst-case analysis, recent researchers have explored learning-augmented al-
gorithms to leverage predictions to improve decision-making. With ML models providing predictions
of unknown variables, these algorithms are robust and have an improved performance.
Scheduling jobs that arrive over time (preemption allowed) is a fundamental challenge in computing
resource management, particularly when minimizing the maximum stretch. The stretch of a job Jj is
                                                               C −r
defined as the ratio of its response time to job size, given by jp∗ j , where Cj denotes the completion
                                                                  j
time, rj release time, and p∗j job size (or processing time). The maximum stretch, termed max-stretch,
measures fairness of the resource allocation: a max-stretch of k implies thatP each job receives at least
a k1 -speed
        P machine. In contrast, other metrics like total completion time ( Cj ) and total response
time ( Cj − rj ) emphasize efficiency and will unfairly delay large jobs, even those released early.
Studying max-stretch scheduling offers a general insight into fair resource allocation.
Previous work has considered offline max-stretch scheduling and online clairvoyant scheduling;
both assume precisely known job sizes (Bender et al., 1998; 2002; Benoit et al., 2021). However,
assuming perfect knowledge is overly optimistic in practice. Job sizes can be estimated using ML
models (Amiri and Mohammad-Khanli, 2017) but are inherently subject to error. This raises a key
question: how can we make fair scheduling decisions with imperfect information? Our objective is
learning-augmented algorithms with performance guarantees tied to the prediction quality and robust


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


against poor predictions. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to explore learning-augmented
algorithms for fair scheduling. We define several terms before presenting our contributions.

Prediction errors. We consider several types of predictions: job size predictions per job at the job’s
arrival, an upfront prediction for the minimum job size, and an upfront prediction for the maximum
job size. Prediction errors are defined as the multiplicative difference between predicted and actual job
                                                                                                 p∗ p
sizes. Let η denote the prediction error, defined as η = max1≤j≤n ηj = max1≤j≤n max{ pjj , p∗j },
                                                                                                      j
where pj is the job size prediction for Jj (Zhao et al., 2022; Azar et al., 2021). We define P
                                                              p∗
as the ratio of the largest and smallest job sizes: P = pmax   ∗   , where p∗max and p∗min represent the
                                                               min
maximum and minimum job sizes. For the predicted minimum job size, the error is denoted by
            pe    p∗
λ = max{ pmin∗  , pmin
                   e   }, where pemin is the predicted minimum job size. The error for the predicted
            min   min
                                  pe     p∗
maximum job size is φ = max{ pmax
                              ∗   , pmax
                                     e   }, where pemax is the predicted maximum job size.
                                   max    max



Competitive framework, consistency, smoothness, and robustness. An online algorithm A will
be compared against an offline optimal algorithm A∗ that knows all jobs’ release times and sizes
                                                                                                ∗
in advance. We say A has a competitive ratio c or is c-competitive, if S A (I) ≤ c · S A (I) for
                                                    ∗
any problem instance I, where S A (I) and S A (I) denote the max-stretch achieved by A and A∗ ,
respectively. Consistency measures the algorithm performance under perfect predictions; smoothness
under any prediction; robustness under worst-case predictions. Formally, an algorithm is said to have
consistency τ (or be τ -consistent) if it is τ -competitive when η = 1; smoothness ρ (or be ρ-smooth) if
it is ρ-competitive where ρ is a function of η; and robustness υ (or be υ-robust) if it is υ-competitive
for any η, where υ is independent of η. The relationship between smoothness and robustness can be
expressed as robustness = limη→∞ smoothness.

                                                                                                    ∗
                                                                               A
Resource augmentation. An algorithm A is (1 + ϵ)-speed c-competitive if S1+ϵ      (I) ≤ c · S1A (I)
                                                    ∗
                                      A
for any problem instance I, where S1+ϵ   (I) and S1A (I) denote the max-stretch achieved by A and
A∗ , respectively, and the subscripts denote the speed of the processor used by the corresponding
algorithm and A∗ is an offline optimal algorithm.

C ONTRIBUTIONS
1. Improved fairness in scheduling: We present an exact offline algorithm with a runtime of
   O(n2 log n), where n is the number of jobs. We develop a family  √ of Relaxed-Greedy (RG)
   algorithms under various prediction settings, achieving an O( P ) competitive ratio matching
   the best-known clairvoyant result under perfect predictions. These algorithms require different
   types of predictions, including job size and minimum/maximum job size predictions, with varying
   guarantees depending on the quality and availability of the predictions. These algorithms leverage
   ML predictions for job sizes to optimize fairness in resource allocation. They extend the algo-
   rithmic idea proposed by Bender et al. (2002), but with predictions, they no longer require prior
   knowledge of exact or extreme job sizes, making them applicable to a broader range of scenarios.
2. Consistency-smoothness trade-off: We explore the trade-off between consistency and smooth-
   ness by introducing RGx with a competitive ratio of O(η 2+2x · P 1−x ). This algorithm is parame-
   terized, allowing users to adjust the guarantees as a function of the prediction error η, based on the
   confidence in the prediction quality.
3. Enhanced robustness via resource augmentation: To address the robustness limitations of O(n ·
   P ) in the RG family, we propose RG+ , round-robin-augmented version of RG, which√achieves
   optimal robustness of O(n) with a (1 + ϵ)-speed and a competitive ratio of O(min{η 3 P , nϵ }).
   We demonstrate how asymptotically optimal robustness can be achieved via resource augmentation
   when the classic technique of preferential round robin fails (Purohit et al., 2018).
4. Extensive experimental validation: We conduct experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
   to evaluate the performance of these algorithms. The experimental results validate our theoret-
   ical analysis and demonstrate that RG+ consistently outperforms other algorithms in practical
   scenarios, showing its robustness and effectiveness.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                      √
The family of the RG algorithms is somewhat reminiscent of the O( P )-competitive algorithm
proposed by Bender et al. (2002). The existing algorithms work in clairvoyant scheduling. They
assume the minimum job size is 1 and a known maximum job size. The assumption is unrealistic,
particularly when the extreme job sizes vary from time to time. Our algorithms extend the existing
work to non-clairvoyant scheduling and overcome these limitations via predictions. The proposed
algorithms allow variable minimum job size and do not require the exact maximum job size.

2     P RELIMINARIES
Problem definition. Consider a job system with a single unit-speed machine and n independent
jobs. The jobs arrive at the machine for processing over time. We use Jj to denote the j-th
arrived job (tie break arbitrarily). Job Jj has a release time rj and a job size p∗j , i.e., it takes
(in total) p∗j time to complete processing job Jj . Jobs are preemptive, which means they can be
preempted during their processing. A preempted job can resume processing later. Let Cj denote
the completion time for job Jj . The stretch Sj for job Jj is the ratio of the response time and job
                  C −r
size, i.e., Sj = jp∗ j . Our objective is to minimize the maximum stretch, known as max-stretch:
                    j
                                               Cj −rj
max-stretch = max1≤j≤n Sj = max1≤j≤n             p∗   .
                                                  j



Related work. We review recent advances in competitive online scheduling with predictions. For
single-machine static scheduling to minimize total completion time, an O(min{ λ1 (1 + 2η            2
                                                                                              n ), 1−λ })-
competitive
Pn             algorithm exists (Purohit et al., 2018), where η is the additive error defined as η =
                ∗
   j=1 |pj − pj |, and λ is a user-defined parameter. Follow-up works analyze robustness-consistency
trade-offs (Wei and Zhang, 2020) and extend the results to dynamic scheduling and parallel machines
(Bampis et al., 2022). For unrelated machine scheduling to minimize makespan, a deterministic
O(min{ log   η log m
          log log m , log m})-competitive algorithm is developed (Li and Xian, 2021), building on
(Lattanzi et al., 2020). Here, the predictions are for machine loads, η is the multiplicative error of the
predictions, and m is the number of machines. For single-machine scheduling to minimize weighted
response time, an O(min{µ3 log(µP ), µ3 log(µD)})-competitive algorithm is developed (Azar et al.,
2021), where µ is the multiplicative error for job size predictions and D is the maximum density
                                                                                        n
ratio. For parallel identical machine scheduling, an O(min{µP, µ log µ + µ log m          })-competitive
                                                                                    2
algorithm is developed to minimize the mean response time, along with an O(µ )-competitive non-
migrative algorithm for minimizing mean stretch (Azar et al., 2022). Our problem is a special case
of minimizing maximum weighted response time, but prior works under the learning-augmented
framework focus on min-sum objective, while our work focuses on min-max. Results on prediction
error metrics (Im et al., 2021), multiple predictions (Dinitz et al., 2022), machine speed predictions
(Balkanski et al., 2023), and stochastic scheduling (Merlis et al., 2023) are also available.

3     O FFLINE , ONLINE CLAIRVOYANT, ONLINE NON - CLAIRVOYANT SCHEDULING
We start with offline scheduling. We show an optimal algorithm with O(n2 log n) run time. We review
the lower bound and competitive algorithms for online clairvoyant scheduling. We consider online
non-clairvoyant scheduling and show a Ω(n) competitive lower bound with an O(n)-competitive
algorithm. Proofs for Section 3.1 and 3.3 are in Appendix A and B.

3.1   O FFLINE SCHEDULING

We have already known that an approximation exists for offline scheduling.
Theorem 3.1 (Bender et al. (1998)). There exists an algorithm that finds a preemptive offline schedule
with max-stretch at most 1 + ϵ times the optimum in time polynomial in n and 1ϵ , for any fixed ϵ > 0.

The (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm is based on a bisection search over the value of the optimal
max-stretch, using Earliest Deadline First (EDF) to check the feasibility of each candidate value.
While the algorithm is polynomial in terms of the number of jobs n and the precision parameter ϵ, it
is not purely polynomial in the input size n. This is because, traditionally, finding the exact minimum
max-stretch was considered to involve an infinite search space, thus requiring a predefined precision


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ϵ to discretize the search space. Bender et al. (2002) propose that the search for the maximum stretch
can be reduced to a finite set of candidates, but they do not formalize this result. Recent work (Benoit
et al., 2021) provides an exact polynomial-time greedy algorithm for the case where all jobs are
released at time 0. This algorithm follows the smallest job size first policy but does not apply to
the general case with arbitrary release times. To close this gap, our first technical contribution is a
formal proof of an exact, polynomial-time offline scheduling algorithm for arbitrary release times.
The insight is identifying an O(n2 )-size list of candidates that contains the optimal max-stretch. We
establish the following result, with the proof provided in Appendix A.
Theorem 3.2 (Optimal Offline Scheduling). There exists an algorithm that finds an offline schedule
with optimal max-stretch in time polynomial in n. It admits an O(n2 log n) implementation.

3.2   O NLINE CLAIRVOYANT SCHEDULING

We consider online clairvoyant scheduling, where we know a job at its release time. We also know
the exact job size p∗j when job Jj is released. This problem has been studied by Bender et al. (1998;
2002). We summarize the key results, including the lower bound and competitive algorithms.
                                             1
Theorem 3.3 (Bender et al. (1998)). No P23 -competitive deterministic clairvoyant algorithm exists.
                                                  √
Theorem 3.4 (Bender et al. (2002)). There exist O( P )-competitive clairvoyant algorithms.

3.3   O NLINE NON - CLAIRVOYANT SCHEDULING

We consider online non-clairvoyant scheduling, where we know a job at its release time but not the
job size p∗j at job Jj ’s release. The job size is revealed only after the job is completed. We give the
lower bound on the competitive ratio for any deterministic algorithm. The key construction of the
adversary is to force the algorithm to allocate no more than a n1 share of processing at some point for
the smallest-sized job, resulting in a stretch of n for that job. Subsequently, the rest of the jobs are
assigned geometrically increasing sizes, ensuring that the optimum max-stretch is approximately 1.
Theorem 3.5 (Non-clairvoyant Lower Bound). No c-competitive deterministic algorithm exists with
c < n for online non-clairvoyant max-stretch scheduling, even if all jobs are released at time 0.
We show Round Robin (RR) scheduling where every job in the system shares an equal amount of
processing power of the machine at any arbitrarily fine time, i.e., with k jobs in the system, each
gets k1 units of the processing done every time unit until any job completes or any job arrives), is an
n-competitive online non-clairvoyant scheduling algorithm.
Theorem 3.6 (n-Competitive RR). RR is n-competitive for online non-clairvoyant scheduling.
We show that any non-lazy algorithm is O(n · P )-competitive. Here, non-lazy means that the
algorithm does not idle the machine unnecessarily when there are active jobs. This result will be used
to establish the robustness of learning-augmented algorithms in the following sections.
Theorem 3.7 (Worst-case Competitive Ratio). Any non-lazy algorithm is (n − 1) · P + 1-competitive.

4     O NLINE SCHEDULING WITH PREDICTIONS
We consider the integration of predictions. Rather than knowing the exact job size, we have a size
prediction pj for job Jj . Initially, we assume that the extreme predictions are known beforehand;
specifically, the algorithm knows the smallest prediction pmin (i.e., min1≤j≤n pj ) and the largest
prediction pmax (max√ 1≤j≤n pj ) at time 0. We present the Relaxed-Greedy algorithm, which
achieves an O(η 3 P ) competitive ratio, where η is the prediction error for job sizes. Next, we
show how to remove this assumption by updating the extreme predictions observed online and
using predictions of the extreme job sizes. We introduce the Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy algorithm,
which uses the prediction of the minimum    √ job size and dynamically updates the maximum job size
prediction, achieving an O(λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P ) competitive ratio, where λ is the prediction error for
the minimum job size. Finally, we present the Predictive Relaxed-Greedy algorithm,   √     which uses
predictions of both extreme job sizes, achieving an O(λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P ) competitive
ratio, where φ is the prediction error for the maximum job size. We begin by outlining the algorithmic
ideas, with proofs for Section 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 provided in Appendix C, E, and F.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   A LGORITHM OVERVIEW

The key algorithmic idea is the reduction to the case with two job sizes. Recall that the stretch is
             C −r
defined as jp∗ j . If there are only two job sizes — one short and the other long — the jobs of the
                j
same type should be executed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner. A short job should be executed
before a long job if the long job is released at the same time as, or later than, the short job. It can
be shown that greedily scheduling the jobs, i.e., always running the job with the minimal stretch,
results in a constant competitive ratio when there are only two job sizes (as shown in Bender et al.
(2002) and Lemma C.6). Clearly, the problem becomes easier when there are only two job sizes. Our
strategy is to reduce the general problem to this two-job-size case via predictions.
We
√
     classify jobs into two categories: job Jj is considered short if its job size prediction pj ≤
  pmin ·pmax
      µ       , where µ is a constant, and long otherwise. We show in Appendix H that the optimal
                   √
choice for µ is 3, though for now, we can ignore this constant. We then approximate the stretch for
                    Cj −rj                            Cj −rj
short jobs by √pmin     ·pmax and for long jobs by pmax ; these are defined to be relaxed stretch. This
construction follows the idea in Bender et al. (2002), but requires both pmin and pmax to account for
that the minimal job size is not necessarily 1, which is assumed p in Bender et al. (2002).  √ This approach
                                                √
overestimates the size of a short job Jj by pmin · pmax ≤ η 2 · p∗min · p∗max = η · P · p∗min ≤ η ·
√                                                                  √
  P · p∗j , resulting in an overestimation by at most a factor of η P . Similarly, it overestimates the size
                          √                            √              q             √                √
of a long job Jj (pj > pmin · pmax ) by pmax ≤ pmin · pmax · ppmax         min
                                                                                ≤ η· P ·η·p∗j = η 2 · P ·p∗j ,
                                                          √
meaning the overestimation
                       √        is at most a factor of η 2 P . Overall, the relaxed stretch overestimates√job
sizes by at most η 2 P . With these approximations, the stretch of a job                               2
                                                                               √Jj is bounded by O(η P )
                                                                             2
times the relaxed stretch, resulting in a competitive ratio loss of O(η P ) (Lemma C.8). However,
the advantage of this approximation is that it reduces the scheduling problem to the easier two-job-
size case. In Appendix H we show that using the square root of pmin · pmax provides the optimal
dependency on P in the competitive ratio, though it is possible to adjust the power to pxmin · p1−x   max for
any 0 < x ≤ 21 , yielding different power dependencies on P in the competitive ratio.
Using predictions to classify jobs as short or long, we greedily schedule the jobs by running the job
with the minimal√relaxed stretch at any time. This heuristic minimizes the relaxed stretch to within a
constant factor ( 3). Finally, we observe that the optimal relaxed stretch is bounded by √η times the
optimal max-stretch (Lemma C.7). The max-stretch bound√from Relaxed-Greedy is O(η 2 P ) of the
optimal relaxed stretch, which is itself bounded by O(η 3 P ) of the optimal max-stretch.

4.2   R ELAXED -G REEDY

One of the assumptions for previous algorithms is that the minimum job size is known to be 1 and
that the maximum job size is also known upfront. We relax these assumptions by setting a threshold
α as the geometric mean of the predicted minimum and maximum job sizes, which serves as the
boundary for classifying jobs as small or large. Our analysis shows that such methods allow the
performance to tie to the prediction errors for these quantities.
Definition 4.1 (α-β Relaxed-Stretch). Define α-β relaxed-stretch S
                                                                 ^j,α,β (t) for job Jj at time t given
                      t−r j                                                    t−rj
α and β: S j,α,β (t) = α if Jj is active at time t and pj ≤ α; Sj,α,β (t) = β if Jj is active at
          ^                                                      ^
time t and pj > α. We drop the prefix α-β when the context is clear.
Definition 4.2 (α-β Short and Long Jobs). Given parameters α and β, a job Jj is said to be short if
pj ≤ α; a job Jj is said to be long otherwise.
                      √
We present an O(η 3 P )-competitive algorithm Relaxed-Greedy    √
                                                                         (RG). Through the execution
                                                                  pmin ·pmax
of RG, parameters α and β are set to be constants: α =              √
                                                                       3
                                                                             and β = pmax . It holds
      √
        pmin ·pmax                                      √
α=        √
             3
                   < pmax = β. Note that the constant 3 in α serves to yield an optimal constant in
                                                                                     √
the competitive ratio. Any constant can replace it and still maintain RG’s O(η 3 P ) competitive
ratio as long as α < β (see Appendix D for a discussion). Algorithm RG maintains the invariant of
running the active job with the largest relaxed-stretch. This means that at any time t, RG looks at all


                                                      5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 1: Relaxed-Greedy
   Data :job size prediction pj upon job release
                                            √ and the extreme predictions pmin and pmax
   Result√:schedule with a max-stretch O(η 3 P ) times the optimum max-stretch
          pmin ·pmax
 1 α ←       √       , β ← pmax
               3
 2 Function relaxedStretch(j, t) // computes job Jj ’s relaxed-stretch at time t
 3    if Jj is completed before t then
 4         t ← Cj // set variable t to be the completion time of Jj
                    t−rj                    t−rj
 5         return    α
                           if pj ≤ α else    β

 6 Relaxed-Greedy maintains the active job (released but not completed job) set U; initially, set U ← ∅.
 7 Event Function JobRelease() // Jj is released
 8    insert Jj into U; run Jj on the machine if U = ∅.
 9 Event Function JobComplete() // Jj has been processed for p∗j unit at time t
10    remove Jj from U.
11    if there is at least one job in U then
12         let Js be the job in U with the largest relaxed-stretch: Js ← arg maxJx ∈U relaxedStretch(x, t),
             with tie breaking by the smaller job index.
13         run Js on the machine.
14    else
15         idle the machine.

16 Event Function JobSwitch() // there exists Jx ∈ U, x ̸= s such that
    relaxedStretch(x, t) > relaxedStretch(c, t), where Jc is the currently running job
17     let Js be the job in U with the largest relaxed-stretch: Js ← arg maxJx ∈U relaxedStretch(x, t), with
         tie breaking by the smaller job index.
18     preempt Jc .
19     run Js on the machine.



     the active jobs and processes the one with the largest relaxed-stretch until the job is completed or
     until there is another active job later with a larger relaxed-stretch. Note that RG does not need the
     knowledge of the prediction error η. The pseudo-code of RG is given in Algorithm 1.
                                √                                                 √       √
     Theorem 4.3 (The O(η 3 P ) Competitive Ratio). Relaxed-Greedy is 3 · η 3 · P -competitive
     for online scheduling with predictions.
     We show that RG is Θ(n · P )-competitive with the worst-case predictions.
     Theorem 4.4 (Robustness of RG). RG is (n − 1) · P + 1-competitive with arbitrarily bad predictions,
     and this bound is tight.
                                          √ √                 √     √
     Remark 4.5. Relaxed-Greedy is 3 ·√ P -consistent, 3 · η 3 P -smooth, and (n − 1) · P + 1-
     robust. It represents a consistency of O( P ) matching (asymptotically) the best-known clairvoyant
     competitive ratio but comes with the worst robustness among non-lazy algorithms.
     Algorithm RG can be implemented with constant run-time for online decision-making. Observe that
     any later-released short (long) job has a smaller relaxed-stretch than any early-released active short
     (long) job. Thus, the short (long) jobs are processed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner, allowing
     us to maintain two queues, one for short and one for long jobs. Determining the job with the largest
     relaxed-stretch requires simply comparing the relaxed-stretch of the jobs at the front of the queues.
     We give RG’s performance for its run-time and space complexity and preemptions.
     Proposition 4.6 (Complexity of RG). Relaxed-Greedy admits an implementation with O(1) run-
     time to make any online decision and O(n) space.
     Proposition 4.7 (Preemptions of RG). Relaxed-Greedy generates a schedule with at most n − 1
     preemptions. Thus, the amortized number of preemptions per job is at most 1.

     4.3     A DAPTIVE R ELAXED -G REEDY

     We remove the assumption of knowing the extreme predictions beforehand and extend RG to
     Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy (ARG). We show that the absence of extreme predictions does not


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                       √
significantly alter the competitive ratio. We show that ARG achieves an O(λ0.5 ·η 2.5 · P ) competitive
ratio, where λ denotes the prediction error for the minimum job size. Instead of knowing the exact
minimum job size prediction, Algorithm ARG can access a black-box ML model that predicts the
minimum job size of all jobs, denoted by pemin . This predicted minimum job size pemin comes with a
                             pe     p∗
prediction error λ = max{ pmin∗   , pmin
                                     e   }. Meanwhile, Algorithm ARG learns pmax along job release.
                              min   min

A key technical challenge in ARG is classifying jobs when α is continuously updated over time.
Dynamically changing the classification of jobs might work, but the proof for its competitive ratio
is difficult to establish (we did not find proof). Our solution overcomes this issue by ensuring that
once a job is classified at its arrival time, based on αrj , it remains unchanged in that classification.
For example, if job Jj is classified as r-long, it remains a long job, regardless of future updates of α.
This enables the competitive analysis for ARG. One innovation of ARG is the use of heterogeneous
predictions, i.e., predictions for different types of quantities, in learning-augmented algorithms. Our
analysis reveals that these different predictions impact the algorithm’s performance differently.
We introduce subscript t to denote the value of a variable at time t. Thus, pmax at time t (denoted
by pmax,t ) represents the maximum job size prediction seen so far, i.e., pmax,t = maxrj ≤t pj .
Parameters α and β are functions in pmin and pmax and thus√ are time-varying. They are updated with
                                                              pemin ·pmax,t
updates of pmax in JobRelease. Formally, ARG sets αt =            √
                                                                     3
                                                                            and βt = max{pmax,t , αt },
where αt and βt denote the values of α and β at time t. We record αrj and βrj for every job Jj .
These values are used to compute the adaptive relaxed-stretch of Jj , defined as follows.
Definition 4.8 (α-β Adaptive Relaxed-Stretch). Define α-β adaptive relaxed-stretch S     \j,α,β (t) for job
                                            t−r j                                                     t−rj
Jj at time t given α and β: S   j,α,β (t) = αr if Jj is active at time t and pj ≤ αrj ; Sj,α,β (t) = βr
                              \                                                         \
                                              j                                                          j
if Jj is active at time t and pj > αrj . We drop the prefix α-β when the context is clear.
Definition 4.9 (α-β r-short and r-long Jobs). Given parameters α and β, a job Jj is said to be r-short
if pj ≤ αrj ; a job Jj is said to be r-long otherwise.

The prefix r for r-short or r-long means that the classification depends on the values of α and β at rj
for job Jj . It is thus possible that a r-short job released later has a larger job size prediction than a
r-long job released earlier. Other than that, ARG maintains the (same) invariant of running the active
job with the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch. The pseudo-code of ARG is given in Appendix E.
                                        √                                                             √
Theorem 4.10  √    (The O(λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P ) Competitive Ratio). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy is 3 ·
λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P -competitive for online scheduling with predictions.
                                                  √ √                  √                 √
Remark 4.11. Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy is 3 · P -consistent, 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P -smooth, and
(n − 1) · P + 1-robust. This robustness result is tight.
The ARG’s performance remains the same as RG with respect to run-time and space complexity and
preemptions. Since the parameters α and β are non-decreasing, it still holds that any later-released
short (long) job has a smaller adaptive relaxed-stretch than any early-released active short (long) job,
allowing ARG to have the same implementation of two FIFO job queues as RG does.
Proposition 4.12 (Complexity of ARG). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy admits an implementation
with O(1) run-time to make any online decision and O(n) space.
Proposition 4.13 (Preemptions of ARG). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy generates a schedule with at
most n − 1 preemptions. Thus, the amortized number of preemptions per job is at most 1.

The competitive result in this section does not hold if the algorithm is instead given the predicted
maximum job size and has to estimate the minimum job size prediction online. There seems to be an
asymmetric importance for the knowledge about extreme job sizes. Having some knowledge of the
minimum job size at the start may be a requirement.

4.4   P REDICTIVE R ELAXED -G REEDY

If the prediction error(s) for extreme job sizes are believed to be lower than η, the algorithm can use
an additional prediction about the maximum job size. We extend RG to Predictive Relaxed-Greedy
(PRG), which needs access to predictions of both the minimum job size, denoted by pemin , and
                                                                                             pe   p∗
the maximum job size, denoted by pemax , of all jobs, with prediction errors λ = max{ pmin    ∗ , pmin
                                                                                                   e   }
                                                                                                min   min


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                   √ e e
                 pe     p∗                                                          pmin ·pmax
and φ = max{ pmax ∗   ,  max
                         e   }. PRG   sets static α and β independent of time: α =             and
                  max pmax                                                             µ
                                                          √   q
                                                                p e
β = pemax , where µ is a symbolic constant µ = max{ 3, pemin + ϵ} for any small fixed ϵ > 0.
                                                                 max
This ensures α < β. Algorithm PRG maintains the same invariant of running the active job with the
largest relaxed-stretch determined by the above α and β.
                                                      √
Theorem 4.14 (The O(λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · √P ) Competitive Ratio). Predictive Relaxed-
Greedy is max{ µ3 , µ} · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P -competitive.
                                                                         √                       √
With reasonable predictions where pemin ≤ pemax and φ ≤ η, PRG is 3 · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η 2 · P -
                                                     e         e
                                                q epmin > 3 · pmax ), however, the competitive
competitive. With extremely bad predictions (i.e.,
                                                                                        √
                                                                                                 ratio
                                                  pmin
depends on the prediction values and becomes ( pe + ϵ) · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P . This can
                                                   max
be avoided by switching√to ARG when pemin > 3 · pemax . √        √ of ARG and√
                                                          Combining                 PRG guarantees
the competitive ratio of 3 · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P or 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P .
                                                           √
Remark 4.15. Predictive Relaxed-Greedy is max{ µ3 , µ} · P -consistent, max{ µ3 , µ} · λ0.5 · φ0.5 ·
               √
η · max{η, φ} · P -smooth, and (n − 1) · P + 1-robust. This robustness result is tight. The algorithm
admits an implementation with O(1) run-time to make any online decision and O(n) space and
generates a schedule with at most n − 1 preemptions.

5    C ONSISTENCY-S MOOTHNESS TRADE - OFFS
We study the trade-off between consistency and smoothness for RG by altering the parameters (α
and β) in the definition of relaxed-stretch. The idea directly applies to ARG and PRG, so this paper
does not discuss them. We introduce a hyper-parameter x (0 ≤ x ≤ 12 ). Denote RGx to be Relaxed
                                                   px   p1−x
Greedy parametrized by x, where RGx sets α =          √ max and β = pmax and runs the same process
                                                    min
                                                        3
                                                                            1
                                                                                                 x
as RG. This constructs a family of algorithms and RG is one member RG . We show that RG
                                                                            2

interpolates between the First Come First Serve
                                              √     (denoted by FIFO) algorithm and RG, where
FIFO is O(P )-competitive and RG is O(η 3 · P )-competitive. See Appendix G for proofs for this
section and Appendix H for the construction process of RGx .
                                                                              √
Theorem 5.1 (The O(η 2+2x · P 1−x ) Competitive Ratio). RGx (0 ≤ x ≤ 21 ) is 3 · η 2+2x · P 1−x -
competitive for online scheduling with predictions.

                                                                   where RG0 decays to FIFO, as
If we set x = 0 with α = pmax , β = pmax , we have a singular point√
every job would be classified as a short job. We drop the constant 3 here as this term in relaxed-
stretch does not improve the performance of RG0 . Algorithm RG0 with α = pmax , β = pmax , or
FIFO, achieves an O(P ) competitive ratio.
Theorem 5.2 (The O(P ) Competitive Ratio). RG0 , or FIFO, is P -competitive.
                                                 √
Setting x = 12 gives the best consistency (O( P )) but the worst smoothness (O(η 3 )). In contrast,
setting x = 0 with α = pmax , β = pmax gives the worst consistency (O(P )) but the optimal
smoothness as a function on η (O(1)), for which the prediction quality does not affect the performance
at all. If we exclude the singular point RG0 , i.e., 0 < x ≤ 12 , increasing hyper-parameter x decreases
the power of P from 1 to 12 and increases that of η from 2 to 3 (a visualization of the trade-offs
is in Appendix I). Practitioners can choose the hyper-parameter x based on the confidence of the
prediction quality: high-quality predictions deserve a high x; low-quality predictions a low x.

6    B OUNDING ROBUSTNESS VIA RESOURCE AUGMENTATION
We introduce a general method for bounding robustness. The goal is to address the weak robustness
(O(n · P )) of the learning-augmented algorithms, i.e., they cannot deal with the worst predictions.
We first show that the recent technique of Preferential Round Robin (PRR) (Purohit et al., 2018),
which allocates partial processing power to multiple algorithms, fails to address this issue with
the max-stretch metric. This shows the necessity of resource augmentation (Kalyanasundaram


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and Pruhs, 2000). We produce a family of RR-augmented algorithms with asymptotically optimal
robustness and
             √ near-optimal consistency. Algorithm RG+ , one member of the family, is (1 + ϵ)-speed
O(min{η 3 · P , nϵ })-competitive. Proofs are in Appendix J.
We first review the PRR method. Suppose we have two algorithms, A and B, with competitive ratios
cA and cB . Combining the two algorithms by giving x (0 < x < 1) proportion of processing power
to A and 1 − x processing power to B constructs a competitive ratio of min{ cxA , 1−x cB
                                                                                          } for some
metrics (e.g., total completion time) under static scheduling (all jobs are released at time 0). This
method, however, requires a critical assumption that each algorithm, when given a processing power
less than 1, has a competitive ratio scaled by the allocated speed. This assumption, unfortunately,
fails to hold in general and, in particular, not for the max-stretch scheduling.
                                                                                          ϵ
Theorem 6.1 (Motivation for Resource Augmentation). Any algorithm is at best 1−ϵ             · n + 1-
competitive, if given a (1 − ϵ)-speed machine, for any 0 < ϵ < 1.

With a slower machine, any algorithm is Ω(n)-competitive, matching the non-clairvoyant lower
bound. This means a (slower) speed takes away the advantages of clairvoyance, echoing a similar
phenomenon as previously observed by Kalyanasundaram and Pruhs (2000). As a result, the
assumption for PRR does not hold. Theorem 6.1 also suggests that RR has an asymptotically
optimal competitive ratio (O(n)) with a slower machine. This leads to the design of RR-augmented
algorithms with resource augmentation. The idea is to augment a base algorithm (e.g., RG) with a
higher-speed machine, using the additional speed to run RR concurrently at unit speed.
Definition 6.2 (Monotonicity (Purohit et al., 2018)). A non-clairvoyant scheduling algorithm is
called monotonic if given two instances with identical inputs and actual job sizes (p∗1 , ..., p∗n ) and
(p∗ ′1 , ..., p∗ ′n ) such that p∗j ≤ p∗ ′j for all j, the objective function value found by the algorithm for the
first instance is no higher than that for the second.
Lemma 6.3. All algorithms mentioned in this paper (RG, ARG, PRG, RGx , and RR) are monotonic.
Theorem 6.4 (RR-augmented Algorithms). Given a monotonic algorithm A with competitive ratio
cA , one can obtain a (1 + ϵ)-speed min{cA , nϵ }-competitive (RR-augmented) algorithm.
                                                                                              √          √
Remark 6.5. RR-augmented RG (denoted by RG+ ) is (1 + ϵ)-speed min{ 3 · η 3 · P , nϵ }-
                                                                            √              √
competitive. Similarly, we produce ARG+ ((1 + ϵ)-speed min{ 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P , nϵ }-competitive),
                                                                               √                                 +
PRG+ ((1+ϵ)-speed min{max{ µ3 , µ}·λ0.5 ·φ0.5 ·η·max{η, φ}· P , nϵ }-competitive), and PRGx
                             √
((1 + ϵ)-speed min{ 3 · η 2+2x · P 1−x , nϵ }-competitive). While preserving their consistency, these
algorithms achieve asymptotically optimal robustness, or strictly optimal with 2-speed augmentation.


7    E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate Greedy-with-Rounding (GWR) (Bender et al., 2002), RR, RG, ARG, and RG+ on
synthetic and real-world datasets ((Google, 2019), (Alibaba, 2023), and Azure (Cortez et al., 2017))
in minimizing max-stretch, variance of stretch, and mean response time. Stretch variance measures
fairness by comparing jobs to each other; the mean response time measures total efficiency. This
section presents the results for the max-stretch minimization. The rest of the results and discussions
are in Appendix K, L, M, and N. Code is available on GitHub (Anonymous, 2024).
We measure the performance ratio, which is the ratio between the max-stretch obtained by an
algorithm and the optimum. Algorithm 2 is used to compute the optimal max-stretch. We set RG+ to
be (1 + 0.3)-speed RR-augmented RG, i.e., it runs RG at unit speed and RR at speed 0.3. The job
sizes are generated following exponential distributions. With the maximum job size ratio P , we set
p∗j to max{1, − log X · A} where X is a random variable with X ∼ U(0, 1) and A a scaling factor to
ensure p∗j ≤ P . Given η and p∗j , we set pj ← p∗j · exp(Y ) with Y ∼ U(− log η, log η). We generate
50 independent instances for every problem set defined by n, P , η, and the range of release times.
Figures 1 to 3 are the results for synthetic datasets. Figures 1 and 2 present the performance ratio
under different n and P with perfect predictions. RG and ARG outperform GWR and RR in most
scenarios. RG+ , with a slight 0.3 speed augmentation, consistently achieves the best performance.
Figure 3 presents the results under an increasing η. While the performance ratio of RG, ARG, and
RG+ increases with η, RG+ is robust to prediction error with a bounded performance ratio.


                                                        9
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                         Performance Ratio
                                                                  20


                                                  Performance Ratio


                                                                                              Performance Ratio


                                                                                                                                           Performance Ratio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Performance Ratio
                                                                                                              60



  Performance Ratio
                  10.0                                                                                                                                     1.5                                           2                                      1.5
                                                                  15
                       7.5                                                                                    40
                                                                  10                                                                                       1.0                                                                                  1.0
                       5.0                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                              20                                           0.5                                                                                  0.5
                                                                      5
                       2.5
                                                                                                                  0                                        0.0                                           0                                      0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                             R
                                                                           RG

                                                                             G
                                                                                      RR

                                                                                        +


                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                       RG

                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                  RR

                                                                                                                                    +



                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                    RG

                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                               RR

                                                                                                                                                                                 +


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                              R
                             RG

                                            G
                                          RR

                                            +


                                                                                                                                                                                                        GW
                                                                      GW


                                                                                                                  GW
                                                                          AR


                                                                                                                      AR


                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                          GW


                                                                                                                                                               GW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GW
                                                                                     RG


                                                                                                                                 RG


                                                                                                                                                                                                             RG
                                     AR


                                                                                                                                                                          AR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                                         RG


                                                                                                                                                                              RG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RG
                                                                  2.5                                         2.5
  Performance Ratio


                                                                                              Performance Ratio


                                                                                                                                                                                         Performance Ratio
                                                  Performance Ratio
                      2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6


                                                                                                                                           Performance Ratio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Performance Ratio
                                                                  2.0                                                                                      2.0                                                                                  5
                      1.5                                                                                     2.0                                                                                        3
                      1.0                                         1.5                                                                                      1.5                                                                                  4
                                                                                                              1.5                                                                                        2
                      0.5                                         1.0                                                                                                                                                                           3
                      0.0                                                                                     1.0                                          1.0                                                                                  2
                              R
                             RG

                                            G
                                          RR

                                            +


                                                                             R
                                                                           RG

                                                                             G
                                                                           RR

                                                                             +


                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                       RG

                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                             RR

                                                                                                                               +
                       GW


                                                                      GW


                                                                                                                  GW
                                     AR


                                                                          AR


                                                                                                                           AR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RR

                                                                                                                                                                                                               +
                                         RG


                                                                          RG


                                                                                                                            RG


                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                    RG

                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                               RR

                                                                                                                                                                                 +


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GW


                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                                                                               GW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GW
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RG
                                                                                                                                                                          AR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                                                                                              RG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RG
     Figure 1: Performance ratios with increasing jobs. Each box represents                                                                    Figure 2: Performance ratios with an increasing P . The job sizes are
     the distribution of the performance ratios. The number of jobs is 1000                                                                    drawn from interval [1, P ], where P is set to 1 (R1C1), 2 (R1C2),
     (R1C1), 2000 (R1C2), 3000 (R1C3), 4500 (R2C1), 6000 (R2C2), and                                                                           5 (R1C3), 10 (R2C1), 20 (R2C2), and 40 (R2C3). The number of
     10000 (R2C3), released uniformly in [0, 5000] with sizes in [1, 10].                                                                      jobs is fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at
     Prediction error is 1 (i.e., pj = p∗
                                        j ).                                                                                                   random. The prediction error is set to 1.
                                   GWR
                      6            RG                                                                                                                          1.45
Performance Ratio


                                   ARG                                                                                                                                    GWR


                                                                                                                                         Performance Ratio
                      5            RR                                                                                                                          1.40       RG
                                   RG+                                                                                                                                    ARG
                      4                                                                                                                                        1.35       RR
                                                                                                                                                                          RG+
                      3                                                                                                                                        1.30
                      2                                                                                                                                        1.25
                                                                                                                                                               1.20
                      1
                                                                                                                                                               1.15
                               1          2   4                           8     16      32                            64   128    512                          1.10
                                                                          Prediction Error                                                                                1          2                         3          4                              5        6
     Figure 3: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error η. The                                                                                                                                 Prediction Error
     prediction error increases from 1 to 512. The number of jobs is fixed at                                                                  Figure 4: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error (1 to
     4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The                                                                        6) on real-world trace-log data from Google Cloud.
     job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].
        400     GWR                                                                                                                                            65     GWR
                                                                                                                                         Performance Ratio
Performance Ratio


        350     RG                                                                                                                                             60     RG
                ARG                                                                                                                                            55     ARG
        300     RR                                                                                                                                                    RR
                RG+                                                                                                                                            50     RG+
        250                                                                                                                                                    45
        200                                                                                                                                                    40
        150                                                                                                                                                    35
        100                                                                                                                                                    30
         50                                                                                                                                                    25
               1           2          3          4          5           6                                                                                             1          2                             3         4                               5        6
                                                                           Prediction Error                                                                                                                  Prediction Error
      Figure 5: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error (1 to                                                                   Figure 6: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error (1 to
      6) on real-world trace-log data from Azure Cloud.                                                                                        6) on real-world trace-log data from Alibaba Cloud.



      Figure 4 to 6 presents the results on real-world trace-log data under different η. RG and ARG have
      strong performance under perfect predictions. With limited job size information, the performance
      ratio of ARG increases the fastest with increasing η. RG’s performance ratio falls between ARG and
      GWR under imperfect predictions. Overall, RG+ achieves the best performance at all times.


       8                       C ONCLUSION

      Under classic scheduling settings, we propose an exact polynomial-time offline algorithm, establish
      a non-clairvoyant competitive lower bound of Ω(n), and present a matching O(n)-competitive
      algorithm. We develop a family of algorithms for online scheduling to minimize max-stretch with
      different types of predictions. These algorithms offer various
                                                               √     guarantees and leverage predictions
      from multiple sources. They achieve a consistency of O( P ) matching the best-known clairvoyant
      result but exhibit relatively weak robustness of O(n · P ). We demonstrate how a consistency-
      smoothness trade-off can be achieved with a parameterized algorithm. Furthermore, we show how
      resource augmentation can overcome the poor robustness guarantee, resulting in asymptotically
      optimal robustness. Through experiments, we demonstrate the practicality of these algorithms. We
      anticipate that many of the techniques we employ are applicable to other problems.
      Many questions remain open for future work. We have not established whether the cubic dependency
      on η is optimal for learning-augmented algorithms. Therefore, analyzing the lower bound on the
      dependency on η remains a subject for future study. While we have shown that our construction
      of RGx achieves the best possible trade-off for consistency and smoothness under this method, we
      have not demonstrated the Pareto-optimality of the trade-off. Establishing this remains an interesting
      direction for future work. Additionally, extending the approach to parallel identical machines seems
      to be a promising direction.


                                                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback and constructive suggestions,
which have significantly improved this work. Professor Albert Zomaya and Dr Wei Li would like to
acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant (DP200103494). Dr
Wei Li acknowledges the support of the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the Discovery
Early Career Researcher Award (DE210100263). Dr Tianming Zhao expresses his deepest gratitude
to his family. In particular, Tianming is grateful to his wife, Min Li, and his newborn son, Michael
Renqian Zhao, for their love, encouragement, and inspiration throughout this journey. Their support
has been an invaluable source of motivation.

R EFERENCES
Alibaba. Alibaba cluster data, 2023. URL https://github.com/alibaba/clusterdata.
  GitHub repository.
Maryam Amiri and Leyli Mohammad-Khanli. Survey on prediction models of applications for
 resources provisioning in cloud. J. Netw. Comput. Appl., 82(C):93–113, March 2017. ISSN
 1084-8045. doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2017.01.016. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.
 2017.01.016.
Anonymous. Experiment code and datasets for competitive fair scheduling with predic-
  tions. https://anonymous.4open.science/r/NIPS Competitive-Fair-Scheduling-with-Predictions-
  3388, 2024. [Online; accessed Date-of-Access].
Yossi Azar, Stefano Leonardi, and Noam Touitou. Flow time scheduling with uncertain processing
  time. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  STOC 2021, page 1070–1080, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 9781450380539. doi: 10.1145/3406325.3451023. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3406325.3451023.
Yossi Azar, Eldad Peretz, and Noam Touitou. Distortion-Oblivious Algorithms for Scheduling on Mul-
  tiple Machines. In Sang Won Bae and Heejin Park, editors, 33rd International Symposium on Algo-
  rithms and Computation (ISAAC 2022), volume 248 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Infor-
  matics (LIPIcs), pages 16:1–16:18, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2022. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
  für Informatik. ISBN 978-3-95977-258-7. doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ISAAC.2022.16. URL https://
  drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.ISAAC.2022.16.
Kenneth R. Baker. Introduction to sequencing and scheduling. Wiley, 1974.
Eric Balkanski, Tingting Ou, Clifford Stein, and Hao-Ting Wei. Scheduling with speed predictions.
  In Jarosław Byrka and Andreas Wiese, editors, Approximation and Online Algorithms, pages
  74–89, Cham, 2023. Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-49815-2.
Evripidis Bampis, Konstantinos Dogeas, Alexander Kononov, Giorgio Lucarelli, and Fanny Pascual.
  Scheduling with untrusted predictions. In Lud De Raedt, editor, Proceedings of the Thirty-First
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pages 4581–4587. International
  Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/636.
  URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/636. Main Track.
Michael A. Bender, Soumen Chakrabarti, and S. Muthukrishnan. Flow and stretch metrics for
 scheduling continuous job streams. In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
 Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’98, page 270–279, USA, 1998. Society for Industrial and Applied
 Mathematics. ISBN 0898714109.
Michael A. Bender, S. Muthukrishnan, and Rajmohan Rajaraman. Improved algorithms for stretch
 scheduling. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
 rithms, SODA ’02, page 762–771, USA, 2002. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
 ISBN 089871513X.
Anne Benoit, Redouane Elghazi, and Yves Robert. Max-stretch minimization on an edge-cloud
  platform. In 2021 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS),
  pages 766–775, 2021. doi: 10.1109/IPDPS49936.2021.00086.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eli Cortez, Anand Bonde, Alexandre Muzio, Mark Russinovich, Marcus Fontoura, and Ricardo
  Bianchini. Resource central: Understanding and predicting workloads for improved resource
  management in large cloud platforms. In Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems
  Principles, pages 153–167, 2017.
Michael Dinitz, Sungjin Im, Thomas Lavastida, Benjamin Moseley, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Algo-
 rithms with prediction portfolios. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho,
 and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages
 20273–20286. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Google. Google Cluster Workload Traces 2019, 2019. URL https://research.google/
  resources/datasets/google-cluster-workload-traces-2019/. Accessed:
  2023-08-20.
Sungjin Im, Ravi Kumar, Mahshid Montazer Qaem, and Manish Purohit. Non-clairvoyant scheduling
  with predictions. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
  Architectures, SPAA ’21, page 285–294, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450380706. doi: 10.1145/3409964.3461790. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1145/3409964.3461790.
Bala Kalyanasundaram and Kirk Pruhs. Speed is as powerful as clairvoyance. J. ACM, 47(4):
  617–643, jul 2000. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/347476.347479. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1145/347476.347479.
Silvio Lattanzi, Thomas Lavastida, Benjamin Moseley, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Online scheduling
  via learned weights. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
   crete Algorithms, SODA ’20, page 1859–1877, USA, 2020. Society for Industrial and Applied
   Mathematics.
Shi Li and Jiayi Xian. Online unrelated machine load balancing with predictions revisited. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6523–6532. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/li21w.html.
Nadav Merlis, Hugo Richard, Flore Sentenac, Corentin Odic, Mathieu Molina, and Vianney Perchet.
  On preemption and learning in stochastic scheduling. In Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 21–27
  Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/merlis23a/merlis23a.
  pdf.
Manish Purohit, Zoya Svitkina, and Ravi Kumar. Improving online algorithms via ml predictions.
 In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors,
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Alexander Wei and Fred Zhang. Optimal robustness-consistency trade-offs for learning-augmented
  online algorithms. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
  9781713829546.
Tianming Zhao, Wei Li, and Albert Y. Zomaya. Real-time scheduling with predictions. In 2022
  IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS), pages 331–343, 2022. doi: 10.1109/RTSS55097.
  2022.00036.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TABLE OF N OTATIONS

See Table 1 for the table of notations used in the analysis.


       S                                                    Meaning
      n                                              the number of jobs
      Jj                                               job with index j
      rj                                              release time of Jj
      p∗j                                                job size of Jj
      pj                                          job size prediction for Jj
      Cj                                            completion time of Jj
       t                                                 a time instant
      CjA                     completion time of Jj in the schedule constructed by algorithm A
       I                  a problem instance (in proofs for Section 6 this I refers to problem input)
      σ                             a schedule constructed for some problem instance I
                                                                                    p∗   p
       ηj                                 prediction error for Jj : ηj = max{ pjj , p∗j }
                                                                                         j
                                                                                                        p∗    p
       η                   total prediction error: η = max1≤j≤n ηj = max1≤j≤n max{ pjj , p∗j }
                                                                                          j
  pmin , p∗max
   ∗
                       minimum/maximum job size: p∗min = min1≤j≤n p∗j and p∗max = max1≤j≤n p∗j
                                                                               p∗
      P                                maximum ratio of any two job sizes: P = pmax
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                             min
                                                                               Cj −rj
       Sj                                         stretch of job Jj : Sj =       p∗
                                                                                  j
                                                                                                             C A −rj
      SjA               stretch of job Jj in the schedule constructed by algorithm A: SjA = jp∗
                                                                                                j
       S∗                             optimal max-stretch for some problem instance I
      SA                     max-stretch achieved by algorithm A for some problem instance I
        π                                            an ordering of jobs
  pmin , pmax     minimum/maximum job size prediction: pmin = min1≤j≤n pj and pmax = max1≤j≤n pj
  pemin , pemax                      predicted minimum/maximum job size of all jobs
                                                                                 pe      p∗
        λ                      prediction error associated with pemin : λ = max{ p∗min , pmin
                                                                                          e   }
                                                                                             min   min
                                                                                         pe        p∗
         φ                    prediction error associated with pemax : φ = max{ pmax∗  , max
                                                                                          e    }
                                                                                    max pmax

   S
   ^ j,α,β (t)                  α-β relaxed-stretch of job Jj at time t, abbreviated as S
                                                                                        fj (t)
    S^ j,α,β      α-β relaxed-stretch of job Jj at its completion, abbreviated as S
                                                                                  fj when α and β are clear
      Sg α,β       maximum α-β relaxed stretch of all jobs: Sg  α,β = max1≤j≤n Sj,α,β , abbreviated as S
                                                                                   ^                    e
       f∗
       S                           optimal max-relaxed-stretch for some problem instance I
       fA
       S                  max-relaxed-stretch achieved by algorithm A for some problem instance I
        dej                     deadline for job Jj to achieve the optimal max-relaxed-stretch
     Pj (t)
     f                                                              fj (t) = {Jx |d
                   predecessors of Jj (in terms of dej ) at time t: P             f x ≤ dj , Jx active at time t}
                                                                                         e
     F
     fj (t)          followers of Jj (in terms of dj ) at time t: Fj (t) = {Jx |dx > dj , Jx active at time t}
                                                  e               f             f      e
     C]  EDF
                         completion time of Jj in the schedule constructed by EDF with deadlines dej
       j
    S^ OP T              max-relaxed-stretch of the optimal schedule for the max-stretch problem
        τj                       the earliest time after which no job delays/⊘-delays Jj
    pmax,t                 maximum job size prediction seen by time t: pmax,t = maxrj ≤t pj
   S
   \ j,α,β (t)            α-β adaptive relaxed-stretch of job Jj at time t, abbreviated as S
                                                                                           cj (t)
    S\ j,α,β            α-β adaptive relaxed-stretch of job Jj at its completion, abbreviated as Scj
      Sd α,β        maximum α-β adaptive relaxed stretch: Sd α,β = max1≤j≤n Sj,α,β , abbreviated as S
                                                                                \                    b
       c∗
       S                      optimal max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch for some problem instance I
       cA
       S              max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch achieved by algorithm A for some problem instance I
        dbj                deadline for job Jj to achieve the optimal max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch
     P
     cj (t)        predecessors of Jj (in terms of dbj ) at time t: Pcj (t) = {Jx |d
                                                                                   c x ≤ dj , Jx active at time t}
                                                                                           b
     F
     cj (t)                                                        cj (t) = {Jx |d
                     followers of Jj (in terms of dbj ) at time t: F             c x >  d
                                                                                        b j , Jx active at time t}

     C[  EDF
                         completion time of Jj in the schedule constructed by EDF with deadlines dbj
       j
     OP T
    S\                max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch of the optimal schedule for the max-stretch problem
                                              Table 1: A table of notations.


                                                           13
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 2: Offline Scheduling
   Data :every job Jj with release time rj and job size p∗j
   Result :schedule with optimal max-stretch
          ri −rj                             r −r
 1 S ← { ∗
          p −p∗
                 |1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, p∗i ̸= p∗j , p∗i −pj∗ ≥ 0} ∪ {0}
             j   i                           j   i
 2 view set S as a sorted index-based list.
 3 l, r, σo , mso ← 0, |S|, ∅, ∞
 4 while l < r do
 5       k ← ⌊ l+r 2
                     ⌋
 6       assign dj ← rj + Sk · p∗j for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n.
 7       order jobs by increasing dj ; tie breaks by smaller p∗j first and tie breaks arbitrarily for the rest.
 8       schedule jobs with respect to this order by always running the active arrived job with the highest
           priority (the most front in the order); let the resulting schedule be σ.
 9       ms ← max-stretch of σ
10       if ms < mso then
11            σo , mso ← σ, ms
12       if every job Jj completes no later than dj in σ then
13            r←k
14       else
15            l ←k+1
16   return σo



     A    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3.1

     An exact minimum (optimal) max-stretch exists. This is a product of the following general result.
     Theorem A.1 (Min Max-user-defined-stretch). Fix any positive vector Γ = (γ1 , γ2 , ..., γn ). There
     exists a schedule, for every problem instance, which achieves a minimum max-user-defined-stretch,
     defined as SfΓ = max1≤j≤n S               fΓj = Cj −rj .
                                   fΓj , where S
                                                       γj


     In the analysis of this section, we use the optimality of EDF: EDF minimizes the maximum lateness
     of the jobs and always finds a feasible schedule if one exists.
     The max-stretch is a special case of the max-user-defined-stretch with Γ = (p∗1 , p∗2 , ..., p∗n ). We show
     a polynomial-time exact algorithm exists. Observe that we can construct an optimal schedule using
     the Earliest Deadline First (EDF) algorithm if we know the optimal max-stretch. If S ∗ is the optimal
     max-stretch, we can assign a deadline dj ← rj + S ∗ · p∗j to every job Jj and schedule jobs by EDF.
     This schedule has max-stretch S ∗ by the optimality of EDF. Essentially, EDF uses the deadlines to
     determine a job ordering and schedules jobs according to the job priority indicated by the ordering.
     We can construct the optimal schedule if we know the optimal job ordering, which a bisection search
                                                   r −r                               r −r
     can find on the following set. We let S = { p∗i −pj∗ |1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, p∗i ̸= p∗j , p∗i −pj∗ ≥ 0} ∪ {0} be the
                                                    j   i                              j     i
     set of all intersections (x-axis) of lines y = rj + p∗j · x and a zero element. Every element x ∈ S
     corresponds to an order of jobs via assigning dj ← rj + x · p∗j and ordering jobs by increasing dj .
     One of these orders is the optimal job order. A bisection search on sorted S can efficiently find it.
     The pseudo-code of this algorithm is given in Algorithm 2.
     The proof for Theorem A.1 uses the following observation.
     Observation A.2. If a schedule exists with max-user-defined-stretch x, there exists a schedule with
     max-user-defined-stretch y for any y ≥ x. If no schedule achieves max-user-defined-stretch x, no
     schedule achieves max-user-defined-stretch y for any y ≤ x.

     Proof. Suppose a schedule σ achieves a max-user-defined-stretch x. Construct another schedule σ ′ ,
     which is identical to σ except for the job Jk that is completed as the last job in σ. Preempt Jk in σ ′
     before its completion and resume Jk later so that the user-defined-stretch for job Jk reaches exactly
     y. Thus, σ ′ achieves a max-user-defined-stretch y.
     Suppose no schedule achieves max-user-defined-stretch x. Suppose, for proof by contradiction, that
     there exists a schedule σ that achieves max-user-defined-stretch y with y ≤ x. Construct a schedule


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


σ ′ following the same procedure as above to produce σ ′ with max-user-defined-stretch x. This
contradicts the idea that no schedule achieves max-user-defined-stretch x.

We introduce some definitions and notations. Given an order of jobs π = (Jj1 , Jj2 , ..., Jjn ) indicating
job priority (the more front in the order, the higher the priority is), define the priority schedule with
respect to π to be the schedule constructed from always running the active arrived job with the highest
priority and preempting the running low priority job if necessary; the priority schedule is denoted by
P S(π).
For any x ∈ S, define π[x] to be the job order constructed by ordering jobs in increasing deadlines,
where dj = rj + x · γj , with tie-breaking by smaller γj first and further tie-breaking by the smaller
job index first (or any arbitrary order). View set S as a sorted index-based list S = (x0 , x1 , ..., xκ ).
Note that x0 = 0 by definition. We have [x0 , x1 ), [x1 , x2 ), ..., [xκ−1 , xκ ), [xκ , ∞) forms a partition
of non-negative numbers.
Define a mapping Ψ that maps positive numbers to orders of jobs. Order Ψ(x) is defined as follows.
Set deadline dj = rj + x · γj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Order the jobs by increasing deadlines. If two jobs
have the same deadline, the one with a smaller weight (γj ) comes first. If two jobs have the same
deadline and size, i.e., the same release times and job sizes, the one with a smaller job index comes
first (this tie-breaking criterion can be arbitrary). The resulting order is Ψ(x).

Proof for Theorem A.1. We make two observations: (1) P S(π[0]) does not achieve a max-user-
defined-stretch 0; (2) P S(π[x]) achieves a max-user-defined-stretch at most x, for a large x. To
                                                n
                                                        p∗
                                       P
                               max1≤j≤n rj +
see observation 2, let x′ =    min1≤j≤n γj
                                          j=1 j
                                                and P S(π[x′ ]) achieves a max-user-defined-stretch
at most x′ . By Observation A.2, there exists the largest index p such that P S(π[xp ]) does not
achieve a max-user-defined-stretch xp . We show that the optimal value for max-user-defined-stretch
                                                                              n
                                                                                  p∗
                                                               P
                                                              max1≤j≤n rj +
                                                                 j=1 j
exists in interval [xp , xp+1 ], where xp+1 denotes    min1≤j≤n γj     if p = κ. By definition of p,
P S(π[xp+1 ]) achieves a max-user-defined-stretch at most xp+1 . Let X ∗ be the max-user-defined-
stretch achieved by schedule P S(π[xp ]). Clearly, X ∗ > xp .
We first show that P S(π[x]) is identical to each other for all x ∈ [xp , xp+1 ), by showing that
Ψ(xp ) = Ψ(x) for any x ∈ [xp , xp+1 ). Suppose, for proof by contradiction, there exists y ∈
(xp , xp+1 ) such that Ψ(xp ) ̸= Ψ(y). Let k be the smallest index such that Ψ(xp )k ̸= Ψ(y)k (the k-th
elements of Ψ(xp ) and Ψ(S ∗ ) are non-equal). For reference, we let Ψ(xp )k = Jq and Ψ(y)k = Jl .
Clearly, Jq is in front of Jl in Ψ(xp ), but Jl is in front of Jq in Ψ(y), by the choice of k. This means
that Jq has a smaller deadline than Jl in Ψ(xp ), but a larger deadline in Ψ(y), by the definition of Ψ.
We have:
                        rq + xp · γq < rl + xp · γl and rq + y · γq > rl + y · γl
This means that γq > γl and rq < rl . However, we have:
                                                rl − rq
                                         xp <           < y < xp+1
                                                γq − γl
This contradicts with xp+1 being the smallest element (in S) greater than xp or a new element should
be in S, by the definition of xp+1 . Thus, we must have Ψ(xp ) = Ψ(y) for all y ∈ (xp , xp+1 ), and
P S(π[x]) is identical to each other for all x ∈ [xp , xp+1 ).
If X ∗ < xp+1 , no schedule achieves a max-user-defined-stretch at most x for any x < X ∗ , as
P S(π[x]) achieves the same max-user-defined-stretch X ∗ for all xp ≤ x < X ∗ . In this case,
X ∗ is the minimum (optimal) max-user-defined-stretch. If X ∗ ≥ xp+1 , no schedule achieves a
max-user-defined-stretch at most x for any x < xp+1 , as P S(π[x]) achieves the same max-user-
defined-stretch X ∗ for all x ∈ [xp , xp+1 ). In this case, P S(π[xp+1 ]) achieves the minimum (optimal)
max-user-defined-stretch xp+1 .

For the rest of this section, we restrict our discussion to the max-stretch, i.e., let Γ = (p∗1 , p∗2 , ..., p∗n )
in the max-user-defined-stretch, and prove Theorem 3.2. We can find the optimal job order with set
          r −r                                 r −r
S (S = { p∗i −pj∗ |1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, p∗i ̸= p∗j , p∗i −pj∗ ≥ 0} ∪ {0}). View set S as a sorted index-based
            j   i                                   j    i
list S = (x0 , x1 , ..., xκ ). We have [x0 , x1 ), ..., [xκ−1 , xκ ), [xκ , ∞) forms a partition of non-negative


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


numbers. The optimal stretch S ∗ must be within one of the intervals. Suppose S ∗ ∈ [xp , xp+1 ), where
we use xκ+1 to represent ∞ for convention. Then, P S(π[xp ]) achieves the optimal max-stretch.
Lemma A.3. There exists x ∈ S such that P S(π[x]) achieves the optimal max-stretch.

Proof. This is a product of Theorem A.1.

Let x∗ ∈ S be the critical element with P S(π[x∗ ]) achieving the optimal max-stretch. Observe the
following property enabling the bisection search.
Lemma A.4. At lease one job Jj in P S(π[x]) completes later than rj + x · p∗j , for x ∈ S, x < x∗ .
Every job Jj in P S(π[x]) completes no later than rj + x · p∗j , for x ∈ S, x > x∗ .

Proof. We first show that P S(π[x]) contains at least one job Jj that completes later than rj + x · p∗j
for x ∈ S, x < xp . Suppose otherwise for proof by contradiction. There exists x̂ ∈ S, x̂ < xp such
that every job Jj completes no later than rj + x̂ · p∗j in P S(π[x̂]). Then, we have the max-stretch of
P S(π[x̂]) to be at most x̂ < xp , which contradicts the fact that the optimal max-stretch is at least xp .
We then show that every job Jj in P S(π[x]) completes no later than rj + x · p∗j for x ∈ S, x > xp . If
x ∈ S, x > xp , then it holds that x ≥ xp+1 > S ∗ . Since there exists a schedule with S ∗ max-stretch,
where every job Jj completes no later than rj + S ∗ · p∗j , a schedule where every job Jj completes no
later than rj + x · p∗j exists for x > S ∗ . By optimality of EDF, P S(π[x]) (x > xp ) must ensure that
every job Jj completes no later than its deadline, rj + x · p∗j .

Lemma A.5. Algorithm 2 admits an O(n2 log n) implementation.

Proof. Computing S takes O(n2 ) time, as there are O(n2 ) pairs of jobs. For the same reason, S has
O(n2 ) elements. Sorting S takes O(n2 log n2 ) = O(n2 log n) time. We sort all jobs by their release
time before entering the bisection search, which takes O(n log n) time. The bisection search loop
experiences O(log n2 ) = O(log n) iterations. Consider any iteration. Computing the job priority
takes O(n) + O(n log n) = O(n log n) time. Computing the priority schedule with the static job
priority takes O(n log n). This is achieved by maintaining a priority queue of active arrived jobs
and processing events, including job release and job completion. There are O(n) events for job
release and job completion. Every event takes O(log n) to process with the priority queue. Apart
from computing the priority schedule, the rest operations in the iteration take O(n) time. Therefore,
an iteration of the bisection search takes O(n log n) + O(n log n) + O(n) = O(n log n) time. The
overall complexity is:
                         O(n2 log n) + O(log n) · O(n log n) = O(n2 log n)
Theorem A.6 (Theorem 3.2 Restated). Algorithm 2 finds an offline schedule with optimal max-stretch
in time polynomial in n. It admits an O(n2 log n) implementation.

Proof for Theorem 3.2. Let the optimal stretch be S ∗ . Let xp ∈ S such that P S(π[xp ]) achieves
max-stretch S ∗ by Lemma A.3. We show that one of the bisection search iterations visits the xp
and finds the optimal job order π[xp ]. First observe that the bisection search procedure terminates
within a finite number of iterations. Let li , ri denote the left and right ends of the searching interval
at the start of the i-th iteration of the search (initially, l0 = 0 and r0 = |S|). We show the invariant
that, if li ≤ p < ri , either the i-th iteration finds xp or li+1 ≤ p < ri+1 . The i-th iteration finds
xp if ⌊ li +r                                                    li +ri            li +ri
           2 ⌋ = p. We consider the other two cases: ⌊ 2 ⌋ < p and ⌊ 2 ⌋ > p. Suppose
              i

       li +ri
k = ⌊ 2 ⌋ < p. With k < p, at least one job Jj in P S(π[xk ]) completes later than rj + xk · p∗j
in this iteration by Lemma A.4. Then, we have li+1 = k + 1 ≤ p (by k, p both integers) and
p < ri = ri+1 . Suppose k = ⌊ li +r     2 ⌋ > p. With k > p, every job Jj completes no later than
                                          i

              ∗
rj + xk · pj in this iteration by Lemma A.4. Then, we have li+1 = li ≤ p and p < k = ri+1 .
Observe that we have le ≥ re , where e is the total number of iterations, at the termination of the
search. This means that one of the iterations must visit the xp and finds the optimal job order π[xp ],
which shows the correctness of the algorithm. Further, Lemma A.5 shows that the algorithm admits a
polynomial-time O(n2 log n) implementation.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3.3
Theorem B.1 (Theorem 3.5 Restated). No c-competitive deterministic algorithm exists with c < n
for online non-clairvoyant max-stretch scheduling, even if all jobs are released at time 0.

Proof for Theorem 3.5. We use proof by contradiction. Suppose there exists a c-competitive deter-
ministic algorithm A with c < n. Consider n identical jobs all with job size 1 to be released at time
0. Run A against this set of jobs. Without loss of generality, let J1 be the job with the least amount of
the processed size l1 . We have l1 ≤ n1 by the pigeonhole principle.
Construct the problem instance consisting n (n ≥ 2) jobs to be released at time 0, with job sizes
p∗1 = n1 + ϵ, p∗2 = ψ − ( n1 + ϵ), p∗3 = ψ 2 − ψ, p∗4 = ψ 3 − ψ 2 , ..., p∗n = ψ n−1 − ψ n−2 . Here,
p∗j = ψ j−1 − ψ j−2 for j ≥ 3, and ψ is a large constant ψ = max{2, n−c     n
                                                                               } and ϵ is a small constant
           1 1     1     1                     1     1      1
ϵ = min{ n , c − c·ψ − n }. Observe that c − c·ψ − n > 0 and thus ϵ > 0 by the definition of ψ.
Run A against this job set. Since the algorithm is deterministic, job J1 will be completed after time 1.
The max-stretch achieved by A on this instance is more than p1∗ = 1/( n1 + ϵ) = 1+n·ϵ       n
                                                                                               . Consider
                                                                      1
the schedule that runs J1 , J2 , ..., Jn sequentially in the order of job index. The stretch for job J1 is
S1 = 1. The stretch for job J2 is S2 = ψ/(ψ − n1 − ϵ). Observe that job Jj completes at time ψ j−1
for j ≥ 3. The stretch for job Jj is:
                                            ψ j−1        ψ
                                          j−1     j−2
                                                      =
                                        ψ     −ψ        ψ−1
                             ψ           ψ
for all j ≥ 3. Observe that ψ−1 ≥ 1 and ψ−1 ≥ ψ/(ψ − n1 − ϵ) by the definition of ϵ. Thus, the
                                          ψ
max-stretch achieved by this schedule is ψ−1 . Therefore, the minimum max-stretch for this job set is
         ψ
at most ψ−1 . However, we have the ratio between the max-stretch achieved by A and the optimal
schedule more than:
                         n
                       1+n·ϵ
                                      1 − ψ1                  1 − ψ1
                               =n·             ≥n·                               =c
                         ψ
                        ψ−1
                                     1+n·ϵ           1 + n · ( 1c − c·ψ
                                                                     1
                                                                        − n1 )

which contradicts the competitive ratio of A.
Theorem B.2 (Theorem 3.6 Restated). RR is n-competitive for online non-clairvoyant scheduling.

Proof for Theorem 3.6. With RR, job Jj is processed by at least p∗j amount during time rj (when the
job arrives) and rj + n · p∗j . Therefore, Cj ≤ rj + n · p∗j and Sj ≤ n for every 1 ≤ j ≤ n. We have
max-stretch = max1≤j≤n Sj ≤ n = n · 1. Observe that the optimal schedule has a max-stretch of at
least 1. Therefore, RR is n-competitive.

We observe instantaneous fairness achieves global fairness under the non-clairvoyant setting. This
processor-sharing policy is necessary for non-clairvoyant scheduling, i.e., any algorithm must adapt a
certain degree of processor sharing to be competitive. We define processor-sharing as follows.
Definition B.3 (k processor-sharing). An algorithm is said to be k processor-sharing for a problem
instance I, if it holds either (1) Jj is completed before t, or (2) Jj has been processed for at least
t−rj
  k unit, for any job Jj and any time instant t ∈ [rj , ∞), in the execution of A on I.

Intuitively, a k processor-sharing algorithm allocates at least k1 unit of processing power to all active
jobs. By definition, RR is n processor-sharing for every problem instance. We show the criticality of
processor-sharing in obtaining competitiveness in online non-clairvoyant scheduling.
Theorem B.4 (Equivalence of Competitiveness and Processor-sharing). In online non-clairvoyant
scheduling, a deterministic algorithm is c-competitive if it is c · S ∗ processor-sharing for any problem
instance I with the minimum max-stretch S ∗ . Any c-competitive algorithm must be c · n processor-
sharing for every problem instance I.
Remark B.5. Any k1 processor-sharing algorithm (for every problem instance) is k2 processor-
sharing for any k1 ≤ k2 . As a corollary of Theorem B.4, any k processor-sharing algorithm (for
every problem instance) is k-competitive.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof for Theorem B.4 uses the following bound for the minimum max-stretch.
Observation B.6. The minimum max-stretch is at most n for any problem instance with n jobs.

Proof. The max-stretch obtained by RR on any problem instance is at most n. Therefore, the
minimum max-stretch for problem instance I is at most n.

Proof for Theorem B.4. Fix a problem instance. If an algorithm is c · S ∗ processor-sharing for that
instance, every job Jj completes before rj + c · S ∗ · p∗j with Sj ≤ c = c · S ∗ . The max-stretch is at
most c times the optimum, so the algorithm is c-competitive. Below we consider the reverse.
Let A be any c-competitive algorithm. Suppose, for proof by contradiction, that there exists a
problem instance I with minimum max-stretch S ∗ , such that there exists a job Jj and a time instant
                                                                     t′ −r
t′ ∈ [rj , ∞), where Jj has been processed for less than q = c·n j at time t′ . Construct another
instance I ′ , which contains the same job set as I except for the job Jj with p∗j = q. Run A on I ′ .
The schedule is the same as the one generated for I before and at time t′ . Therefore, Jj is completed
                                                               t′ −r
after t′ for I ′ . The max-stretch achieved on I ′ is more than q j = c · n. The minimum max-stretch
for I ′ is at most n by Observation B.6. Thus, algorithm A achieves a max-stretch on I ′ more than c
times the optimum, which contradicts the c competitive ratio.
Theorem B.7 (Theorem 3.7 Restated). Any non-lazy algorithm is (n − 1) · P + 1-competitive.

Proof for Theorem 3.7. Pick any job Jj . The algorithm is processing active jobs in time [rj , Cj ].
               C −r      (n−1)·p∗     ∗
                                max +pmin
We have Sj = jp∗ j ≤           p∗         = (n − 1) · P + 1 and max-stretch = max1≤j≤n Sj ≤
                   j                min
(n − 1) · P + 1.

C    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.2

Define a heuristic relaxed-stretch based on two parameters α and β (α < β).
Definition C.1 (α-β Relaxed-Stretch). Define α-β relaxed-stretch S ^j,α,β (t) for job Jj at time t
                            t−rj                                                      t−rj
given α and β: Sj,α,β (t) =
                ^
                                αif Jj is active at time t and pj ≤ α; S
                                                                       ^ j,α,β (t) =       if Jj is
                                                                                            β
active at time t and pj > α. We use S ^j,α,β to denote the α-β relaxed-stretch at the completion
                     Cj −rj                      C −r
of job Jj : Sj,α,β =
            ^
                        α   if pj ≤ α; Sj,α,β = j j if pj > α. Fixing a problem instance of
                                       ^
                                                       β
online scheduling with predictions and a schedule, we use max-relaxed-stretch, denoted by Sg       α,β ,
to represent the maximum α-β relaxed stretch of all jobs: Sα,β = max1≤j≤n Sj,α,β . We drop the
                                                             g                    ^
subscripts α and β from the notations when the context is clear for simplicity. We also drop the prefix
α-β when the context is clear.

Classify jobs into short and long jobs according to their job size predictions, with a given α and β.
Definition C.2 (α-β Short and Long Jobs). Given parameters α and β, a job Jj is said to be short if
pj ≤ α; a job Jj is said to be long otherwise.

Fix a problem instance I. Run RG. Let S RG and S ∗ denote the max-stretch achieved by RG and
the optimal max-stretch of I. Let Sg          f∗ denote the max-relaxed-stretch achieved by RG
                                       RG and S

and the optimal max-relaxed-stretch of I. The quantity S  f∗ exists due to Theorem A.1, regardless
of the values of α and β. We study the relations between S RG , Sg            f∗ , and S ∗ . We begin
                                                                         RG , S

with showing Sg RG ≤ 3 · S  f∗ . We consider how much RG differs from an optimal execution by
examining the maximum amount of processing units a job can be delayed compared with the optimal
schedule. Define dej to be the deadline of completing job Jj to achieve the max-relaxed-stretch, i.e.,
           f∗ · α for short job Jj and dej = rj + S
dej = rj + S                                       f∗ · β for long job Jj . A schedule achieves the
optimal max-relaxed-stretch if every job Jj completes no later than dej . We study how much any job
Jj can be delayed after dej in RG.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Observe that EDF finds a feasible schedule meeting all deadlines if one exists. The schedule obeying
EDF with deadlines dej achieves the optimal max-relaxed-stretch S        f∗ . Define set P
                                                                                         fj (t) = {Jx |d
                                                                                                       fx ≤
                                   fj (t) = {Jx |d
dej , Jx active at time t} and set F             fx > dej , Jx active at time t} to be the predecessors and
followers (in terms of the deadlines) of Jj at time t.
Definition C.3 (Definition of Delay). Job Jj is said to be delayed by another job Jk at time t, if the
following four conditions are simultaneously met: (1) Jj is not completed or not released at time t, (2)
Jk ∈ F            fj (t) ̸= ∅, and (4) RG is processing Jk at time t with max f S
      fj (t), (3) P                                                                    f (t) < S
                                                                             Jx ∈Pj (t) x
                                                                                                fk (t).

   ]
If C EDF and C RG denote the completion time for J in the (optimal) schedule constructed by EDF
     j          j                                  j
       f∗ and the schedule by RG, it follows C RG ≤ C]EDF +
                                                            R
with S                                           j        j                    dt. The following
                                                                  any job delays Jj at time t
two lemmas hold with any given α and β (α < β).
Lemma C.4 (No Job Delays a Long Job). A long job is never delayed, for any α and β (α < β).

Proof. Fix any long job Jj and a time t before the completion of Jj . Suppose, for proof by
contradiction, that another job Jk ∈ F
                                     fj (t) delays Jj at time t. Job Jk must be a short job, since
otherwise, we would have rj < rk and S  fj (t) > S                     fk > dej ⇒ rk + S
                                                  fk (t). We also have d                 f∗ · α >
       ∗
rj + S · β ⇒ rk > rj . Thus, Jj is active at time t. We have:
     f

                      S        fk (t) ⇒ t − rj < t − rk ⇒ t > rk · β − rj · α
                      fj (t) < S
                                          β        α               β−α

Observe, by the definition of delay, that Jk ∈ F                   f∗ · α > rj + S
                                               fj (t) implies rk + S             f∗ · β. It holds that:

                                f∗ · β − S
                          (rj + S        f∗ · α) · β − rj · α
                     t>                                              f∗ · β = dej
                                                              = rj + S
                                        β−α
Thus, no job delays Jj before time dej . In such a case, however, Jj completes no later than dej , which
is earlier than t, contradicting the definition of delay.
                                                                                              f∗ ·α,
Lemma C.5 (Bound on the Delay for a Short Job). A short job Jj completes no later than rj +3· S
for any α and β (α < β).

Proof. We claim that any short job Jj can only be delayed before time dej , i.e., some job Jk ∈ F  fj (t)
delays Jj at some time t implies t < dej . We show this via proof by contradiction. Fix a short job Jj .
Suppose another job Jk ∈ F  fj (t) delays Jj at some time t ≥ dej . Job Jj must be active at time t. Job
Jk must be a long job, since otherwise, we would have Jk ∈ F   fj (t) implying dfk > dej , which means
rk > rj and Sfj (t) > S
                      fk (t). We have:

                      S        fk (t) ⇒ t − rj < t − rk ⇒ t < rj · β − rk · α
                      fj (t) < S
                                          α        β               β−α

With Jk ∈ F                     f∗ · β > rj + S
          fj (t), it holds rk + S             f∗ · α. We have:

                                         f∗ · α − S
                          rj · β − (rj + S        f∗ · β) · α
                     t<                                              f∗ · α = dej
                                                              = rj + S
                                        β−α
which contradicts Jk delays job Jj at time t ≥ dej .
Next, consider any short job Jj . Define τj to be the earliest time after which no job delays Jj , i.e.,
for any time t after τj and before the completion time of Jj , the processor always processes a job
from Pfj (t) when Pfj (t) ̸= ∅, and τj is the earliest time instant such that the condition holds (τj is
the last time Jj is delayed). Consider set P  fj (τj ). Observe that every job Jx ∈ P fj (τj ) is delayed
by the job (call it Jq ) running at time instant τj , since dfx ≤ dej and dej < deq . It follows P fj (τj )
contains only short jobs, by Lemma C.4. Observe that, for any job Jx ∈ Pj (τj ), we have τj ≤ d
                                                                           f                        fx , or


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


equivalently rx ≥ τj − S f∗ · α, as job Jx is delayed at τj . We bound the total amount of delay on Jj
                  ∗                                                             f∗ . We have two cases.
   P
by Jx ∈Pfj (τj ) px . Consider the optimal schedule constructed by EDF with S

                                                                                                   f∗ · α
                                                        fj (τj ) are released no earlier than τj − S
Case 1 (τj < rj ). In the optimal schedule, all jobs in P
                                                          ∗
and no later than τj and completed no later than τj + S · α. We have:
                                                        f
                          X
                                p∗x ≤ τj + Sf∗ · α − (τj − S f∗ · α) = 2 · Sf∗ · α
                        Jx ∈P
                            fj (τj )



Case 2 (τj ≥ rj ). In the optimal schedule, all jobs in P
                                                        fj (τj ) (including job Jj ) are released no earlier
           ∗
than τj − S · α and completed no later than dj = rj + S
          f                                      e          f∗ · α. We have:
                  X
                          p∗x ≤ dej − (τj − S
                                            f∗ · α) = rj + 2 · S  f∗ · α − τj ≤ 2 · S f∗ · α
               Jx ∈P
                   fj (τj )


Thus, the completion time for a short job Jj in RG is at most dej + Jx ∈Pfj (τj ) p∗x ≤ rj +3· S
                                                                                               f∗ ·α
                                                                   P



    f∗ and Sg
Let S       RG                                                                      f∗ and RG.
               be the relaxed-stretch of Jj in the schedule constructed by EDF with S
     j      j

                                                    RG                              RG
                                                        f∗ for any long job Jj and Sg      f∗
Lemma C.6. For any given α and β (α < β), it holds Sg
                                                    j  ≤S                           j  ≤ 3·S
for any short job Jj .

Proof. Pick any job Jj . If Jj is a long job, it follows by Lemma C.4 that:
                                 Z
              CjRG ≤ C ] EDF +
                         j                              dt = C]EDF ⇒ S
                                                               j
                                                                     g RG
                                                                       j  ≤Sf∗ ≤ S
                                                                             j
                                                                                 f∗
                                        any job delays Jj at time t

If Jj is a short job, it follows by Lemma C.5 that:
                                        RG
                          RG
                               Cj           − rj             f∗ · α) − rj
                                                   (rj + 3 · S
                         Sg  =                   ≤                           f∗
                                                                          =3·S
                          j
                                           α                  α

Denote SjRG and Sg
                 j
                  RG
                     to be the stretch and the relaxed-stretch of job Jj in the execution of RG. The
                                                                                           √
                                             f∗ with S ∗ and S RG with SgRG                  p  ·p
following lemmas show the relation between S                             j   by using α = min
                                                                                  j
                                                                                               √ max
                                                                                                        3
and β = pmax . Lemma C.7 requires α < β and pj ≤ β for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n to hold; Lemma C.8
requires the specific values for α and β to hold. They do not hold under any arbitrary α and β.
           f∗ ≤ η · S ∗ , for any given α < β and pj ≤ β for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n.
Lemma C.7. S


Proof. Denote S^ OP T to be the max-relaxed-stretch of the optimal schedule for the max-stretch

problem (the schedule with max-stretch S ∗ ). It follows S
                                                         f∗ ≤ S
                                                              ^ OP T . Consider the optimal schedule

with max-stretch S ∗ . Let Cj∗ and S
                                   ^
                                    j
                                     OP T denote the completion time of job J and the relaxed-stretch
                                                                             j
                                                                      ^OP  T    C ∗ −rj    C ∗ −rj
of J in this schedule. Pick any job J . It follows p ≤ α and S
    j                                     j              j             j     = j   α    ≤ j  pj    ≤
    Cj∗ −rj        ∗                                                  ^OP  T    Cj∗ −rj   Cj∗ −rj
η · p∗ ≤ η · S , if Jj is a short job. It follows pj ≤ β and Sj              =     β    ≤ pj                ≤
         j
   Cj∗ −rj
η · p∗ ≤ η · S ∗ , if Jj is a long job. Combining these two cases gives us S
                                                                           f∗ ≤ S
                                                                                ^ OP T ≤ η · S ∗ .
       j


                                   √              √                                               √
Lemma C.8. It holds SjRG ≤             3 · η2 ·            RG
                                                      P · Sg
                                                           j  for any long job Jj and SjRG ≤ √η3 · P · Sg
                                                                                                        RG
                                                                                                        j  for
                               √
                                   pmin ·pmax
any short job Jj , with α =          √
                                        3
                                              and β = pmax .


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                           √
                                                                               pmin ·pmax
Proof. Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is a long job, it holds that pj > α =         √
                                                                                    3
                                                                                          . We have:

                CjRG − rj    CjRG − rj β             β              √         pmax
         SjRG =      ∗    =                  RG
                                             j ·η·
                                      · ∗ ≤ Sg           < Sg RG
                                                             j ·η·    3· √
                   pj            β      pj           pj                     pmin · pmax
                                                    s
                        √    r
                                pmax           √      η · p∗max   √         √
             ≤ SgRG
                 j ·η·    3·         ≤ SgRG
                                         j ·η·   3·     ∗        = 3 · η 2 · P · SgRG
                                                                                   j
                                pmin                  pmin /η

If job Jj is a short job, we have:
         CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj α                       η · p∗min · η · p∗max   η √ g
                                                                  p
SjRG =             ≤           =                 RG
                                                 j ·
                                          · ∗ ≤ Sg                    √                  ≤ √   · P · SjRG
            p∗j         p∗min        α     pmin                          3 · p∗min           3
                                                                   p∗
The derivation uses the observation: pmax ≤ η · p∗max , pmin ≥                          ∗
                                                                    η , and pmin ≤ η · pmin .
                                                                    min


Combining the above results completes the proof for Theorem 4.3.
                                                           √     √
Theorem C.9 (Theorem 4.3 Restated). Relaxed-Greedy is 3 · η 3 · P -competitive for online
scheduling with predictions.

Proof for Theorem 4.3. Consider the execution of RG. Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is a long job, we
have, by Lemmas C.8, C.6, and C.7, that:
                     √        √            √       √           √           √
              SjRG ≤ 3 · η 2 · P · SgRG
                                         ≤ 3 · η2 · P · Sf∗ ≤ 3 · η 3 · P · S ∗
                                     j

If job Jj is a short job, we have, by Lemmas C.8, C.6, and C.7, that:
                            η √              η √                 √       √
                                                           f∗ ≤ 3 · η 2 · P · S ∗
                  SjRG ≤ √ · P · Sg    RG
                                       j  ≤ √ · P ·3·S
                             3                3
                                              √       √               √    √
Therefore, we have S RG = max1≤j≤n SjRG ≤ 3·η 3 · P ·S ∗ . RG is 3·η 3 · P -competitive.

We show that RG is Θ(n · P )-competitive with the worst-case predictions.
Theorem C.10 (Theorem 4.4 Restated). RG is (n − 1) · P + 1-competitive with arbitrarily bad
predictions, and this bound is tight.

Proof for Theorem 4.4. The non-lazy RG is (n − 1) · P + 1-competitive by Theorem 3.7. To see the
bound is tight, we show that, for any small ϵ > 0, there exists a set of n jobs with the associated
predictions such that the max-stretch obtained by RG is at least (n − 1) · P + 1 − ϵ times the optimum.
                                     ϵ·P                             ∗                     n4 ·P 2
Fix any 0 < ϵ < 1. Let ω = (n−1)·P     +(1−ϵ) . Construct n jobs: p1 = 1, r1 = 0, p1 = ω 2 + 3 and
p∗j = P, rj = (1 − ω) + (j − 2) · P, pj = 1 for all j ≥ 2. For this instance, we have pmin = 1 and
pmax = p1 . The optimal schedule processes job J1 , J2 , ..., Jn in order and has max-stretch 1 + Pω .
Algorithm RG will classify job J1 as a long job and the rest as short jobs. In the execution of RG, job
                                              r                        fj (t) for t ∈ (rj + √ rj , C RG ]
J1 is not processed in the intervals (rj + √p1j−1 , CjRG ] as S
                                                              f1 (t) < S
                                                                                               p1 −1 j
for all 2 ≤ j ≤ n. Thus, before CnRG , job J1 has been processed for at most:
                              n                             n
                              X          rj                X   (1 − ω) + (j − 2) · P
                  (1 − ω) +         √          = (1 − ω) +        q                  <1
                              j=2
                                        p1 − 1             j=2
                                                                    n4 ·P 2
                                                                            +3−1
                                                                     ω2

At CnRG , jobs J2 , ..., Jn are completed, leaving J1 to be completed at time (n − 1) · P + 1. The
max-stretch obtained by RG is (n − 1) · P + 1, which is (n − 1) · P + 1 − ϵ times 1 + Pω , the optimum
max-stretch.

We show RG’s performance for its run-time and space complexity and preemptions.
Lemma C.11. A short job Jj remains to have the largest relaxed-stretch among active jobs for all
time t ≥ t′ before its completion if it had the largest relaxed-stretch among active jobs at some time
t′ .


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Suppose job Jj has the largest relaxed-stretch among active jobs at time t′ . For any short job
Jk active at time t′ , we have S           fk (t′ ) ⇒ rj ≤ rk . Fix any time t ≥ t′ . Any short job Jk active
                                fj (t′ ) ≥ S
at time t (including those released after t′ ) has rj ≤ rk and, thus, S fj (t) ≥ S
                                                                                 fk (t). For any long job Jk
                ′           t−rj       t−rk
released after t , we have α ≥ β ⇒ Sj (t) ≥ Sk (t), as rj ≤ rk and α < β. For any long job Jk
                                                f        f
                            t′ −rj       ′             β·r −α·rk          β·r −α·rk
active at time t′ , we have  α      ≥ t −rk ⇒ t′ ≥ j
                                       β                  β−α     ⇒t≥ j    β−α        ⇒S fj (t) ≥ S
                                                                                                  fk (t).



Theorem C.12 (Theorem 4.6 Restated). Relaxed-Greedy admits an implementation with O(1)
run-time to make any online decision and O(n) space.



Proof for Theorem 4.6. Main two First-In-First-Out (FIFO) queues: short queue and long queue. The
short/long queue contains short/long jobs in order of release time. The algorithm always processes the
job with the largest relaxed-stretch at the front of the two queues and removes a job from the (front of
the) queue when the job is completed. We claim that one of the jobs at the front of the queues has the
                                                                                       t−r
overall largest relaxed-stretch at any time t. To see this, it holds that rj ≤ rk ⇒ α j ≥ t−r      α ⇒
                                                                                                    k


fj (t) ≥ S
         fk (t) for any short jobs Jj , Jk , and that rj ≤ rk ⇒  t−r j   t−r
                                                                  β ≥ β        ⇒S
S                                                                            k   fj (t) ≥ Sfk (t) for any
long jobs Jj , Jk . Therefore, Lines 17 and 22 in Algorithm 1 each require O(1) time to run. The rest
operations take O(1) time to run. Finally, since the algorithm maintains at most all jobs in memory
and a constant number of support variables, the space required is O(n).



Instead of running JobSwitch at every time t, the algorithm may compute a critical time t′ such that
t′ −rj    ′

   α   = t −r
            β , if a long job Jk is currently being processed, where Jj and Jk are the short (if there
              k


are any) and long jobs at the front of the queues. Update or re-compute this t′ if Jk is completed, or a
new short job is released when there is no short job prior to the job’s release. The algorithm calls
JobSwitch only at time t′ , which minimizes the number of function calls. This is supported by the
observation that JobSwitch is executed only when a long job is being processed by Lemma C.11.
Theorem C.13 (Theorem 4.7 Restated). Relaxed-Greedy generates a schedule with at most n − 1
preemptions. Thus, the amortized number of preemptions per job is at most 1.



Proof for Theorem 4.7. Preemptions are triggered by JobSwitch, which is not triggered while a
short job is being processed by Lemma C.11. A long job may be preempted by short jobs; these short
jobs, however, will not be preempted by Lemma C.11. Thus, the number of preemptions is bounded
by the total number of short jobs, which is at most n − 1. No preemptions occur if all jobs have
the same job size prediction. Therefore, the amortized number of preemptions (per job) is at most
n−1
  n ≤ 1.



D    D ISCUSSION OF THE CONSTANT IN R ELAXED -S TRETCH FOR S ECTION 4.2
                                     √
We show that replacing the constant 3 in α with any other constant maintains RG’s competitive
ratio, as long as α < β. The idea applies to the family of RG-based algorithms, including ARG,
PRG, RGx , and their RR-augmentations. For simplicity, we focus our discussion on RG.
                         q                 √
                                             p   ·p
Fix any constant µ (µ > ppmax
                            min
                                ). Set α = minµ max and β = pmax in RG. It holds α < β. With
parameters α and β, we (re-)use the definitions, lemmas, and notations from Section 4.2. We show
the following theorem.
                                                        √                        √
                                                                                   p   ·p
Theorem D.1. Relaxed-Greedy is max{µ, µ3 } · η 3 · P -competitive with α = minµ max , β =
                q
pmax , and µ > ppmax
                   min
                       , for online scheduling with predictions.


                                                     22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 3: Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy
   Data :job size prediction pj upon job release and a√prediction for minimum job size pemin
   Result :schedule with a max-stretch O(λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P ) times the optimum max-stretch
              e
 1 pmin ← pmin , pmax ← −1, α ← −1, β ← −1
 2 Function relaxedStretch(j, t) // computes adaptive relaxed-stretch for job
    Jj at t
 3     if Jj is completed before t then
 4          t ← Cj
 5       if pj ≤ αrj then
                     t−r
 6            return αr j
                         j

 7       else
                       t−r
 8              return βr j
                         j


 9 Event Function JobRelease() // job Jj is released at time rj
10    if U = ∅ then
11        run Jj on the machine.
12       insert Jj into U.
                                     √
                                       pmin ·pmax
13       pmax ← max(pmax , pj ), α ←     √
                                            3
                                                  , β ← max(pmax , α), αrj ← α, βrj ← β
14   The other functions (JobComplete, JobSwitch) remain the same as in Algorithm 1.


                                                                                                √
                                                                                                 pmin ·pmax
     Proof. Consider the execution of RG. Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is a long job (pj > α =       µ       ),
     we have:
                    CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj β                 β                    pmax
         SjRG =          ∗    =            · ∗ ≤ Sg   RG
                                                      j ·η·
                                                                  RG
                                                                  j ·η·µ· √
                                                               < Sg
                       pj            β      pj              pj                 pmin · pmax
                               s
                                 η · p∗max             √                 √                  √
                 ≤ SgRG
                                           = µ · η 2 · P · Sg
                                                            RG                f∗ ≤ µ · η 3 · P · S ∗
                                                               ≤ µ · η2 · P · S
                     j ·η·µ·       ∗                        j
                                 pmin /η
     where the second last inequality is by Lemma C.6, and the last inequality is by Lemma C.7. If job Jj
     is a short job, we have:
                                                                           √
                  CjRG − rj      CjRG − rj       CjRG − rj    α              pmin · pmax
          SjRG =       ∗     ≤        ∗       =            ·  ∗   = SgRG
                                                                      j  ·
                      pj            pmin             α       pmin             µ · p∗min
                           η · p∗min · η · p∗max    η √                    √                   √
                         p
                    RG                                        RG    3            f∗ ≤ 3 · η 2 · P · S ∗
               ≤ Sgj ·                           = · P · Sg   j   ≤ ·η· P ·S
                               µ · p∗min            µ               µ                   µ
     where the second last inequality is by Lemma C.6, and √
                                                           the last inequality is by Lemma C.7. Therefore,
     we have S RG = max1≤j≤n SjRG ≤ max{ µ3 , µ} · η 3 · P · S ∗ .
                                                                                  √
     The implications
             √           of Theorem D.1 are as follows. Altering the constant 3 in α preserves RG’s
     O(η 3 · P ) competitive ratio, i.e., the choice does not affect the asymptotic performance guarantee.
     This opens the door to searching for the appropriate
                                               √           constant for specific applications via algorithm
     engineering. In√addition, choosing µ = 3 yields the optimal constant   √ in the competitive ratio, as
     max{ µ3 , µ} ≥ 3 for all µ > 0 and the minimum is obtained at µ = 3. This justifies our choice of
     √
       3 in the definition of α.

     E    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.3
     We introduce subscript t to denote the value of a variable at time t. Thus, pmax at time t (denoted
     by pmax,t ) represents the maximum job size prediction seen so far, i.e., pmax,t = maxrj ≤t pj .
     Parameters α and β are functions in pmin and pmax and thus√ are time-varying. They are updated with
                                                                   pemin ·pmax,t
     updates of pmax in JobRelease. Formally, ARG sets αt =            √
                                                                          3
                                                                                 and βt = max{pmax,t , αt },


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where αt and βt denote the values of α and β at time t. We record αrj and βrj for every job Jj .
These values are used to compute the adaptive relaxed-stretch of Jj , defined as follows.
Definition E.1 (α-β Adaptive Relaxed-Stretch). Define α-β adaptive relaxed-stretch S      \j,α,β (t) for job
                                         t−r j                                                         t−rj
Jj at time t given α and β: S
                            \j,α,β (t) =  αr   if Jj is active at time t and p j ≤ αrj ; S
                                                                                         \j,α,β (t) = βr
                                              j                                                          j

if Jj is active at time t and pj > αrj . We use S
                                                \j,α,β to denote the α-β adaptive relaxed-stretch
                                        Cj −r j                      Cj −rj
at the completion of job Jj : Sj,α,β = αr if pj ≤ αrj ; S
                               \                           \j,α,β = βr      if pj > αrj . Fixing a
                                                  j                             j

schedule, we use max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch, denoted by Sd     α,β to represent the maximum α-β
adaptive relaxed-stretch of all jobs: Sα,β = max1≤j≤n Sj,α,β . We drop the subscripts α and β from
                                      d                 \
the notations and the prefix α-β when the context is clear for simplicity.

The classification of job Jj now depends on the relationship between pj and αrj .
Definition E.2 (α-β r-short and r-long Jobs). Given parameters α and β, a job Jj is said to be
r-short if pj ≤ αrj ; a job Jj is said to be r-long otherwise.
Definition E.3 (Minimum max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch). We use Sd     ∗
                                                                     α,β to denote the minimum
max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch, given any α and β. The existence of this quantity is due to Theorem
A.1. We drop the subscripts α and β from the notations when the context is clear.

Define dbj to be the deadline of completing job Jj to achieve the minimum max-adaptive-relaxed-
                          c∗ · αr for r-short job Jj and dbj = rj + S
stretch, i.e., dbj = rj + S                                         c∗ · βr for r-long job Jj . A schedule
                                 j                                         j

achieves the optimal max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch if every job Jj completes no later than dbj . Define
    cj (t) = {Jx |d
set P               cx ≤ dbj , Jx active at time t} and set F
                                                            cj (t) = {Jx |d
                                                                          cx > dej , Jx active at time t} to
be the predecessors and followers of Jj at time t in terms of minimizing the max-adaptive-relaxed-
stretch.
Definition E.4 (Definition of ⊘-delay). Job Jj is said to be ⊘-delayed by another job Jk at time t, if
the following four conditions are simultaneously met: (1) Jj is not completed or not released at time
t, (2) Jk ∈ F           cj (t) ̸= ∅, and (4) ARG is processing Jk at time t with max c S
            cj (t), (3) P                                                                     c (t) <
                                                                                    Jx ∈Pj (t) x
S
ck (t).

The symbol ⊘ is only to distinguish ⊘-delay from delay; it does not contain any other meaning. We
first make the following observation.
Observation E.5. For any x ≤ y, it holds (1) αx ≤ βx , (2) αx ≤ αy , and (3) βx ≤ βy .
Lemma E.6 (No Job ⊘-delays a r-long Job). A r-long job is never ⊘-delayed.

Proof. Fix a r-long job Jj . Consider, for the proof by contradiction, another job Jk ∈ F
                                                                                        cj (t) ⊘-
delays Jj at some time t. Observe that rj < rk , since otherwise, we would have dj = rj + S
                                                                                   b         c∗ ·
             c∗
βrj ≥ rk + S · βrk ≥ dk . Thus, Jj is active at time t. Job Jk must be r-short, since otherwise,
                        c
cj (t) = t−rj > t−rk = S
S                       ck (t). We have:
          βrj
                 βr  k



S        ck (t) ⇒ t − rj < t − rk ⇒ βr > αr and t > rk · βrj − rj · αrk ≥ rj + S
cj (t) < S                                                                     c∗ · βr = dbj
                                      j    k                                          j
                    β rj     αrk                         βrj − αrk
                                    ck > dbj ⇒ rk + S
where the last inequality is due to d                c∗ · αr > rj + S c∗ · βr . Thus, no job ⊘-delays
                                                            k                 j

Jj before time dbj . However, in this case, job Jj completes no later than dbj , which is earlier than t,
contradicting the definition of ⊘-delay.
Lemma E.7 (Bound on the Delay for a r-short Job). A r-short job Jj completes no later than
         c∗ · αr .
rj + 3 · S      j


Proof. We claim that any r-short job can only be ⊘-delayed before dbj , i.e., some job Jk ∈ F   cj (t)
⊘-delays Jj at time t implies t < dj . We show this via proof by contradiction. Fix a r-short job Jj .
                                  b


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suppose another job Jk ∈ F cj (t) ⊘-delays Jj at some time t ≥ dbj . Job Jj must be active at time t.
Observe that rj > rk , since otherwise, we would have dbj = rj + S  c∗ · αr ≤ rk + S  c∗ · αr ≤ d  ck .
                                                                           j                  k

Job Jk must be r-long, since otherwise, d          c∗ · αr < rj + S
                                         ck = rk + S                 c∗ · αr = dbj . Then, it follows
                                                          k                  j
ck > dbj ⇒ rk + S
d                c∗ · βr > rj + S  c∗ · αr ⇒ βr > αr . We have:
                         k                j      k      j



        S        cj (t) ⇒ t − rk > t − rj ⇒ t < rj · βrk − rk · αrj < rj + S
        ck (t) > S                                                         c∗ · αr = dbj
                                                                                  j
                            β rk     αrj             βrk − αrj
                                                    c∗ · βr > rj + S
                                    ck > dbj ⇒ rk + S
where the last inequality is due to d                              c∗ · αr . It follows dbj ≤ t < dbj ,
                                                           k              j

contradicting that Jk ⊘-delays job Jj at time t ≥ dbj .
Next, consider any r-short job Jj . Let τj denote the earliest time after which no job ⊘-delays
Jj . Every job Jx ∈ P   cj (τj ) is ⊘-delayed at time τj by the job Jl running at time instant τj , since
dx ≤ dj < dl . Thus, every job Jx ∈ P
c       b      b                             cj (τj ) is r-short by Lemma E.6. It follows that, for any
job Jx ∈ P cj (τj ), dcx ≤ dbj ⇒ rx + S   c∗ · αr ≤ rj + S    c∗ · αr ⇒ rx ≤ rj and τt ≤ d        cx ⇒ rx ≥
                                                 x                     j

τj − S · αrx ≥ τj − S · αrj . We bound the total amount of delay on Jj by Jx ∈Pcj (τj ) p∗x . Consider
       ∗                 ∗
      c                 c                                                          P

the optimal schedule (in minimizing adaptive-relaxed-stretch) constructed by EDF with S          c∗ . We have
two cases.
Case 1 (τj < rj ). In the optimal schedule, all jobs in P                                             c∗ · αr
                                                           cj (τj ) are released no earlier than τj − S
                                                                                                              j

and no later than τj and completed no later than τj + S        c∗ · αy ≤ τj + S   c∗ · αr , where y denotes
                                                                                           j
maxJx ∈Pcj (τj ) rx . We have:
                         X
                                 p∗x ≤ τj + S
                                            c∗ · αr − (τj − S
                                                    j
                                                                c∗ · αr ) = 2 · S
                                                                         j
                                                                                  c∗ · αr
                                                                                          j

                      Jx ∈P
                          cj (τj )


Case 2 (τj ≥ rj ). In the optimal schedule, all jobs in P
                                                        cj (τj ) (including job Jj ) are released no earlier
          c∗ · αr and completed no later than dbj = rj + S
than τj − S                                                    c∗ · αr . We have:
                  j                                                    j
               X
                       p∗x ≤ dbj − (τj − S
                                         c∗ · αr ) = rj + 2 · S
                                                 j
                                                                 c∗ · αr − τj ≤ 2 · S
                                                                         j
                                                                                       c∗ · αr
                                                                                               j

             Jx ∈P
                 cj (τj )


                                                                                                p∗x ≤ rj + 3 · S
                                                                                                               c∗ ·
                                                                              P
Thus, the completion time for a r-short job Jj in ARG is at most dbj +           Jx ∈P
                                                                                     cj (τj )
αrj

    [
Let C EDF and C ARG be the completion time of J in the schedule constructed by EDF with S
                                                                                        c∗ and
      j        j                                 j

ARG. Let Sc∗ and S[ARG
                        be the adaptive relaxed-stretch of Jj in these two schedules.
             j         j

Lemma E.8. It holds S[
                     ARG
                     j
                          c∗ for any r-long job Jj and S[
                         ≤S                             ARG
                                                        j
                                                               c∗ for any r-short job Jj .
                                                            ≤3·S

Proof. Pick any job Jj . If Jj is a r-long job, it follows by Lemma E.6 that:
                                Z
            CjARG ≤ C[  EDF +
                        j                                dt = C[      [
                                                                EDF ⇒ S
                                                                j      j
                                                                        ARG   c∗ ≤ S
                                                                             ≤Sj
                                                                                   c∗
                                     any job ⊘-delays Jj at time t

If Jj is a r-short job by Lemma E.7, it follows that:
                                     ARG                         c∗ · αr ) − rj
                                   Cj      − rj        (rj + 3 · S
                            S[
                             ARG
                             j   =                 ≤                    j          c∗
                                                                                =3·S
                                        αrj                       αrj
                                              √ e
                                                 pmin ·pmax,t
           c∗ ≤ η · S ∗ , with αt =
Lemma E.9. S                                        √         and βt = max{pmax,t , αt }.
                                                       3


           \
Proof. Let S OP T be the max-adaptive-relaxed-stretch of the optimal schedule for the max-stretch

                    c∗ ≤ S
problem. It follows S     \ OP T . Consider the optimal schedule with the minimum max-stretch.



                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let Cj∗ and S
            \ OP T be the completion time of job J and the adaptive relaxed-stretch of J in this
              j                                    j                                    j
                                                                             \OP  T    Cj∗ −rj
schedule. Pick any job J . If job J is a r-short job, it follows p ≤ α and S
                           j          j                              j    rj       j=       αrj≤
Cj∗ −rj       Cj∗ −rj        ∗
   pj    ≤ η · p∗ ≤ η · S . If job Jj is a r-long job, it follows pj ≤ maxrx ≤rj px = pmax,rj = βrj
                  j
                  Cj∗ −rj    C ∗ −rj      C ∗ −rj
and Sj\ OP T  = βr        ≤ jpj      ≤ η · jp∗ ≤ η · S ∗ . Combining these two cases gives us
                       j                      j

c∗ ≤ S
S    \ OP T = max      \OP T ≤ η · S ∗ .
                 1≤j≤n Sj



Let SjARG and S[
               ARG
               j   be the stretch and adaptive relaxed-stretch of job Jj in the execution of ARG.
                                 √                  √
Lemma E.10. It holds SjARG ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 1.5 · P · S[     ARG
                                                                  for any r-long job Jj and SjARG ≤
          √                                             √ je
 0.5 0.5
λ √·η                                                     pmin ·pmax,t
    3
         · P · S[ARG
                 j   for any r-short job Jj , with αt =      √
                                                                3
                                                                        and βt = max{pmax,t , αt }.

                                                                      √ e
                                                                        pmin ·pmax,rj
Proof. Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is r-long, it follows pj > αrj =        √
                                                                              3
                                                                                      . We have:

          CjARG − rj   CjARG − rj βrj               βr              √           pmax,rj
 SjARG =       ∗     =            · ∗ ≤ S[ ARG
                                           j   · η · j < S[  ARG
                                                             j   ·η· 3· p e
              pj           β rj     pj              pj                       pmin · pmax,rj
                                                   s
                   √   r
                          pmax,rj            √       η · p∗max   √                 √
       ≤ S[ARG
           j   ·η· 3·         e   ≤ S[ARG
                                      j   ·η· 3·       ∗       = 3 · λ0.5 · η 1.5 · P · S[
                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                         j
                           pmin                      pmin /λ
If job Jj is r-short, we have:
          CjARG − rj   CjARG − rj αrj                     λ · p∗min · η · p∗max   λ0.5 · η 0.5 √ [
                                                      p
SjARG ≤       ∗      =           · ∗ ≤ S[
                                        ARG
                                        j   ·                √                  =    √        · P · SjARG
             pmin          α rj   pmin                          3 · p∗min               3
The derivation uses the observation: pmax,t = maxrx ≤t px ≤ pmax ≤ η · p∗max for any t ≥ 0.
                                                                           √                √
Theorem E.11 (Theorem 4.10 Restated). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy is 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P -
competitive for online scheduling with predictions.

Proof for Theorem 4.10. If job Jj is r-long, we have, by Lemmas E.10, E.8, and E.9, that:
           √                √             √                 √        √                  √
  SjARG ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 1.5 · P · S[ARG                           c∗ ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P · S ∗
                                        ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 1.5 · P · S
                                   j

If job Jj is r-short, we have, by Lemmas E.10, E.8, and E.9, that:
              λ0.5 · η 0.5 √              λ0.5 · η 0.5 √            √                  √
                                                              c∗ ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 1.5 · P · S ∗
     SjARG ≤     √        · P · S[
                                 ARG
                                 j    ≤      √        · P ·3·S
                    3                           3
                            √                √                √                  √
Therefore, we have S ARG ≤ 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P · S ∗ . ARG is 3 · λ0.5 · η 2.5 · P -competitive.

Algorithm ARG is (n − 1) · P + 1-robust. The robustness√result is tight by the same construction
                                                          p
used in Theorem 4.4 with pemin = 1, where ARG sets α = √31 and β = p1 at time 0, remains these
parameters constants, and produces the same result as RG.
For proving the run-time and space complexity, as well as the number of preemptions, we first show
an equivalent version of Lemma C.11 for ARG.
Lemma E.12. A r-short job Jj remains to have the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch among active
jobs for all time t ≥ t′ before its completion if it had the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch among
active jobs at some time t′ .

Proof. Suppose job Jj has the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch among active jobs at time t′ . For
                                                                      ′
any r-short job Jk active at time t′ , we have S          ck (t′ ) ⇒ t −rj ≥ t′ −rk ⇒ rj ≤ rk .
                                               cj (t′ ) ≥ S
                                                                      αr     j
                                                                              αr       k
Fix any time t ≥ t′ . Any r-short job Jk active at time t (including those released after t′ ) has


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rj ≤ rk and αrj ≤ αrk , thus, S        ck (t). For any r-long job Jk released after t′ , we have
                              cj (t) ≥ S
t−rj   t−rk
 αr ≥ βr    ⇒ Sj (t) ≥ Sk (t), as rj ≤ rk and αrj ≤ βrj ≤ βrk . For any r-long job Jk active at
               c        c
    j          k
time t′ , we have:
        t′ − rj   t′ − rk       βr · rj − αrj · rk    βr · rj − αrj · rk
                ≥         ⇒ t′ ≥ k                 ⇒t≥ k                 ⇒S
                                                                          cj (t) ≥ S
                                                                                   ck (t)
          αrj       β rk           βrk − αrj             βrk − αrj
Therefore, job Jj remains to have the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch among active jobs at time t.
Theorem E.13 (Theorem 4.12 Restated). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy admits an implementation
with O(1) run-time to make any online decision and O(n) space.

Proof for Theorem 4.12. Similar to the proof for Theorem 4.6. Main two First-In-First-Out (FIFO)
queues: short queue and long queue. The short queue contains r-short jobs in order of release
time; the long queue contains r-long jobs in order of release time. The algorithm always processes
the job with the largest adaptive relaxed-stretch at the front of the two queues and removes a job
from the (front of the) queue when the job is completed. We show that one of the jobs at the
front of the queues has the overall largest adaptive relaxed-stretch at any time t. To see this, it
                          t−r
holds that rj ≤ rk ⇒ αr j ≥ t−r     αr
                                       k
                                         ⇒ S  cj (t) ≥ Sck (t) for any r-short jobs Jj , Jk and that
                                  j         k
             t−r
rj ≤ rk ⇒ βr j ≥ t−r   βrk ⇒ Sj (t) ≥ Sk (t) for any r-long jobs Jj , Jk . Finally, as the algorithm
                          k    c       c
               j
maintains at most all jobs in memory and a constant number of support variables, the space required
is at most O(n).
Theorem E.14 (Theorem 4.13 Restated). Adaptive Relaxed-Greedy generates a schedule with at
most n − 1 preemptions. Thus, the amortized number of preemptions per job is at most 1.

Proof for Theorem 4.13. Preemptions are triggered only by JobSwitch. Observe that JobSwitch is
not triggered while a r-short job is being processed by Lemma E.12. A r-long job may be preempted
while being processed by r-short jobs; these r-short jobs, however, will not be preempted by Lemma
E.12. Thus, the number of preemptions is bounded by the total number of r-short jobs, which is at
most n − 1. Note that no preemptions occur if all jobs have the same job size prediction pmax . As a
result, the amortized number of preemptions per job is at most n−1
                                                                 n ≤ 1.


F       M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.4
                                                               √
We prove that PRG achieves an O(λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P ) competitive ratio. With static α
and β, we (re-)use the definitions, lemmas, and notations from Section 4.2.
Theorem F.1 (Theorem 4.14 Restated). Predictive Relaxed-Greedy is max{ µ3 , µ} · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η ·
             √
max{η, φ} · P -competitive for online scheduling with predictions.

Proof for Theorem 4.14. Consider the execution of PRG. Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is a long job, we
have:
                                                                                            s
            PRG
         C  j   − rj   β               β                          p e
                                                                                               pemax
SjPRG =              · ∗ ≤ S]  PRG
                               j   ·η·    < S]  PRG
                                                j    · η · µ · p e max e    ≤ S]
                                                                               PRG
                                                                               j   ·η·µ·
              β       pj               pj                       pmin · pmax                    pemin
                      s
                         φ · p∗max                         √
      ≤ S] PRG
           j    ·η·µ·     ∗        ≤ µ · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · P · Sf∗ (By Lemma C.6)
                         pmin /λ
If job Jj is a short job, we have:
          CjPRG − rj                λ · p∗min · φ · p∗max                  √
                                  p
                                                           3
SjPRG ≤         ∗      ≤  S]
                           j
                            PRG
                                ·             ∗           ≤ · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · P · S
                                                                                f∗ (By Lemma C.6)
              pmin                      µ · pmin           µ
                                                                                           ∗           ∗
              f∗ by S ∗ through S
We then bound S                 ^                                    ^
                                  OP T . Pick any job J . It follows S OP T = Cj −rj ≤ Cj −rj ≤
                                                       j              j         α        pj
    C ∗ −rj                                                          ∗            ∗            ∗
                                                               OP T = Cj −rj ≤ φ· Cj −rj ≤ φ· Cj −rj ≤ φ·S ∗ ,
η· jp∗        ≤ η·S ∗ , if job Jj is a short job. It follows S
                                                             ^
                                                              j          β         p∗           p∗
        j                                                                         max              j


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            f∗ ≤ S
if job Jj is a long job. Therefore, we have S    ^ OP T = max       ^OP T ≤ max{η, φ} · S ∗ , and,
                                                              1≤j≤n Sj
                                                                           √
thus, S PRG = max1≤j≤n SjPRG ≤ max{ µ3 , µ} · λ0.5 · φ0.5 · η · max{η, φ} · P · S ∗ .

Algorithm PRG is (n − 1) · P + 1-robust. The robustness result for PRG is tight by the same
construction used in Theorem 4.4 with pemin = 1 and pemax = p1 .

G    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5
We show that RGx is O(η 2+2x · P 1−x )-competitive.
                                                                       √
Theorem G.1 (Theorem 5.1 Restated). RGx (0 ≤ x ≤ 12 ) is                   3 · η 2+2x · P 1−x -competitive for
online scheduling with predictions.

Proof for Theorem 5.1. Consider the execution of RGx . Pick any job Jj . If job Jj is a long job, we
have:
            x               β              √        pmax         √
                  RGx             RGx                                                 RGx
        SjRG ≤ S] j    ·η·    < S]j   ·η· 3· x           1−x   ≤ 3 · η 1+2x · P x · S]j
                           pj                    pmin · pmax
                √                       √
              ≤ 3·η    1+2x   x f   ∗
                            ·P ·S ≤ 3·η       2+2x
                                                    · P x · S ∗ (By Lemmas C.6 and C.7)
If job Jj is a short job, we have, by Lemmas C.6 and C.7, that:
                          α           x
                                           · p1−x η · P 1−x ]      √
                                 RGx p√
           x        x                                            x
      SjRG ≤ S]
              RG
              j  ·        ∗   ≤ S]
                                 j  · min ∗max ≤     √     · SjRG ≤ 3 · η 2 · P 1−x · S ∗
                         pmin           3 · pmin       3
                           x                   x    √
Therefore, we have S RG = max1≤j≤n SjRG ≤               3 · η 2+2x · P 1−x · S ∗ .

Theorem G.2 (Theorem 5.2 Restated). RG0 (with α = pmax , β = pmax ), or FIFO, is P -competitive.

Proof for Theorem 5.2. We first show RG0 minimizes max1≤j≤n Cj − rj (max-flow). If ω =
max1≤j≤n Cj − rj (existence of ω is due to Theorem A.1), set dj = rj +ω for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n and run
EDF with dj . The resulting schedule, which is identical to the schedule generated by RG0 , achieves
the minimum max-flow. Let Jk be the job with the largest flow in the schedule that minimizes
max-stretch (e.g., Ck∗ − rk = max1≤j≤n Cj∗ − rj ). Consider the execution of RG0 . Pick any job Jj .
We have:
               0                           0
    0     CjRG − rj   max1≤q≤n CqRG − rq   max1≤q≤n Cq∗ − rq   Ck∗ − rk p∗k
SjRG =              ≤                    ≤                   =         · ∗ ≤ S∗ · P
              p∗j            p∗j                 p∗j              p∗k   pj
                           0                   0
Therefore, we have S RG = max1≤j≤n SjRG ≤ S ∗ · P .

H    C ONSTRUCTION OF THE T RADE - OFF A LGORITHM FOR S ECTION 5
                                                                               a
                                                                              p 1 ·pa2
We introduce parameters θ = (a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 , µ) and parametrize α = minµ max and β = pbmin1
                                                                                                  · pbmax
                                                                                                       2

                                                                               x
in the definition of relaxed-stretch. This section shows the construction of RG , the trade-off between
consistency and smoothness under this parametrization.
For Lemmas C.4, C.5, and C.6 to hold, we must ensure α < β. For Lemma C.7 to hold, we must
ensure pj ≤ β for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n. We will enforce these two relations after we derive the others we
desire. For now, we assume that these relations hold. Run RG with the parametrized α and β. Pick
any job Jj . If Jj is a long job, it holds that pj > α, and we have:
         CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj β                 β                   pbmin
                                                                        1
                                                                           · pbmax
                                                                                2
SjRG =             =          ·     ≤ S
                                      g
                                       j
                                        RG
                                           · η ·    < S
                                                      g
                                                       j
                                                        RG
                                                           · η · µ ·   a       a
            p∗j          β      p∗j              pj                  pmin
                                                                        1
                                                                           · pmax
                                                                                2


                           2 −a2
                        pbmax             pb2 −a2 f∗             pb2 −a2
        RG
        j ·µ·η·
     = Sg                 a1 −b1
                                 ≤ µ · η · max
                                           a1 −b1
                                                  · S ≤ µ · η 2 · max
                                                                    1 −b1
                                                                          · S ∗ (By Lemma C.6 and C.7)
                        pmin              pmin                   pamin


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If Jj is a short job, we have:
                     CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj   CjRG − rj   α        a1      a2
                                                              RG pmin · pmax
         SjRG =           ∗    ≤     ∗     =                  j ·
                                                       · ∗ = Sg         ∗
                        pj          pmin         α      pmin      µ · pmin
                  3 pamin
                        1
                            · pamax
                                 2                  a1     a2
                                      f∗ ≤ 3 · η · pmin · pmax · S ∗ (By Lemma C.6 and C.7)
                 ≤  ·      ∗        ·S                  ∗
                  µ       pmin              µ          pmin
                                     a2
                  3                 p
                 ≤ · η 1+|a1 | · ∗ max       · S∗
                  µ              (pmin )1−a1
where the last inequality is due to pamin
                                       1
                                           ≤ η |a1 | · (p∗min )a1 , as pamin
                                                                          1
                                                                             ≤ (η · p∗min )a1 = η |a1 | · (p∗min )a1
                a1        1   −a1         η  −a1          |a1 |     ∗    a1
if a1 ≥ 0 and pmin = ( pmin )      ≤ ( p∗ )          =η         · (pmin ) if a1 < 0.
                                         min
                                                                                              √
The constant term to appear in the competitive ratio is max{µ, µ3 }, which is at least 3 (the minimum
                   √                                       √
is achieved at µ = 3). Therefore, we choose µ = 3 for an optimal constant term.
As we aim to relate the competitive ratio to P , the maximum ratio of any two job sizes, we enforce
the power of pmax to equal that of pmin (or p∗min ) on the denominator. Thus, we set:
                                              a1 + a2 = b1 + b2 = 1
                                   a −b1 a2 −b2
                                    1
                                  pmin  ·p
To enforce α < β, or α
                     β =
                                       √ max
                                         3
                                                     = √13 · ( ppmax
                                                                 min a1 −b1
                                                                     )      < 1, we set:

                                                         a1 ≥ b1
                                                                                     pmax b1
To enforce pj ≤ β for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n, or pmax ≤ pbmin  1
                                                         · pbmax
                                                              2
                                                                 = pbmin
                                                                      1
                                                                         · p1−b
                                                                            max ⇐⇒ ( pmin )
                                                                               1
                                                                                             ≤ 1,
we set:
                                               b1 ≤ 0
With these constraints, the results (i.e., Lemmas) used in this section can hold.
We have (with a1 + a2 = b1 + b2 and a1 ≥ b1 ):
             √                 2 −a2
                            pbmax           √           pmax a1 −b1 ∗ √             η · p∗
   SjRG ≤        3 · η2 ·     a1 −b1
                                     · S ∗ = 3 · η2 · (      )     · S ≤ 3 · η 2 · ( ∗ max )a1 −b1 · S ∗
                            pmin                        pmin                        pmin /η
             √
         =       3 · η 2+2a1 −2b1 · P a1 −b1 · S ∗
for Jj being a long job. We have (with a2 = 1 − a1 ):
                                      √               pmax
                              SjRG ≤ 3 · η 1+|a1 | · ( ∗ )1−a1 · S ∗
                                                      pmin
for Jj being a short job.
Observe that FIFO is P -competitive by Theorem 5.2. We set the power of P and that of ppmax
                                                                                         ∗   (which
                                                                                         min
will relate to P ) to be at most 1, as FIFO will otherwise dominate our algorithm. We enforce:
                                         a1 − b1 ≤ 1 ⇒ a1 ≤ 1 + b1 ≤ 1
and
                                                          a1 ≥ 0
                                                                                   √
Fix any 0 ≤ a1 ≤ 1, decreasing b1 increases both the power of η and P in term 3 · η 2+2a1 −2b1 ·
P a1 −b1 · S ∗ . We choose b1 = 0 (and therefore b2 = 1) for the optimal (minimal) competitive ratio.
                             √
With θ = (a1 , 1 − a1 , 0, 1, 3), we have:
                                            √
                                    SjRG ≤ 3 · η 2+2a1 · P a1 · S ∗
for Jj being a long job, and:
         √                 pmax            √              η · p∗              √
SjRG ≤       3 · η 1+a1 · ( ∗ )1−a1 · S ∗ ≤ 3 · η 1+a1 · ( ∗ max )1−a1 · S ∗ = 3 · η 2 · P 1−a1 · S ∗
                           pmin                             pmin

                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                       √
for Jj being a short job. Therefore, we have S RG = max1≤j≤n SjRG ≤ 3 · η 2+2a1 · P max{a1 ,1−a1 } ·
S ∗ . For the competitive ratio, RG with a1 = 12 − ∆ dominates that with a1 = 12 + ∆ for any
0 < ∆ ≤ 12 . Therefore, we restrict:
                                                         1
                                             0 ≤ a1 ≤
                                                         2
                                                          √                       √
The competitive ratio of RG (with θ = (a1 , 1 − a1 , 0, 1, 3) and 0 ≤ a1 ≤ 12 ) is 3 · η 2+2a1 · P 1−a1 .
                                                                                      px   ·p1−x
Replacing a1 by x (0 ≤ x ≤ 12 ), we construct RGx with α =                               √ max and β = pmax .
                                                                                       min
                                                                                            3


I    V ISUALIZATION OF C ONSISTENCY-S MOOTHNESS T RADE - OFFS
The trade-off between consistency and smoothness is visualized in Figure 7.


Figure 7: Trade-off between consistency and smoothness. The graphs show how the hyper-parameter x (on the x-axis) changes the competitive
ratio as a function of η (left curve (x, η, η 2+2x )) and P (right curve (x, P, P 1−x )), i.e., the projection on plane x = a (0 ≤ a ≤ 12 )
represents the competitive ratio as a function of η and P .


J     M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 6
                                                              ϵ
Theorem J.1 (Theorem 6.1 Restated). Any algorithm is at best 1−ϵ · n + 1-competitive, if given a
(1 − ϵ)-speed machine, for any 0 < ϵ < 1.

Proof for Theorem 6.1. Construct n jobs: p∗j = 1, rj = j − 1 for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Clearly, the optimal
schedule with a unit-speed machine has a max-stretch of 1. Run any algorithm with a (1 − ϵ)-speed
                                                                      n
machine. Let the last completed job be Jk . Clearly, we have Ck ≥ 1−ϵ   and rk ≤ n − 1. Therefore,
                                           Ck −rk     n                        ϵ
the max-stretch achieved is at least Sk = 1 ≥ 1−ϵ − (n − 1), which is 1−ϵ         · n + 1 times the
optimum.

We prove Lemma 6.3, which claims the monotonicity of the algorithms mentioned in this paper. We
first show that the RG-based algorithms (RG, ARG, PRG, RGx ) are monotonic. Our proof shows
that (1) any RG-based algorithm has time-varying priority execution for all problem inputs, and (2)
any algorithm with time-varying priority execution for all problem inputs is monotonic. We define
time-varying priority execution as follows.
Definition J.2 (Time-varying Priority Execution). Let A be an algorithm and I a problem input.
We say A has a time-varying priority execution for I if there exist a partitioning of time 0 = t0 ≤
t1 ≤ t2 ≤ ... ≤ tP and a mapping F from time partitions to total orderings of jobs (i.e., F (tx , tx+1 )
is an order of all jobs) such that A always processes the active job that has the highest priority
indicated by F (tx , tx+1 ) (jobs at the front of F (tx , tx+1 ) have higher priorities) during (tx , tx+1 )
for all 0 ≤ x ≤ P , where tP +1 represents ∞.

Here, a problem input differs from a problem instance. A problem input reveals the job size prediction
to an algorithm when a job is released, i.e., problem input includes release times and job size
predictions. A problem instance is all the data (release times, job sizes, and job size predictions).
Thus, a job set can create different problem instances by attaching different job size predictions. A


                                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time-varying priority execution processes jobs in a (time-varying) order that depends solely on the
problem input, not the job sizes. This is key to proving monotonicity.
Lemma J.3. Any RG-based algorithm has time-varying priority execution for all problem inputs.

Proof. Consider any RG-based algorithm A and any problem input I. Suppose I include n jobs
(J1 , ..., Jn ) where job size prediction for Jj is pj and release time is rj . Let yj = α if pj ≤ α
and yj = β if pj > α for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n in the case of static α and β. In the case of time-varying
α and β (for ARG), let yj = αrj if pj ≤ αrj and yj = βrj if pj > αrj . The relaxed-stretch
                                                                                              t−r
(or adaptive-relaxed-stretch in ARG) for Jj at the time t can be uniformly written as yj j for
any RG-based algorithm. Let 0 = t0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 ≤ ... ≤ tP be the sorted elements in set
  y ·r −y ·r                              y ·r −y ·r
{ i yji −yjj i | 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, yi ̸= yj , i yji −yjj i ≥ 0} ∪ {0}, where every element corresponds to
                                t−rj
the solution to equation t−r
                          yi =
                             i
                                 yj with variable t for some i, j. Recall that the algorithm runs the
                              t−rj
active job Jj with the largest yj at any time t (with tie-breaking by smaller job index first). Thus,
to conclude a time-varying priority execution, we only need to show that the relative priority between
                 t−r
jobs (in terms of yj j ) for the entire job set remains the same in every interval (tx , tx+1 ). Suppose,
                                                                                  ′         ′           ′′       ′′
                                                                          t −rb
for proof by contradiction, that there are two jobs Ja and Jb with t −r
                                                                     ya > yb and
                                                                        a        t −ra
                                                                                   ya  < t y−r
                                                                                            b
                                                                                               b

      ′    ′′     ′ ′′
with t < t and t , t ∈ (tx , tx+1 ) for some x. Then, we have:
                                                    ya · rb − yb · ra
                                       tx < t′ <                      < t′′ < tx+1
                                                         ya − yb
which contradicts the construction of the time partitioning 0 = t0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 ≤ ... ≤ tP .
Lemma J.4. Any algorithm with time-varying priority execution for all problem inputs is monotonic.

Proof. Consider any algorithm A with time-varying priority execution for all problem inputs, any two
instances with identical input I and actual job sizes (p∗1 , ..., p∗n ) and (p∗1 ′ , ..., p∗n ′ ) such that p∗j ≤ p∗j ′
for all j. Let S (1) and S (2) be the max-stretch obtained by A on these two instances, and we denote
                                                                       (1)       (2)
the schedules by σ1 and σ2 . To show S (1) ≤ S (2) , we show Cj ≤ Cj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n, where
  (1)        (2)                                                                                  (1)           (2)
Cj and Cj denote the completion time for job Jj in the two schedules. Let pj (t) and pj (t)
denote the remaining job size of job Jj at time t in the two schedules, i.e., p∗j minus the total amount
                                                                          (1)         (2)
of processing allocated to job Jj up to time t. To show Cj                      ≤ Cj , we show that algorithm A
              (1)          (2)
maintains pj (t) ≤ pj (t) for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n, t ≥ 0. Let 0 = t0 ≤ t1 ≤ ... ≤ tP be the time
partition (for algorithm A running against I) with a mapping F such that A always processes the
active job that has the highest priority indicated by F (tx , tx+1 ).
             (1)          (2)
We show pj (t) ≤ pj (t) for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n, t < tx , x ≥ 1 via induction on x (we slightly abuse
the notation to let tP +1 represent ∞). The base case is to consider the interval [t0 , t1 ). Initially,
 (1)                         (2)
pj (0) = p∗j ≤ p∗j ′ = pj (0). Fix any time t ∈ (t0 , t1 ). The ordering F (t0 , t1 ) defines the job
priority in (t0 , t1 ). Schedules σ1 and σ2 are processing (either) the same or different jobs at time t. If
                                                    (1)             (2)
they are processing the same job Js , it follows pj (t) = 0 = pj (t) for every job Jj with a priority
                    (1)          (1)          (2)             (2)
higher than Js ; pj (t) = pj (0) ≤ pj (0) = pj (t) for every job Jj with a priority lower than Js .
                    (1)          (2)
It also follows ps (t) ≤ ps (t), as p∗j ≤ p∗j ′ for every job Jj with a higher priority than Js . If they
are processing different jobs Ja (in σ1 ) and Jb (in σ2 ), it follows that Ja has a lower priority than Jb
in F (t0 , t1 ) and Jb has been completed in σ1 at time t. Therefore, any job Jj with a priority higher
                                            (1)              (2)
than Ja has been completed in σ1 , i.e., pj (t) = 0 ≤ pj (t); any job Jj with a priority no higher
                                                        (1)                           (2)
than Ja has not been processed in σ2 , i.e., pj (t) ≤ p∗j ≤ p∗j ′ = pj (t). The arguments hold for
                                                                    (1)         (2)
every t ∈ (t0 , t1 ). For the inductive step, suppose pj (t) ≤ pj (t) for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n, t < tk for
                                                                                                 (1)           (2)
some k ≥ 1. Consider the interval [tk , tk+1 ). By inductive hypothesis, we have pj (tk ) ≤ pj (tk )
for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n. The inductive step uses a generalized version of the arguments to show the base
case. Fix any time t ∈ (tk , tk+1 ). The ordering F (tk , tk+1 ) defines the job priority in (tk , tk+1 ). If
                                                           (1)             (2)
σ1 and σ2 are processing the same job Js , it follows pj (t) = 0 = pj (t) for every job Jj with a


                                                              31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (1)         (1)         (2)      (2)
priority higher than Js ; pj (t) = pj (tk ) ≤ pj (tk ) = pj (t) for every job Jj with a priority lower
          (1)        (2)         (1)         (2)
than Js ; ps (t) ≤ ps (t), as pj (tk ) ≤ pj (tk ) for every job Jj with a higher priority than Js . If
                                                                               (1)                 (2)
they are processing different jobs Ja (in σ1 ) and Jb (in σ2 ), it follows that pj (t) = 0 ≤ pj (t) for
                                                   (1)     (1)         (2)           (2)
any job Jj with a priority higher than Ja and pj (t) ≤ pj (tk ) ≤ pj (tk ) = pj (t) for any job Jj
with a priority no higher than Ja .
Lemma J.5 (Lemma 6.3 Restated). All algorithms mentioned in this paper (RG, ARG, PRG, RGx ,
and RR) are monotonic.

Proof for Lemma 6.3. Any RG-based algorithm (RG, ARG, PRG, and RGx ) is monotonic by
Lemmas J.3 and J.4. It is trivial to see that RR is monotonic.
Theorem J.6 (Theorem 6.4 Restated). Given a monotonic algorithm A with competitive ratio cA ,
one can obtain a (1 + ϵ)-speed min{cA , nϵ }-competitive (RR-augmented) algorithm.

Proof for Theorem 6.4. With a (1 + ϵ)-speed machine, we allocate one-unit speed to algorithm A
and ϵ-unit speed to RR. That is, for every time unit, both algorithms run in parallel: algorithm A
                     1                                ϵ
is run at a rate of 1+ϵ , and RR is run at a rate of 1+ϵ . Let the completion time for Jj be Cj in this
schedule.
When running A standalone on a unit-speed machine, the completion time CjA satisfies
            CjA −rj
max1≤j≤n      p∗    ≤ cA · S ∗ , where S ∗ is the optimal max-stretch, and cA is the competitive ratio of
                j
                                                                                           CjR −rj
algorithm A. Similarly, for RR running standalone with ϵ-speed, we have max1≤j≤n             p∗    ≤ nϵ ·S ∗ ,
                                                                                               j

where CjR is the completion time in this schedule.
Due to the monotonicity of algorithms A and RR, we have:
      Cj − rj        min{CjA , CjR } − rj                     n                  n
 max     ∗    ≤ max                       ≤ max min{cA · S ∗ , · S ∗ } = min{cA , } · S ∗
1≤j≤n   pj     1≤j≤n        p∗j            1≤j≤n              ϵ                  ϵ

Thus, the combined algorithm achieves a competitive ratio of min{cA , nϵ }.

J.1   O PTIMALITY OF RG+

The proof of Theorem B.1 can be extended to show that ”no deterministic algorithm can achieve a
                                n
competitive ratio better than 1+ϵ  for online non-clairvoyant max-stretch scheduling with a machine
of speed (1 + ϵ), even if all jobs are released at time 0.” The idea of the extension is as follows.
Consider n identical jobs all with job size 1 to be released at time 0. Run any algorithm A against
this set of jobs. By time 1, let J1 be the job with the least amount of the processed size l1 . We have
l1 ≤ 1+ϵ n by the pigeonhole principle. We can then construct an instance with n jobs, all released at
time 0, where the job sizes are defined as p∗1 = 1+ϵn + λ and the rest geometrically increasing sizes,
i.e., p2 = ψ − p1 , p3 = ψ − ψ, p4 = ψ − ψ , ..., p∗n = ψ n−1 − ψ n−2 , where ψ is a large constant
       ∗          ∗ ∗      2         ∗     3    2

and λ a small constant. In this setup, the optimal max-stretch using a unit-speed machine approaches
                                                                                                     n
1, while the max-stretch achieved by algorithm A with a faster machine is at least approximately 1+ϵ   .
                                                                              n
This establishes a lower bound for the (1 + ϵ)-speed competitive ratio as 1+ϵ . Therefore, algorithm
RG+ achieves an asymptotically optimal robustness under speed augmentation.

K     J OB S IZE D ISTRIBUTIONS IN E XPERIMENTS
We aim to replicate real-world data size distributions in our synthetic datasets. Figure 8 shows the
job size distributions in the real-world datasets (Google Google (2019), Alibaba Alibaba (2023),
and Azure Cortez et al. (2017)). Job sizes generally follow an exponential distribution, except for
Google’s data, which has more randomness in the right tail. With the maximum job size ratio P ,
we set p∗j to max{1, − log X · A} where X is a random variable with X ∼ U(0, 1) and A a scaling


                                                     32
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Google                                                Azure                                                 Alibaba
          0.7

          0.6

          0.5
Density

          0.4

          0.3

          0.2

          0.1

          0.0
                  0.0          0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8     1.0       0.00        0.05   0.10       0.15   0.20   0.25   0.00     0.02   0.04     0.06     0.08   0.10   0.12
                                      Job Size                                              Job Size                                              Job Size
                                                                    Figure 8: Real-world Job Size Distribution.


                                                                                Job Size Distribution (KDE)
                           0.20

                           0.15
                 Density


                           0.10

                           0.05

                           0.00
                                                                                           Job Size
                                                                     Figure 9: Synthetic Job Size Distribution



factor ensuring p∗j ≤ P . Figure 9 shows the Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) of the job sizes in
the synthetic datasets, showing that the synthetic job sizes follow an exponential distribution aligned
with the real-world applications.

 L                E XPERIMENTS FOR VARIANCE OF S TRETCH

                        1.00                                                1.00                                             1.00
                        0.75                                                0.75                                             0.75
                Variance


                                                                     Variance


                                                                                                                      Variance


                        0.50                                                0.50                                             0.50
                        0.25                                                0.25                                             0.25
                        0.00                                                0.00                                             0.00
                                R
                               RG

                                              G
                                            RR

                                              +


                                                                                    R
                                                                                   RG

                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                   RR

                                                                                                     +


                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                    RG

                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                    RR

                                                                                                                                                      +
                            GW


                                                                                 GW


                                                                                                                                  GW
                                           AR


                                                                                            AR


                                                                                                                                                  AR
                                           RG


                                                                                                  RG


                                                                                                                                                   RG


                        1.00                                                1.00                                             1.00
                        0.75                                                0.75                                             0.75
                Variance


                                                                     Variance


                                                                                                                      Variance


                        0.50                                                0.50                                             0.50
                        0.25                                                0.25                                             0.25
                        0.00                                                0.00                                             0.00
                                  R
                                RG

                                  G
                                RR

                                  +


                                                                                      R
                                                                                    RG

                                                                                      G
                                                                                    RR

                                                                                      +


                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                     RG

                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                     RR

                                                                                                                                       +
                            GW


                                                                                 GW


                                                                                                                                  GW
                               AR


                                                                                   AR


                                                                                                                                    AR
                               RG


                                                                                   RG


                                                                                                                                    RG


                 Figure 10: The variance of stretch with increasing jobs. Each box represents the distribution of the normalized variance scores.
                 The number of jobs is set to 1000 (Row 1 Column 1), 2000 (R1C2), 3000 (R1C3), 4500 (R2C1), 6000 (R2C2), and 10000 (R2C3).
                 Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10]. The prediction error is set to 1
                 (i.e., pj = p∗
                              j ).



This section presents the experimental results for GWR, RR, RG, ARG, and RG+ in minimizing the
variance of stretch, defined as:
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                  1X
                                                            variance of stretch =                       (Sj − S)2
                                                                                                  n j=1


                                                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            1.00                                           1.00                                          1.00
            0.75                                           0.75                                          0.75



     Variance


                                                    Variance


                                                                                                  Variance
            0.50                                           0.50                                          0.50
            0.25                                           0.25                                          0.25
            0.00                                           0.00                                          0.00

                       R
                      RG

                                G
                              RR

                                +


                                                                   R
                                                                  RG

                                                                               G
                                                                             RR

                                                                               +


                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                RG

                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                          RR

                                                                                                                            +
                 GW


                                                               GW


                                                                                                             GW
                           AR


                                                                          AR


                                                                                                                     AR
                             RG


                                                                            RG


                                                                                                                         RG
            1.00                                           1.00                                          1.00
            0.75                                           0.75                                          0.75
     Variance


                                                    Variance


                                                                                                  Variance
            0.50                                           0.50                                          0.50
            0.25                                           0.25                                          0.25
            0.00                                           0.00                                          0.00
                         R
                       RG

                         G
                       RR

                         +


                                                                     R
                                                                   RG

                                                                     G
                                                                   RR

                                                                     +


                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                 RG

                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                 RR

                                                                                                                   +
                 GW


                                                               GW


                                                                                                             GW
                      AR


                                                                  AR


                                                                                                                AR
                      RG


                                                                  RG


                                                                                                                RG
       Figure 11: The variance of stretch with an increasing P . The job sizes are drawn from interval [1, P ], where P is set to 1 (R1C1),
       2 (R1C2), 5 (R1C3), 10 (R2C1), 20 (R2C2), and 40 (R2C3). The number of jobs is fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time
       [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The prediction error is set to 1.


              Pn
where S = n1 j=1 Sj . The variance of stretch measures fairness from the view of jobs as if they are
compared to each other. We run the experiments on the synthetic datasets under the same settings as
Section 7. In presenting the results, we apply a min-max normalization to the variance scores, i.e.,
dividing the variance by the difference between the maximum and minimum variance of all problem
instances under each setting.
Figures 10 and Figure 11 present the normalized variance score under increasing n and P with
perfect predictions. The performance ordering of these algorithms generally aligns with that in the
max-stretch minimization: a lower max-stretch performance ratio corresponds to a lower variance
score. RG+ shows its superior performance under all the settings. This suggests that RG+ ensures
fairness in resource allocation measured in the stretch space. In contrast, RR suffers the consistent
worst variance scores. This worsened performance is the cost of ignoring the job size information in
fair scheduling.



                       GWR
                       RG
                0.8    ARG
                       RR
                       RG+
                0.6
     Variance


                0.4

                0.2

                0.0
                       1          2             4                 8           16         32              64        128          512
                                                                      Prediction Error
Figure 12: The variance of stretch with an increasing prediction error η. The prediction error increases from 1 to 512. The number of jobs is
fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].


Figure 12 presents the results under an increasing η. The variance scores of GWR and RR are
constants, as their executions are irrelevant to job size predictions. The variance score of RG and
ARG increases with an increasing prediction error, showing a weakening fairness guarantee with
worsening predictions. RG+ demonstrates its robustness in minimizing the variance of stretch under
imperfect predictions: the variance score increases slowly and is capped as η increases. Overall, the
distinction in the variance scores is evident: RG+ outperforms the rest, followed by RG and ARG,
and then GWR, with RR the worst.


                                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  1.75


                                                                                                        Performance Ratio
     Performance Ratio
                                                                                                                        4


                                                  Performance Ratio


                                                                                                         (Response Time)
      (Response Time)
                     1.2


                                                   (Response Time)
                                                                  1.50                                                  3
                     1.0                                          1.25                                                  2
                                                                  1.00                                                  1
                     0.8                                          0.75


                                R
                               RG
                                       G
                                     RR
                                       +


                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                              RG

                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                     RR

                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                             R
                                                                            RG
                                                                                          G
                                                                                        RR
                                                                                          +
                         GW


                                                                                                                       GW
                                                                          GW
                                    AR


                                                                                                                                   AR
                                    RG


                                                                                                                                    RG
                                                                                    AR

                                                                                       RG
                                                  Performance Ratio
                     4                                                3                                                 2.5


                                                   (Response Time)
     Performance Ratio


                                                                                                        Performance Ratio
      (Response Time)


                                                                                                         (Response Time)
                     3                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                      2
                     2
                                                                                                                        1.5
                     1                                                1
                                                                                                                        1.0
                     0


                                                                           R
                                                                          RG
                                                                                       G
                                                                                     RR
                                                                                       +
                                R
                              RG

                                G
                              RR

                                +


                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                   RG
                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                   RR
                                                                                                                                     +
                                                                  GW


                                                                                   AR
                    GW


                                                                                                                             GW
                                                                                    RG
                             AR


                                                                                                                                  AR
                             RG


                                                                                                                                  RG
       Figure 13: Performance ratios for the mean response time with increasing jobs. Each box represents the distribution of the
       performance ratios. The number of jobs is set to 1000 (Row 1 Column 1), 2000 (R1C2), 3000 (R1C3), 4500 (R2C1), 6000
       (R2C2), and 10000 (R2C3). Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10]. The
       prediction error is set to 1 (i.e., pj = p∗
                                                 j ).


                     2.0


                                                                                                        Performance Ratio
     Performance Ratio


                                                  Performance Ratio


                                                                      2.0


                                                                                                         (Response Time)
      (Response Time)


                                                   (Response Time)


                                                                                                                        3
                     1.5                                              1.5
                                                                                                                        2
                     1.0                                              1.0
                     0.5                                              0.5                                               1
                     0.0                                              0.0                                               0
                                  R
                                RG
                                  G
                                RR
                                  +


                                                                               R
                                                                             RG
                                                                               G
                                                                             RR
                                                                               +


                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                               RG

                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                               RR

                                                                                                                                 +
                         GW


                                                                       GW


                                                                                                                       GW
                               AR


                                                                            AR


                                                                                                                              AR
                               RG


                                                                            RG


                                                                                                                              RG
                         3
     Performance Ratio


                                                                                                        Performance Ratio
      (Response Time)


                                                  Performance Ratio


                                                                                                         (Response Time)
                                                                      2.5
                                                   (Response Time)


                                                                                                                            2.0
                         2                                            2.0
                                                                      1.5                                                   1.5
                         1
                                                                      1.0                                                   1.0
                        R
                      RG
                        G
                      RR
                        +


                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                   RG
                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                   RR
                                                                                                                                     +
                                                                               R
                                                                             RG
                                                                               G
                                                                             RR
                                                                               +
                     GW


                                                                                                                             GW
                     AR


                                                                       GW


                                                                                                                                  AR
                     RG


                                                                                                                                  RG
                                                                            AR

                                                                            RG


       Figure 14: Performance ratios for the mean response time with an increasing P . The job sizes are drawn from interval [1, P ],
       where P is set to 1 (R1C1), 2 (R1C2), 5 (R1C3), 10 (R2C1), 20 (R2C2), and 40 (R2C3). The number of jobs is fixed at 4500.
       Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The prediction error is set to 1.


                         3.5                                                                                                              GWR
                                                                                                                                          RG
                         3.0                                                                                                              ARG
     Performance Ratio


                                                                                                                                          RR
      (Response Time)


                         2.5                                                                                                              RG+

                         2.0
                         1.5
                         1.0
                         0.5
                                1        2      4                           8          16          32               64            128   512
                                                                                Prediction Error
Figure 15: Performance ratios for the mean response time with an increasing prediction error η. The prediction error increases from 1 to 512.
The number of jobs is fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].


                                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M       E XPERIMENTS FOR R ESPONSE T IME
This section presents the experimental results for GWR, RR, RG, ARG, and RG+ in minimizing the
mean response time, defined as:
                                                                                   n
                                                                              1X
                                            mean response time =                    Cj − rj
                                                                              n j=1

The mean response time is used to measure the efficiency of scheduling. A lower response time
indicates lower waiting time and an improved quality of service. While our proposed algorithms
ensure fairness of scheduling, we are interested in whether this comes with a cost in efficiency. We
compare the mean response time of our algorithms with that of GWR and RR. We measure the
performance ratio for the response time, defined as the ratio between the mean response time obtained
by an algorithm and the optimal value given a problem instance. Shortest Remaining Processing
Time First (SRPT) is used to compute the optimal mean response time Baker (1974). We run the
experiments on the synthetic datasets under the same settings as Section 7.
Figures 13 and 14 present the performance ratio for the mean response time under increasing n and
P with perfect predictions. RR has the worst performance, as active jobs mutually delay each other
when they constantly share the resource equally. The performance ordering of the other algorithms
aligns with that in the max-stretch minimization. It suggests that reducing the max-stretch does not
come with a high cost in response time. While RG achieves outstanding performance in minimizing
response time, its augmented variant, RG+ , emerges as the champion again.
Figure 15 presents the results under an increasing η. The performance ratios of RG and ARG increase
marginally with an increasing prediction error, showing their robustness in minimizing response
time with imperfect predictions. In addition, the performance ratio stays close to that of GWR,
even with badly wrong predictions. Though the performance ratio increases as that of RG, RG+
shows its superior performance by its winning performance ratio and the robustness to the prediction
error. Overall, RG+ performs well in minimizing response time while having a strong guarantee for
fairness.

N      E XPERIMENTS ON R EAL - WORLD DATASETS

                            1.45   GWR
            Performance Ratio


                            1.40   RG
                                   ARG
                            1.35   RR
                                   RG+
                            1.30
                            1.25
                            1.20
                            1.15
                            1.10
                                   1            2                 3                  4                 5                 6
                                                               Prediction Error
Figure 16: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error on real-world trace-log data from Google Cloud. The prediction error increases
from 1 to 6.


Figure 16, 18, and 17 presents the results on the real-world datasets. The data are server trace logs
collected from Google, Azure, and Alibaba Cloud. Each dataset contains the arrival time and job size
of the jobs submitted to the cloud. We generate job size predictions with a prediction error from 1 to
6: with the prediction error η and job size p∗j , we set pj ← p∗j · exp(Y ) with Y ∼ U(− log η, log η).
On Azure and Alibaba datasets, RG and ARG, under a low prediction error, are comparable to GWR,
with RR the worst. The performance of RG and ARG gradually becomes worse than RR as the
prediction error increases. RG+ consistently outperforms the others. The overall performance of all
algorithms on Alibaba and Auzre datasets aligns with the results on the synthetic datasets. On the
Google dataset, the performance ratios are not sensitive to the prediction error due to the distribution
of job size being closer to uniform than exponential. RG+ consistently achieves the best performance.
This time, however, RR outperforms RG, ARG, and GWR due to a high maximum job size ratio P


                                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            400           GWR


            Performance Ratio
                            350           RG
                                          ARG
                            300           RR
                                          RG+
                            250
                            200
                            150
                            100
                             50
                                       1            2              3                 4                 5                  6
                                                               Prediction Error
Figure 17: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error on real-world trace-log data from Azure Cloud. The prediction error increases
from 1 to 6.


                            65        GWR
            Performance Ratio


                            60        RG
                            55        ARG
                                      RR
                            50        RG+
                            45
                            40
                            35
                            30
                            25
                                      1             2             3                 4                  5                  6
                                                              Prediction Error
Figure 18: Performance ratios with an increasing prediction error on real-world trace-log data from Alibaba Cloud. The prediction error increases
from 1 to 6.



in the Google dataset (compared to the others). RR’s performance does not worsen with an increasing
P , but the others do.


O      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS WITH A UNIT- SPEED RG+



                                      GWR
            Performance Ratio


                            6         RG
                                      ARG
                            5         RR
                            4         RG+
                                      RGF
                            3
                            2
                            1
                                  1             2       4     8          16          32          64          128         512
                                                             Prediction Error
Figure 19: Performance ratios for the max-stretch with an increasing prediction error η. The prediction error increases from 1 to 512. The
number of jobs is fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].


We performed additional experiments where we set the speed of RG+ to be the same as the others.
Figures 19, 20, and 21 presents the results for max-stretch, variance of stretch, and response time.
The label RGF denotes the RG+ running with a unit-speed machine, where 0.3-speed is allocated to
RR and the rest 0.7-speed to RG.
The performance of RGF is not as good as RG+ due to the slower machine, but the performance
generally stays bounded in between RG and RR for all metrics. This is as expected. The intuition is
that when RG performs well on an instance, some portion of the processing is shared to RR, thus
decreasing the overall performance; when RR performs well, again, some portion is shared to RG,


                                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      GWR
                      0.8             RG
                                      ARG
                                      RR



            Variance
                      0.6             RG+
                                      RGF
                      0.4
                      0.2
                      0.0
                                  1             2       4       8            16     32         64         128         512
                                                                Prediction Error
Figure 20: The variance of stretch with an increasing prediction error η. The prediction error increases from 1 to 512. The number of jobs is
fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].


                            3.5           GWR
            Performance Ratio
             (Response Time)


                            3.0           RG
                                          ARG
                            2.5           RR
                                          RG+
                            2.0           RGF
                            1.5
                            1.0
                            0.5
                                      1             2       4       8         16     32         64         128        512
                                                                 Prediction Error
Figure 21: Performance ratios for the mean response time with an increasing prediction error η. The prediction error increases from 1 to 512.
The number of jobs is fixed at 4500. Jobs are released in time [0, 5000] uniformly at random. The job sizes are drawn from [1, 10].



thus decreasing the overall performance. In return, however, the robustness is persevered, making the
performance relatively stable under varying prediction errors.


                                                                        38
