Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT O FF -P OLICY L EARNING FOR
H IGH -D IMENSIONAL ACTION S PACES
 Fabian Otto∗                                                              Philipp Becker
 Microsoft Research                                                        Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
 fabian.otto@microsoft.com

 Ngo Anh Vien                                                              Gerhard Neumann
 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence                                  Karlsruhe Institute of Technology


                                                   A BSTRACT
             Existing off-policy reinforcement learning algorithms often rely on an explicit state-
             action-value function representation, which can be problematic in high-dimensional
             action spaces due to the curse of dimensionality. This reliance results in data ineffi-
             ciency as maintaining a state-action-value function in such spaces is challenging.
             We present an efficient approach that utilizes only a state-value function as the
             critic for off-policy deep reinforcement learning. This approach, which we refer
             to as Vlearn, effectively circumvents the limitations of existing methods by elim-
             inating the necessity for an explicit state-action-value function. To this end, we
             leverage a weighted importance sampling loss for learning deep value functions
             from off-policy data. While this is common for linear methods, it has not been
             combined with deep value function networks. This transfer to deep methods is
             not straightforward and requires novel design choices such as robust policy up-
             dates, twin value function networks to avoid an optimization bias, and importance
             weight clipping. We also present a novel analysis of the variance of our estimate
             compared to commonly used importance sampling estimators such as V-trace. Our
             approach improves sample complexity as well as final performance and ensures
             consistent and robust performance across various benchmark tasks. Eliminating
             the state-action-value function in Vlearn facilitates a streamlined learning process,
             yielding high-return agents.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for training intelligent agents
through interaction with their environment (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016). On-policy and
off-policy are the two primary approaches within model-free RL On-policy methods rely on newly
generated (quasi-)online samples in each iteration (Schulman et al., 2017; Otto et al., 2021), whereas
off-policy methods leverage a replay buffer populated by a behavior policy (Abdolmaleki et al.,
2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018). Although on-policy methods can compensate for
off-policy data to some extent via importance sampling (Espeholt et al., 2018), they cannot exploit
it fully. To harness the full potential of off-policy data, off-policy methods traditionally focus on
learning state-action-value functions (Q-functions) as critics (Degris et al., 2012).
In this work, we present Vlearn, a off-policy policy gradient method that exclusively utilizes V-
functions. With Vlearn, we do not seek to replace existing methods, but rather to offer a new
perspective and practical insights for deep off-policy RL by demonstrating the general feasibility
and benefits of such a setting. Unlike commonly used Q-function based methods, this approach
does not require learning over the joint state-action space, making it less susceptible to the curse
of dimensionality and more effective at updating the critic regardless of the actions taken when
acting in the environment. Consequently, Vlearn naturally demonstrates better suitability for high-
dimensional action spaces. While existing V-function methods, such as V-trace (Espeholt et al.,
    ∗
        Work partially done at Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence and University of Tübingen


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Vlearn     V-trace (1-Step)        Bellman Target        Target Critic
                          ρ = 1.0                         ρ = 0.5                         ρ = 0.1                      ρ = 0.0
              10
Critic Loss
              5


              0

                   −10   −5      0       5     10 −10   −5      0       5   10 −10    −5      0       5   10 −10      −5      0       5   10

                              Vθ (st )                       Vθ (st )                      Vθ (st )                        Vθ (st )

Figure 1: To provide intuition on the differences between Vlearn and V-trace, we consider the
following example for different importance ratios ρ. Suppose for a state st the Bellman target is
r(s, a) + γVθ̄ (st+1 ) = 4, the target critic predicts Vθ̄ (st ) = −6 and we plot the loss for values of
Vθ (s) for Vlearn and V-trace. For on-policy samples (ρ = 1.0), both losses are the same. However,
for increasingly off-policy samples (ρ → 0), we see how V-trace increasingly relies on the target
critic, shifting the optimal value towards it. Vlearn, on the other hand, simply reduces the scale of the
loss and thus the importance of the sample, making Vlearn more robust to errors in the target critic.


2018), attempt to increase the usability of stale data in on-policy methods, we find that they are less
effective in a completely off-policy context. These methods typically focus on reweighting Bellman
targets, but prior research (Mahmood et al., 2014) in the linear domain indicates that applying
importance sampling to the entire Bellman error is more advantageous. Inspired by these findings,
we demonstrate that this objective can be recovered in a deep RL setting as an upper bound on the
original naive Bellman error. This upper bound can be derived using Jensen’s inequality and retains
the same minimum. This loss shifts the importance weights from the Bellman targets to the objective,
simplifying V-function updates and enhancing the stability of learning a V-function from off-policy
data, which posed significant challenges in earlier methods. Our analysis in the bandit setting shows
that this Bellman error estimator has lower variance compared to the estimators from common deep
RL importance sampling schemes like V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018).
Crucially, we propose a practical algorithm that leverages this objective and improves the stability of
policy learning by using the trust region update from Otto et al. (2021) and other commonly used
techniques from off-policy deep RL, such as twin critics and delayed policy updates (Fujimoto et al.,
2018), tanh squashing (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and advantage normalization (Schulman et al., 2017).
Our experiments demonstrate the relevance and importance of these design choices in achieving high
performance. Notably, by removing the dependence on the Q-function our method is particularly
well suited for environments with complex action spaces, such as the challenging MyoSuite (Vittorio
et al., 2022) and dog locomotion tasks in DeepMind control (DMC) (Tassa et al., 2018), which most
standard off-policy actor-critic methods cannot solve.

2             R ELATED W ORK
To enhance sample efficiency in RL, off-policy algorithms aim to leverage historical data stored in a
replay buffer (Lin, 1992). While deep Q-Learning-based methods (Mnih et al., 2013; Van Hasselt
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Hessel et al., 2018) excel in efficiently learning from discrete action
spaces, they are often not directly applicable to continuous problems. For such problems, off-policy
actor-critic methods optimize a policy network that generates continuous actions based on the state-
action-value function estimator (Degris et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2019). This approach accommodates
both deterministic (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018) and probabilistic policies (Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018).
In the on-policy setting, trust-region methods (Schulman et al., 2017; 2015; Otto et al., 2021) have
proven effective in stabilizing the policy gradient. However, these methods have not received the same
level of attention in the off-policy setting. Past efforts have focused on training the value function
with off-policy data (Gu et al., 2016) or extended trust region policy optimization (Schulman et al.,
2015) to the off-policy setting (Nachum et al., 2018; Meng et al., 2022). While Wang et al. (2017),
for instance, employs a more standard approach by combining off-policy trust regions with additional


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


advancements, such as Retrace (Munos et al., 2016) and truncated importance sampling, it is still not
able to compete with modern actor-critic approaches. Peng et al. (2019), on the other hand, provide a
different perspective and split policy and value-function learning into separate supervised learning
steps. Generally, standard off-policy trust region methods often fall behind modern actor-critic
approaches (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018) and cannot achieve competitive performance.
However, maximum aposteriori policy optimisation (MPO) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) can be seen
as a non-classical trust region method. Its EM-based formulation offers more flexibility, with trust
regions akin to optimizing a parametric E-step without an explicit M-step.
While on-policy trust region methods estimate the less complex state-value function, most off-policy
methods rely on estimating state-action-value functions to learn from replay buffer data (Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018). Methods exclusively utilizing state-value
functions must employ importance sampling to address the distributional discrepancy between target
and behavior policies. However, this has been primarily studied in the context of asynchronous
on-policy settings, where the policy distributions differ only slightly (Espeholt et al., 2018; Luo et al.,
2020). In particular, V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018) aims to compensate for a limited distributional
shift due to asynchronous computations and is not designed for a full off-policy setting, such as in this
work. Further, such an off-policy correction is computationally expensive as it relies on storing and
processing trajectories. Moreover, the truncation technique used in importance weight calculations
introduces a bias (Espeholt et al., 2018). Consequently, the implementation of trajectory-based
Bellman target estimators would exacerbate the already pronounced issue of bias propagation.
In the linear case, the effect of varying the placement of the importance weight in the off-policy case
has already been studied. Applying importance weighting to the entire Bellman error, rather than just
the Bellman target, yields better performance and may even lead to reduced variance. This approach
is naturally used in methods such as off-policy TD(0) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), and further supported
by Mahmood et al. (2014); Dann et al. (2014); Graves & Ghiassian (2022) on its effectiveness in the
linear setting. However, translating these findings to deep RL presents a challenge, as insights from
linear models are often not directly applicable (Mnih et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2015).

3     D EEP O FF -P OLICY L EARNING FROM S TATE -VALUE F UNCTIONS
We seek to determine an optimal policy π(a|s) within the framework of a Markov decision process
(MDP), which is defined by a tuple (S, A, T , r, ρ0 , γ). Here, both the state space S and action
space A are continuous. The transition density function T : S × A × S → R+ is defined as a
function mapping from the current state st ∈ S and action at ∈ A to the probability density of
transitioning to the subsequent state st+1 ∈ S. The initial state distribution’s density is denoted as
ρ0 : S → R+ . The reward attained from interactions with the environment is determined by the
function r : S × A → R, and the parameter γ ∈ [0, 1) represents the discount factor applied to
future rewards. POur primary objective     is to maximize the expected cumulative discounted reward
                   ∞     k−t
Gt = ET ,ρ0 ,π     k=t γ      r(sk , ak ) . Most popular off-policy actor-critic methods (Haarnoja et al.,
2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) now aim to find a policy that maximizes the
cumulative discounted reward by making use of a learnable state-action value estimate Qπθ (s, a) =
Eπ [Gt |st = s, at = a]. To train this estimator, they rely on a dataset D = {(st , at , rt , st+1 )t=1...N }
and a behavioral policy πb (·|s) responsible for generating this dataset. Typically, D takes the form
of a replay buffer (Lin, 1992), with the corresponding behavior policy πb being a mixture of the
historical policies used to populate the buffer. Training the state-action value function then usually
involves temporal difference learning (Sutton, 1988; Watkins & Dayan, 1992), with updates grounded
in the Bellman equation (Bellman, 1957). The objective commonly optimized is
              h                                                                                          2 i
  E(st ,at )∼D Qπθ (st , at ) − r(st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼T (·|st ,at ),at+1 ∼π(·|st+1 ) Qθ̄ (st+1 , at+1 )      , (1)
where Qθ̄ (s, a) is a frozen target network. Furthermore, to mitigate overestimation bias, most
methods employ two state-action value functions (Fujimoto et al., 2018). To maintain the stability of
this approach, the target network’s weights are updated via polyak averaging θ̄ ← τ θ + (1 − τ )θ̄.

3.1    I MPORTANCE S AMPLING E STIMATORS FOR THE B ELLMAN E RROR

Instead of using the state-action function Qπθ (st , at ), an alternative approach is to work solely with
the state-value function Vθπ (st ). This base estimator can be trained by minimizing the following loss


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


function using importance sampling
                             "                                                                        2 #
                                                                                  π(at |st )
             Lbase (θ) = Est ∼D      Vθπ (st ) − Eat ∼D,st+1 ∼T (·|st ,at )                    V̄           .   (2)
                                                                                  πb (at |st )

where V̄ = r(st , at ) + γVθ̄ (st+1 ) with target network weights θ̄. Directly optimizing Equation 1 or
Equation 2 can be difficult due to the double sampling problem (Zhu & Ying, 2020). Approximating
the inner expectation with one Monte Carlo sample yields a high variance. Getting a more reliable
estimate requires multiple samples, which implies either multiple action executions per state or
occurrences of the same state in the replay buffer, an unrealistic assumption for most RL problems. A
key distinction from the Q-function based objective (Equation 1) is the introduction of the importance
weight, which compensates for the discrepancy between the behavior distribution πb (·|s) and the
current policy π(·|s). Unlike the Q-function that updates estimates solely for the selected action, the
V-function does not depend on specific actions and implicitly updates estimates for all actions. The
difference between the current and the data-generating policy must therefore be taken into account.
Equation 2 is closely related to the 1-step V-trace estimate (Espeholt et al., 2018). It can be seen as
a naive version of V-trace because a large difference between the target and behavior policies may
result in importance weights approaching either zero or infinity, consequently impacting the Bellman
optimization target for the state-value function Vθπ (st ). While truncated importance weights can
prevent excessively large values for the Bellman target, the importance ratios and Bellman target may
still approach values close to zero. V-trace circumvents this issue by effectively interpolating between
the Bellman target and the value function estimate in the 1-step case
                             h                                                                     2 i
        LV-trace (θ) = Est ∼D Vθπ (st ) − Eat ∼D,st+1 ∼T (·|st ,at ) (1 − ρt )Vθ̄ (st ) + ρt V̄

                                                                                                       , (3)

where ρt = min(π(at |st )/πb (at |st ), ϵρ ) are the truncated importance weights with a user-specified
upper bound (typically ϵρ = 1). This objective can then also be extended for off-policy corrections of
n-step returns (Espeholt et al., 2018). Yet, this formulation has two main drawbacks. Since executing
multiple actions for the same state is impractical, or even impossible, V-trace approximates the inner
expectation with just one action sample, resulting in potentially undesirable high variance estimates.
Moreover, while the V-trace reformulation avoids optimizing the value estimate toward zero for
small importance ratios, the interpolation now optimizes it increasingly toward the current (target)
value function (see Figure 1). This interpolation also leads to a shift of the optimum, which means
for samples with small importance ratios the value function is barely making any learning progress
and maintains its current estimate. It is important to note that only the optimum changes; the scale
of the loss function, and thus the scale of the gradient, remains the same for all importance ratios.
In the original work, this issue is less pronounced, as V-trace provides off-policy corrections for
asynchronous distributed workers of an on-policy method. In this setup, the policy distributions are
expected to stay relatively close, mitigating the impact of any potential divergence. However, in a
complete off-policy setting, such as in our case, the samples in the replay buffer and the current policy
deviate significantly faster and stronger from each other. The size of the replay buffer, learning speed,
or entropy of different policies can all influence the importance ratio.

3.2   O FF -P OLICY S TATE -VALUE F UNCTION L EARNING

To address the above-mentioned issues of V-trace, we propose a more effective approach to training
the value function by following Mahmood et al. (2014); Dann et al. (2014) and shifting the importance
ratio in front of the loss function by extending their results to the general function approximation
case. We show that both loss functions, i.e., Equation 2 and Equation 4 share the same optimum.

Theorem 1 Consider the following loss, minimized with respect to the V-function’s parameters θ
                                                                                      2
                                                          π(at |st )   π
            LWIS (θ) = E(st ,at )∼D,st+1 ∼T (·|st ,at )                Vθ (st ) − V̄      .   (4)
                                                          πb (at |st )
This objective serves as an upper bound to the importance-weighted Bellman loss (Equation 2).
Furthermore, this upper bound is consistent; that is, a value function minimizing Equation 4 also
minimizes Equation 2.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first statement’s proof relies on Jensen’s Inequality, while the proof of the second statement is
an extension of Neumann & Peters (2008). The complete proofs are provided in Appendix A.1 and
Appendix A.2, respectively.
This bound closely resembles the standard state-action-value loss functions used in other off-policy
methods but is based on the action-independent state-value function. It just introduces importance
weights in front of the loss to account for the mismatch between behavior and policy distribution.
Importantly, evaluating Equation 4 becomes straightforward using the provided replay buffer D.

Connection to Linear Off-Policy Methods. Interestingly, optimizing this upper bound recovers
the linear off-policy TD(0) update (Sutton & Barto, 2018, Chapter 11.1) for the non-linear setting.
While the intuitive objectives for linear off-policy TD(0) might appear to be either Equation 2 or
Equation 3, the actual update results from optimizing Equation 4. Mahmood et al. (2014); Dann
et al. (2014) further demonstrated that Equation 2 and Equation 4 can be connected to ordinary
and weighted importance sampling (WIS) in the linear setting, respectively. These findings can be
applied for linear value function estimation methods such as LSTD (Bradtke & Barto, 1996) by
employing the linear version of the loss from Equation 4, thereby obtaining similar theoretical and
empirical benefits as those seen with WIS. These previous works in the linear domain concluded that
weighting only the Bellman targets is less effective than applying importance weights to the entire
loss function, which might even reduce variance (Graves & Ghiassian, 2022). Consequently, linear
off-policy TD(0) naturally optimizes a superior objective without explicitly aiming to do so. Despite
this evidence, deep learning approaches have predominantly continued to apply importance weights
solely to the Bellman targets (Munos et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018), as naively using the WIS
loss with non-linear function approximations results in poor performance. Following the standard
pattern for transferring ideas from tabular or linear function approximation settings to deep RL (Mnih
et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2015), a set of non-trivial design choices and extensions are required
to achieve a scalable and performant WIS-based deep RL approach. We will discuss these design
choices in Section 3.3 and their effectiveness in our experiments.

Variance Analysis of Importance Sampling Estimators of the Bellman Error. When using the
WIS loss, we can draw Monte Carlo samples from the joint state-action distribution. This mitigates
the issue of having a single action per state, which can be limiting for a Equation 3 since requires
separate estimates for both state and action distributions. Consequently, the WIS loss helps to reduce
variance compared to the original and V-trace objectives. Moreover, one of the challenges with
the use of importance sampling is that its estimator can exhibit high variance when the target and
behavior policies significantly diverge. However, evaluating the variance of the importance sampling
estimator is generally intractable (Munos et al., 2016; Koller & Friedman, 2009). Therefore, we
consider a stateless MDP, i.e., a multi-armed bandit problem, as a simplified scenario. The critic’s
empirical losses for the base (Equation 2), WIS (Equation 3), and V-trace objective (Equation 4) can
then be simplified for N samples as
                                     !2
                      1 X                                1 X                                     2
     Lbase = V −              ρa r(a)        LV-trace =           V − (1 − ρa ) V + ρa r(a)
                     N a∼π                               N a∼π
                            b                                  b

                                         1  X                   2
                                LWIS =           ρa V − r(a) ,
                                        N a∼π
                                              b


where we denote weights ρa = π(a)/πb (a). Taking the derivatives of the above losses with respect
to the estimator V and solving the derivative of zero for V yields the following three estimators
                                                          2
                 P                              P                            P
                        ρa r(a)                    a∼πb ρa r(a)                a∼πb ρa r(a)
         V̂base = a∼πb               V̂V-trace = P          2
                                                                     V̂WIS =   P            .
                       N                             a∼πb ρa                      a∼πb ρa

This simplified scenario illustrates the intuition that the WIS loss yields the self-normalized im-
portance weighting estimator, while V-trace results in a squared self-normalized estimator and the
base objective yields a standard importance weighting estimator. It is well established that the
self-normalized estimator is more robust in the presence of extreme importance weights and often
yields a lower variance than the standard importance weighting estimator in general machine learning
(Koller & Friedman, 2009) and in RL settings (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Futoma et al., 2020).
However, the squared estimator from V-trace yields higher variances, as discussed in Appendix A.3.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Ant-v4                                        Humanoid-v4
             6,000                                          8,000
                                                                                                                     Vlearn           SAC

    Reward


                                                   Reward
             4,000                                          6,000
                                                                                                                     MPO              PPO
                                                            4,000
             2,000                                                                                                   TRPL             V-trace
                                                            2,000
                0                                              0
                     0    1    2    3    4    5                     0    1        2    3    4   5
                         Env. Steps (×106 )                             Env. Steps (×106 )

                              dog-walk                                           dog-trot                                         dog-run
            1,000                                          1,000                                             1,000
   Reward


                                                  Reward


                                                                                                    Reward
              500                                            500                                              500



                0                                              0                                                0

                     0    1    2    3    4    5                     0    1       2     3    4   5                     0       1   2    3    4   5
                         Env. Steps (×106 )                             Env. Steps (×106 )                                 Env. Steps (×106 )


Figure 2: Mean over 10 seeds and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals for the high-dimensional
Gymnasium tasks, the 38-dimensional DMC dog tasks. Vlearn consistently achieves a better asymp-
totic performance for all tasks. For the dog tasks SAC and MPO even struggle to learn a consistent
policy. Compared to V-trace our method is significantly more stable and achieves a better final
performance.


Furthermore, unlike V-trace, each sample optimizes towards the Bellman target but has an impact
on the total loss per step depending on its importance weight, as shown in Figure 1. The smaller
importance weights mainly scale the gradient without causing a shift in optimizing to a different
optimum, such as the current (target) value function. This approach makes learning the state-value
function in an off-policy setting more stable and efficient.

3.3          D EEP O FF -P OLICY P OLICY L EARNING WITH S TATE -VALUE F UNCTIONS

In order to leverage the previous findings about learning a state-value function, we need to ensure,
we can also learn a policy. Conventional policy gradient techniques frequently use the gradient of
the likelihood ratio and an importance sampling estimator to optimize the estimated Q-function.
In particular, a more effective approach involves optimizing the advantage function, denoted as
Aπ (s, a) = Qπ (s, a) − V π (s). Adding the V-function as a baseline yields an unbiased gradient
estimator with reduced variance. The optimization can then be formulated as follows

                             ˆ                            πϕ (a|s) π
                       max J(πϕ , πb ) = max E(s,a)∼D              A (s, a) .                    (5)
                         ϕ                 ϕ              πb (a|s)
In the on-policy case, the advantage values are commonly estimated via Monte Carlo approaches,
such as general advantage estimation (Schulman et al., 2016). Yet, in our setting, we cannot reliably
compute the Monte Carlo estimate and do not have a Q-function estimate (Degris et al., 2012).
Further, the direct use of the V-function to improve the policy is not feasible. Nevertheless, using
a replay buffer enables a strategy akin to the standard policy gradient. This approach enables us to
utilize an off-policy estimate of the V-function, resulting in a significant improvement in sample
efficiency. The advantage estimate is computed using the one-step return of our off-policy evaluated
value function Aπ (st , at ) = rt + γVθπ (st+1 ) − Vθπ (st ). Equation 5 can then be optimized by any
policy gradient algorithm, e.g., proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) or trust
region projection layer (TRPL) (Otto et al., 2021).
In this work, we use TRPL (Otto et al., 2021) as it has been shown to stabilize learning even for
complex and high-dimensional action spaces (Otto et al., 2022; 2023). Unlike PPO, it provides a
mathematically sound and scalable approach to enforce trust regions exactly per state. Moreover,
TRPL allows us to use the constraint policy also during the value function update, which now requires
importance sampling. PPO has only the clipped objective for the policy update, and using a clipped
value function has been shown to potentially degrade performance (Engstrom et al., 2020).


                                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TRPL efficiently enforces a trust region for each input state of the policy using differentiable convex
optimization layers (Agrawal et al., 2019), providing more stability and control during training
and at the same time reducing the dependency on implementation choices (Engstrom et al., 2020).
Intuitively, the layer ensures the predicted Gaussian distribution from the policy network always
satisfies the trust region constraint. This way, the objective from Equation 5 can directly be optimized
as the trust region always holds. The layer receives the network’s initial prediction for the mean
µ and covariance Σ of a Gaussian distribution and projects them into the trust region when either
exceeds their respective bounds. This is done individually for each state provided to the network.
The resulting Gaussian policy distribution, characterized by the projected parameters µ̃ and Σ̃, is
then used for subsequent computations, e.g., sampling and loss computation. Formally, as part of the
forward pass, the layer solves the following two optimization problems for each state s
                       arg min dmean (µ̃s , µ(s)) , s.t. dmean (µ̃s , µold (s)) ≤ ϵµ
                          µ̃s

                      arg min dcov Σ̃s , Σ(s) , s.t. dcov Σ̃s , Σold (s) ≤ ϵΣ ,
                         Σ̃s


where µ̃s and Σ̃s are the optimization variables for input state s. The trust region bounds ϵµ , ϵΣ
are for the mean and covariance of the Gaussian distribution, respectively. For the dissimilarities
between means dmean and covariances dcov , we use the decomposed KL-divergence. How to receive
the gradients for the backward pass via implicit differentiation is described in Otto et al. (2021).
As the original V-trace algorithm is primarily used for off-policy corrections in distributed on-policy
learning methods, it typically does not incorporate a target network. In contrast, it is common practice
for off-policy methods (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) to do
so. This approach was also employed by V-trace’s predecessor, Retrace (Munos et al., 2016), hence
we adopt it for our use case as well. Additionally, we make use of further common improvements of
actor-critic and policy gradient methods, including twin critics and delayed policy updates (Fujimoto
et al., 2018), tanh squashing (Haarnoja et al., 2018), as well as advantage normalization (Schulman
et al., 2017; Otto et al., 2021). While the overestimation bias is not a direct problem when using just
state-value functions, we found twin critics beneficial in practice. We assume the twin network acts
as a small ensemble that provides a form of regularization. Given there is no significant drawback
and the widespread adoption of the twin network approach in other baseline methods, we chose
to maintain it in our case as well. Finally, similar to prior works (Munos et al., 2016; Espeholt
et al., 2018) we aim to reduce the variance by replacing the standard importance sampling ratio with
truncated importance sampling min(π(at |st )/πb (at |st ), ϵρ ).
Section 4.2 demonstrates the importance of employing a principled trust region approach and the
necessity of these design choices for increased final performance. We call the final practical algorithm
Vlearn, referring to its ability to learn from state-value functions. Pseudo-Code is given in Appendix B.

3.4   C ONSIDERATIONS R EGARDING O LD AND B EHAVIOR P OLICY

For Vlearn, we keep track of three different policies: The current policy πϕ , which is optimized, the
old policy πold , which is used as a reference for the trust region, and the behavioral policy πb , which
is needed for off-policy correction using importance sampling.
In particular, in an off-policy setting, the behavior policy πb is a mixture of all past policies that
contributed to the replay buffer. However, storing and/or evaluating this would be expensive, so
we assume that each sample belongs to only one mixture component, specifically the policy that
originally created the action. Since we rely on importance sampling for the off-policy correction,
we can simply store the (log-)probability for each action as part of the replay buffer to represent πb
during training at minimal additional cost. This (log-)probability may then be used for importance
sampling without the necessity of further computations.
Similar to most on-policy trust region methods, πold can simply be a copy of the main policy network
from the previous iteration. Choosing πb for the trust region would be detrimental to performance
because it would slow down the policy network update or, in the worst case, force the policy back to
a much older and worse policy distribution. Conversely, we cannot use the copied πold as a behavior
policy because the actual behavior policy πb can be arbitrarily far away, especially for older samples.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Vlearn                SAC             PPO               TRPL             V-trace

                                                                       Pose             Pose - Hard      Reach          Reach - Hard      KeyTurn
                        MyoSuite - MyoHand                    1


                                                   Success
               1

              0.8                                            0.5
    Success


              0.6                                             0
              0.4
                                                                   KeyTurn - Hard        ObjHold      ObjHold - Hard      PenTwirl     PenTwirl - Hard
              0.2                                             1


                                                   Success
               0
                                                             0.5
                    0     1   2   3   4       5
                                          6
                        Env. Steps (×10 )                     0


Figure 3: Performance on the 39-dimensional MyoHand from MyoSuite. Left. IQM and 95%
bootstrapped confidence intervals for the aggregated performance over all 10 MyoHand tasks. Right.
Mean over 10 seeds and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals for the individual performances of all
MyoHand tasks. While Vlearn does not outperform all baselines on all tasks, it performs well across
all tasks and achieves the highest aggregated performance.


4             E XPERIMENTS

For our experiments, we evaluate Vlearn on various high-dimensional continuous control tasks from
Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2023), DMC (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) and MyoSuite (Vittorio et al.,
2022). As baselines, we trained the standard off-policy methods SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and
MPO (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) as well as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and the on-policy version
of TRPL (Otto et al., 2021). In addition, we compare our method to V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018)
by replacing our lower bound objective from Equation 4 with the objective in Equation 3. All other
components remain the same as in Vlearn. This comparison aims to highlight the difference in the
placement of the importance ratios. To ensure a fair assessment, we want to eliminate any external
factors that could influence the results and thus do not use n-step returns for both V-trace and Vlearn.
All methods are evaluated for 10 different seeds each, and their performance is aggregated using mean
values and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals for individual tasks as described in Agarwal et al.
(2021). We maintain uniformity in the architecture of the policy and critic networks for all methods,
incorporating layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) before the first hidden layer. Hyperparameters are
kept constant and only adjusted appropriately for the higher dimensional dog and MyoSuite tasks.
Detailed hyperparameter information for all methods can be found in Appendix D.


4.1             H IGH -D IMENSIONAL C ONTROL TASKS

As illustrated in Figure 2, for the two high-dimensional Gymnasium tasks, Ant-v4 and Humanoid-v4,
Vlearn outperforms all other baselines. Across both environments, Vlearn demonstrates superior
convergence speed and asymptotic performance. While the improvement is more subtle for Ant-v4
with its 8-dimensional action space, Vlearn achieves a 25% increase over SAC in the larger 17-
dimensional action space of Humanoid-v4. Here, focusing solely on learning a state-value function
proves to be a less complex and more effective approach than attempting to learn the full state-action
value function. MPO is unable to achieve competitive performance for either Ant-v4 or Humanoid-v4.
The DMC (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) dog tasks pose the most challenging locomotion problems
in our evaluation, with a 38-dimensional action space modeling a realistic pharaoh dog. Consistent
with the above Gymnasium tasks, Vlearn exhibits superior performance on these high-dimensional
dog locomotion tasks. Although we found that SAC benefits from layer normalization for these tasks,
it struggles to learn well-performing policies for all three movement types. While SAC improves for
“easier” motions, its convergence remains highly unstable, and its final performance often falls below
that of on-policy methods. Similar to the higher dimensional Gymnasium tasks, MPO is also unable
to solve the dog tasks. In contrast, Vlearn learns reliably for all three distinct dog movement types.


                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              2e3           1e4               5e4                                  Vlearn           V-trace                 PPO loss
              1e5           2.5e5             1e6                                  No IS            No Twin                 ϵp = 20

                  Humanoid-v4 - Buffer size                              Ant-v4 - Components                           Humanoid-v4 - Components

          8,000                                              6,000                                             8,000
 Reward


                                                    Reward


                                                                                                      Reward
          6,000                                              4,000                                             6,000
          4,000                                                                                                4,000
                                                             2,000
          2,000                                                                                                2,000
             0                                                  0                                                 0
                  0    1    2   3    4     5                         0     1       2   3    4   5                      0    1    2     3   4    5
                      Env. Steps (×106 )                                 Env. Steps (×106 )                                Env. Steps (×106 )


Figure 4: Left. Ablation study on the impact of replay buffer size on policy performance. For smaller
replay buffers learning becomes unstable or does not converge, while larger sizes tend to lead to
similar final performances. Right. Investigation in the importance of various design choices of Vlearn
on Ant-v4 and Humanoid-v4.


From MyoSuite (Vittorio et al., 2022), we evaluated all tasks involving the 39-dimensional myoHand
(see Figure 3). Vlearn shows consistently strong performance across a wide range of tasks, achieving
the highest aggregated performance. Although it does not always outperform all baselines in specific
cases, Vlearn tends to learn more stable behavior compared to SAC and V-trace. This stability is
particularly evident in the easy versions of the tasks.
In direct comparisons between Vlearn and V-trace, Vlearn consistently demonstrates superior perfor-
mance across all tasks. In particular, V-trace demonstrates minimal learning within a fixed number
of environment interactions. For the dog tasks, the V-trace estimator fails to learn and is among the
worst baselines, even falling behind on-policy methods. Our investigations revealed that while V-trace
is eventually able to learn, it experiences a significant drop in performance after an extended training
period. This discrepancy can be attributed to the sole difference between the two experiments, namely
the V-trace objective. The key distinction between our objective and V-trace lies in how they handle
situations where the importance ratio approaches zero and the position of the expectations. In our
objective, samples get assigned a weight close to zero, minimizing their influence on the gradient.
Conversely, V-trace attempts to bring these samples closer to the target network, potentially leading to
performance degradation. Additionally, estimating the joint state-action expectation is typically more
stable. This observation aligns with findings in Mahmood et al. (2014); Dann et al. (2014); Graves &
Ghiassian (2022), which shows that importance sampling exclusively for the Bellman targets can lead
to inferior performance. While they evaluated this only for the linear case, we found similar results
for general nonlinear function approximation as shown in Figure 2.

4.2          I MPORTANCE OF D ESIGN C HOICES

We investigate the effect of replay buffer size as well as the individual components of our method
on the learning process. We trained multiple agents on the Gymnasium Humanoid-v4 with varying
replay buffer sizes from 2e3 up to 1e6, for 10 seeds each. Note that while the original V-trace
(Espeholt et al., 2018) relies on a relatively large replay buffer, the massively parallel computation
used there implies that policy distribution differences are not as pronounced as in standard off-policy
methods like Vlearn or SAC. As shown in Figure 4 (left), significant improvement occurs when
transitioning from updating the policy and critical setting near an on-policy setting, using the smallest
replay buffer size, to using a medium buffer. In particular, moving from a small buffer to a medium
buffer yields significant benefits, while there is little difference between buffer sizes at the upper end
of the range. In our experiments, we found that a replay buffer size of 5e5 consistently produced
optimal performance across all tasks and was used for the results in Figure 2, Figure 3, and Figure 5.
In order to analyze our design choices, we trained several variations of Vlearn for Ant-v4 and
Humanoid-v4 to investigate the effects of each component (Figure 4 right). As a naive baseline, we
removed importance sampling (No IS) and assumed that all samples in the replay buffer were from
the current policy. Without the importance sampling correction, the agent was unable to learn in both
environments. Replacing the TRPL policy loss with the clipped PPO loss (PPO loss), our results
suggest that the heuristic trust region provided by PPO is insufficient for the off-policy case, where


                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Vlearn           SAC                   MPO           PPO              TRPL              V-trace

                             Hopper-v4                                        Walker2D-v4                                HalfCheetah-v4
                                                                                                           15,000
             3,000
                                                            4,000
    Reward


                                                   Reward


                                                                                                  Reward
                                                                                                           10,000
             2,000
                                                            2,000                                           5,000
             1,000

                0                                              0                                               0
                     0       1        2       3                     0          1      2       3                     0       1       2        3
                         Env. Steps (×106 )                              Env. Steps (×106 )                             Env. Steps (×106 )

Figure 5: Mean over 10 seeds and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals for the low-dimensional
Gymnasium tasks. While SAC achieves the best performance on the HalfCheetah-v4, Vlearn still
performs similar to MPO and achieves and equivalent performance for Hopper-v4 and Walker2D-v4.
V-trace once again cannot make any meaningful progress in the off-policy setting.


stabilizing learning is even more important. While the PPO loss can achieve reasonable performance
on Humanoid-v4, its asymptotic performance lags behind that of the agent using TRPL and is not able
to learn for Ant-v4. For importance weight truncation, we followed previous work (Espeholt et al.,
2018; Munos et al., 2016) by choosing ϵρ = 1 to reduce variance and potentially avoid exploding
gradients. Similar to the PPO loss, we saw that learning becomes unstable for a larger truncation level
(ϵρ = 20). Finally, we trained an agent without the twin critic networks (No Twin), which performs
worse in both environments. We assume that the twin network can be seen as a small ensemble that
provides a form of regularization that becomes more beneficial for higher dimensional problems.


4.3           L OW-D IMENSIONAL C ONTROL TASKS

While the core benefit of our method is in high-dimensional action spaces, we ensure Vlearn is able to
achieve competitive performance on lower-dimensional tasks. Generally, Vlearn performs well on the
lower dimensional Gymnasium tasks shown in Figure 5. Its asymptotic performance is comparable to
that of other baselines, except for SAC’s performance on HalfCheetah-v4. While Vlearn outperforms
on-policy methods on the HalfCheetah-v4, it exhibits a slower convergence rate compared to SAC
and reaches a lower local optimum, similar to the on-policy methods. Generally, HalfCheetah-v4
seems to be an outlier that challenges the learning capabilities of all trust-region methods. Even MPO,
employing a related KL regularization concept, does not match the performance of SAC. Moreover,
the environment itself has shown extreme behavior in the past (Zhang et al., 2021). However, for the
other lower dimensional tasks, Vlearn and MPO perform comparably to the remaining baselines.


5            C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we have demonstrated an efficient approach for learning V-functions from off-policy
data using an upper bound objective to subsequently update the policy network. Our approach not
only ensures computational efficiency, but also demonstrates improved stability and performance
compared to existing methods. Integrating this idea with TRPL yields an effective off-policy method
that is particularly well-suited for scenarios involving high-dimensional action spaces.
Although our method excels in handling high-dimensional action spaces, it may still require a
substantial amount of data to achieve optimal performance. Hence, sample efficiency remains a
challenge that needs to be addressed further. In future work, we aim to further enhance the stability
of off-policy state-value function-based methods and explore their potential benefits in tackling
even higher-dimensional problems, such as those found in overactuated systems. Additionally, we
interested in which ideas for Q-function-based methods also translate to the V-function only setting,
such as ensembles (Chen et al., 2021), distributional (Bellemare et al., 2017) or categorical critics
(Farebrother et al., 2024) as well as simplified ways to stabilize off-policy learning (Bhatt et al., 2024;
Gallici et al., 2024). Furthermore, we are looking to extend our method to the realm of offline RL,
which offers the opportunity to leverage pre-collected data efficiently, opening doors to real-world
applications and minimizing the need for extensive data collection.


                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In our experiments, we utilized standard RL benchmarks and followed the evaluation protocols from
Agarwal et al. (2021). The pseudo-code of our method, implementation details, and hyperparameters
used in our experiments can be found in the Appendix. Readers can replicate our results by following
the procedures outlined in these sections.

R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Martin
  Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In International conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Akshay Agrawal, Brandon Amos, Shane Barratt, Stephen Boyd, Steven Diamond, and J Zico Kolter.
  Differentiable convex optimization layers. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
Richard Bellman. A markovian decision process. Journal of mathematics and mechanics, pp.
  679–684, 1957.
Aditya Bhatt, Daniel Palenicek, Boris Belousov, Max Argus, Artemij Amiranashvili, Thomas Brox,
  and Jan Peters. Crossq: Batch normalization in deep reinforcement learning for greater sample
  efficiency and simplicity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Steven J Bradtke and Andrew G Barto. Linear least-squares algorithms for temporal difference
  learning. Machine learning, 22(1):33–57, 1996.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning:
  Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021.
Christoph Dann, Gerhard Neumann, Jan Peters, et al. Policy evaluation with temporal differences: A
  survey and comparison. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15:809–883, 2014.
Thomas Degris, Martha White, and Richard S. Sutton. Off-policy actor-critic. In Proceedings of the
  29th International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’12, pp.
  179–186, Madison, WI, USA, 2012. Omnipress. ISBN 9781450312851.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph,
  and Aleksander Madry. Implementation Matters in Deep Policy Gradients: A Case Study on
  PPO and TRPO. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2005.12729.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with
  importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taı̈ga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex
  Irpan, Sergey Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, et al. Stop regressing: Training
  value functions via classification for scalable deep rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03950, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Joseph Futoma, Michael C Hughes, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Popcorn: Partially observed prediction
  constrained reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04032, 2020.
Matteo Gallici, Mattie Fellows, Benjamin Ellis, Bartomeu Pou, Ivan Masmitja, Jakob Nicolaus
 Foerster, and Mario Martin. Simplifying deep temporal difference learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2407.04811, 2024.
Eric Graves and Sina Ghiassian. Importance sampling placement in off-policy temporal-difference
  methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10172, 2022.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E Turner, and Sergey Levine. Q-prop:
  Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02247, 2016.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and teaching.
  Machine learning, 8:293–321, 1992.
Michael Luo, Jiahao Yao, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, and Ion Stoica. Impact: Importance weighted
 asynchronous architectures with clipped target networks. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2020.
A Rupam Mahmood, Hado P Van Hasselt, and Richard S Sutton. Weighted importance sampling for
  off-policy learning with linear function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 27, 2014.
Wenjia Meng, Qian Zheng, Yue Shi, and Gang Pan. An off-policy trust region policy op-
 timization method with monotonic improvement guarantee for deep reinforcement learning.
 IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(5):2223–2235, 2022. doi:
 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3044196.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-policy
   reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ofir Nachum, Mohammad Norouzi, Kelvin Xu, and Dale Schuurmans. Trust-pcl: An off-policy trust
  region method for continuous control. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2018. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=HyrCWeWCb.
Gerhard Neumann and Jan Peters. Fitted q-iteration by advantage weighted regression. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Fabian Otto, Philipp Becker, Ngo Anh Vien, Hanna Carolin Ziesche, and Gerhard Neumann. Dif-
  ferentiable trust region layers for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fabian Otto, Onur Celik, Hongyi Zhou, Hanna Ziesche, Ngo Anh Vien, and Gerhard Neumann. Deep
  black-box reinforcement learning with movement primitives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09622,
  2022.

Fabian Otto, Hongyi Zhou, Onur Celik, Ge Li, Rudolf Lioutikov, and Gerhard Neumann. Mp3:
  Movement primitive-based (re-) planning policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12729, 2023.

Art B Owen. Monte carlo theory, methods and examples, 2013.

Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust Region
  Policy Optimization. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1889–1897, 2015. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/schulman15.html.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Policy
  Optimization Algorithms. In arXiv preprint, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.
  06347.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Richard S Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning, 3:
  9–44, 1988.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. The self-normalized estimator for counterfactual learning.
  advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.

Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.

Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Andrea
 Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymnasium,
 March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025.

Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S2665963820300099.

Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.

Caggiano Vittorio, Wang Huawei, Durandau Guillaume, Sartori Massimo, and Kumar Vikash.
  Myosuite – a contact-rich simulation suite for musculoskeletal motor control. https://github.
  com/facebookresearch/myosuite, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  13600.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1995–2003. PMLR, 2016.
Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and
  Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Baohe Zhang, Raghu Rajan, Luis Pineda, Nathan Lambert, André Biedenkapp, Kurtland Chua, Frank
  Hutter, and Roberto Calandra. On the importance of hyperparameter optimization for model-based
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  4015–4023. PMLR, 2021.
Shangtong Zhang, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Generalized off-policy actor-critic.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yuhua Zhu and Lexing Ying. Borrowing from the future: An attempt to address double sampling. In
  Mathematical and scientific machine learning, pp. 246–268. PMLR, 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ERIVATION

We now show the proof of our new objective function. We start with a standard loss function for
learning a V-value function for policy π as defined in Equation 2. Then we derive its upper bound
shown in Equation 4. For simplicity, we denote V̄ = r(s, a) + γVθ̄ (s′ ).


A.1   U PPER B OUND O BJECTIVE

                           "                                     #
                                                       2
               Es∼dπ (s)       Vθπ (s) − Ea∼π(·|s) V̄
                           "                                                    2 #
                                                                π(a|s)
             =Es∼dπ (s)         Vθπ (s) − Ea∼πb (·|s)                    V̄
                                                                πb (a|s)
                           "                                                                    !2 #
                                                    π(a|s) π                      π(a|s)
             =Es∼dπ (s)         Ea∼πb (·|s)                 V (s) − Ea∼πb (·|s)            V̄
                                                    πb (a|s) θ                    πb (a|s)
              (Vθπ does not depend on a)
                        "                                         2 #
                                        π(a|s)
                                                 V π (s) − V̄

             =Es∼dπ (s)   Ea∼πb (·|s)
                                        πb (a|s) θ
                                                               2 
                            Z         π(a|s)                     
             =E              πb (a|s)            Vθπ (s) − V̄ da 
                                                                 
                s∼dπ (s)
                                      πb (a|s) |      {z     }  
                                |     {z       }         x
                                         weight terms t
                       "  Z      #
             =Es∼dπ (s) f   txda ,
                           "Z                   #
             ≤Es∼dπ (s)             tf (x) da ,
                           "                                                    #
                                                π(a|s)                 2
             =Es∼dπ (s) Ea∼πb (·|s)                      Vθπ (s) − V̄
                                                πb (a|s)
              (Jensen’s inequality)
                                   "                        #
                                     π(a|s)    π
                                                          2
             =Es∼dπ (s),a∼πb (·|s)            V (s) − V̄      .
                                     πb (a|s) θ

Here, we denote the convex function f (x) = x2 , the weight terms are in [0, 1] and normalized,
  tda = πb (a|s) ππ(a|s)    da = π(a|s)da = 1 and dπ (s) is the stationary distribution induced by
R         R                     R
                    b (a|s)
policy π. Therefore, one can estimate the loss using Monte Carlo samples from the joint state-action
distribution
                      X X π(at,j |st )                                                     2
                                                       Vθπ (st ) − rt,j + γVθ̄ (st+1,j )     .
                        t       j
                                     πb (at,j |st )


A.2   C ONSISTENCY OF U PPER B OUND O BJECTIVE

We follow a similar derivation as in Neumann & Peters (2008) (for the case of state-action value
function Q(s, a)) to prove the consistency between L∗ (θ) and L(θ), i.e., the solution for minimizing


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L(θ) is the same for the original objective L∗ (θ).
                                h                         2 i
             L∗ (θ) = Es∼dπ (s) Vθπ (s) − Ea∼π(·|s) [V̄ ]
                    = Es∼dπ (s) [Vθπ (s)2 − 2Vθπ (s)Ea∼π(·|s) [V̄ ] + Ea∼π(·|s) [V̄ ]2 ]
                                 h           h               2 ii
               L(θ) = Es∼dπ (s) Ea∼πb (·|s) ρ Vθπ (s) − V̄
                     = Es∼dπ (s) [Ea∼πb (·|s) [ρ(Vθπ (s)2 − 2Vθπ (s)V̄ + V̄ 2 )]]
                     = Es∼dπ (s) [Vθπ (s)2 − 2Vθπ (s)Ea∼πb (·|s) ρV̄ + Ea∼πb (·|s) ρV̄ 2 ]


                     (Vθπ does not depend on a)
                     = Es∼dπ (s) [Vθπ (s)2 − 2Vθπ (s)Ea∼π(·|s) V̄ + Ea∼π(·|s) V̄ 2 ]


where ρ = π(a|s)/πb (a|s). The above results show that L∗ (θ) and L(θ) are identical except for a
constant term added, which remains independent of Vθπ .

A.3    A NALYZING THE VARIANCE OF THE DIFFERENT I MPORTANCE S AMPLING E STIMATORS

As shown in Section 3.2, for the bandit case the V-trace and weighted importance sampling estimators
are given by
                                            2
                                   P                              P
                                     a∼πb ρa r(a)                    a∼πb ρa r(a)
                      V̂V-trace = P            2
                                                   and V̂WIS = P
                                       a∼πb ρa                         a∼πb ρa
with the crucial difference that the importance weights are squared for V-trace. We can now consider
the effective sample sizes for both, the standard    self-normalized importance sampling estimator,
ρi xi / j ρj and the squared version ρ2i xi / j ρ2j . They are given by
       P                                        P

                                                2                        2 2
                                     Pn                         Pn
                               ρ    ( i=1 ρi )            ρ2       i=1 ρi
                             neff =  P  n     2   and neff =     P  n     4 ,
                                        i=1 ρi                      i=1 ρi
                                            Pn
respectively. Given that ρi ≥ 0 with i=1 ρi being strictly positive and n > 1, it holds that
          2
nρeff ≥ nρeff (cf. Owen (2013) Chapter 9.3). Consequently, the variance in the squared case is always
larger or equal to that of the standard estimator.

B     P SEUDO C ODE

Algorithm 1 Pseudo Code for Vlearn
 1: Initialize policy ϕ; critics θ1 , θ2 ; target critics θ̄1 , θ̄2
 2: Initialize πold ← πϕ ; trust region bounds ϵµ , ϵΣ
 3: Initialize replay buffer D; truncation level ϵρ
 4: while not converged do
 5:    Collect sample (s, a, r, s′ , πϕ (a|s)) and add to D
 6:    Sample batch B = {(s, a, r, s′ , πb (a|s))}t=1...K from D
 7:    Get current policy πϕ (a|s) for all s in B
 8:    Compute projected policy π̃ϕ = TRPL(πϕ , πold , ϵµ , ϵΣ ) for all s in B
 9:    Update critic network i ∈ {1, 2} with gradient

                          π̃ϕ (a|s)
                                                                            2
             1
                                            Vθπi (s) − r + γVθ̄i (s′ )
                P
       ∇θ i K     B min πb (a|s) , ϵρ
10:    if update policy then
11:        Compute advantage estimates Â = r + γ mini=1,2 Vθπi (s′ ) − mini=1,2 Vθπi (s)
                                                         h P                                            i
                                                            1               π̃ϕ (a|s)
12:        Update policy with trust region loss ∇ϕ K                B min πb (a|s) , ϵρ Â − αd(πϕ , π̃)
13:    end if
14:    θ̄i ← τ θi + (1 − τ )θ̄i for i ∈ {1, 2}
15:    if update old policy for trust region then
16:        πold ← πϕ
17:    end if
18: end while


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C            A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

                          Vlearn         V-trace                    PPO loss         No IS                 No Twin             ϵp = 20

                             Hopper-v4                                     Walker2D-v4                                  HalfCheetah-v4
                                                                                                           8,000
             3,000
                                                            4,000                                          6,000
    Reward


                                                   Reward


                                                                                                  Reward
             2,000
                                                                                                           4,000
                                                            2,000
             1,000
                                                                                                           2,000
                0                                              0                                              0
                     0       1       2        3                      0         1     2        3                    0       1        2       3
                         Env. Steps (×106 )                              Env. Steps (×106 )                            Env. Steps (×106 )

Figure 6: Performance of Vlearn without importance sampling (no IS) and when replacing TRPL
with the PPO loss on low-dimensional Gymnasium tasks. Shown are the mean over 10 seeds and
95% bootstrapped confidence intervals. Similar to the high-dimensional setting, using the PPO
loss or ignoring importance sampling altogether is not sufficient to ensure stable training and the
performance suffers for most tasks.


D            H YPERPARAMETERS
We conducted a random grid search to tune all hyperparameters for both Gymnasium1 (Towers et al.,
2023) and DMC2 (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020), which are based on Mujoco3 (Todorov et al., 2012).
We included learning rates within the range [10−5 , 5 × 10−5 , 10−4 , 3 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 ], mean
and covariance bounds within [10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 , 10−2 , 5 × 10−2 , 10−1 , 5 ×
10−1 ], batch sizes of [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512], policy update intervals of [1, 2], and network sizes
consisting of two hidden layers with [64, 128, 256, 512] neurons each. All models were trained on an
internal cluster on one Nvidia V 100 for approximately 1-3 days, depending on the task. The best
hyperparameter sets, as shown in Tables 1 and 2, were then trained for multiple seeds.
We found it is important of achieving a harmonious balance between the selected learning rate and
the mean/covariance bound of the trust region. We observed that an aggressive learning rate does
not pair well with a tight bound, and vice versa. Interestingly, when compared to other off-policy
methods, we found that Vlearn and off-policy V-trace performed better with smaller batch sizes,
and we did not observe any benefits from using warm start samples. In general, we noticed that the
hyperparameters were a blend of configurations established from existing off-policy and on-policy
methods. We attribute this to the structural similarities between our approach and both on-policy
methods, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and TRPL (Otto et al., 2021), as well as off-policy
methods, such as SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and MPO4 (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018).


    1
      Published under MIT license at https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/Gymnasium
    2
      Published under Apache-2.0 license at https://github.com/google-deepmind/dm_control
    3
      Published under Apache-2.0 license at https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco
    4
      Published under Apache-2.0 license at https://github.com/google-deepmind/acme/


                                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Hyperparameters for the Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2023) experiments in Figure 2 and Fig-
ure 5. The larger sample size for the the two on-policy methods is for the Humanoid-v4 experiments.
                                       PPO         TRPL       Vlearn/V-trace     SAC         MPO

 number samples                     2048/16384   2048/16384        1              1           1
 GAE λ                                 0.95         0.95          n.a.           n.a.        n.a.
 discount factor                       0.99         0.99          0.99           0.99        0.99


 ϵµ                                    n.a.         0.05           0.1           n.a.        1e-3
 ϵΣ                                    n.a.        0.0005        0.0005          n.a.        2e-6


 optimizer                            adam         adam           adam          adam        adam
 updates per epoch                     10           20            1000          1000        1000
 learning rate                        3e-4         5e-5           5e-4           3e-4        3e-4
 epochs critic                         10           10             n.a.          n.a.        n.a.
 learning rate critic (and alpha)     3e-4         3e-4           5e-4           3e-4        3e-4
 learning rate dual                    n.a.         n.a.           n.a.          n.a.        1e-2
 number minibatches                    32           64             n.a.          n.a.        n.a.
 batch size                            n.a.         n.a.           64            256         256
 buffer size                           n.a.         n.a.           5e5           1e6         1e6
 learning starts                        0            0              0           10000       10000
 policy update interval                n.a.         n.a.            2             1           1
 polyak weight                         n.a.         n.a.          5e-3           5e-3        5e-3
 trust region loss weight              n.a.         10             10            n.a.        n.a.
 num action samples                    n.a.         n.a.           n.a.           1           20


 normalized observations               True        True           True           False       False
 normalized rewards                    True        False          False          False       False
 observation clip                      10.0         n.a.           n.a.           n.a.        n.a.
 reward clip                           10.0         n.a.           n.a.           n.a.        n.a.
 critic clip                            0.2         n.a.           n.a.           n.a.        n.a.
 importance ratio clip                  0.2         n.a.           n.a.           n.a.        n.a.


 hidden layers                       [64, 64]     [64, 64]      [256, 256]     [256,256]   [256,256]
 hidden layers critic                [64, 64]     [64, 64]      [256, 256]     [256,256]   [256,256]
 hidden activation                     tanh         tanh           relu           relu        relu
 initial std                            1.0          1.0           1.0            1.0         1.0


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Hyperparameters for the dog tasks from DMC (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) and the
MyoHand tasks from Myosuite (Vittorio et al., 2022) in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively.
                                  PPO         TRPL      Vlearn/V-trace     SAC           MPO

 number samples                     16384      16384         1            1           1
 GAE λ                               0.95       0.95        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.
 discount factor                     0.99       0.99        0.99         0.99        0.99


 ϵµ                                   n.a.      0.05         0.1         n.a.        1e-3
 ϵΣ                                   n.a.     0.0005      0.0005        n.a.        1e-6


 optimizer                           adam       adam        adam        adam        adam
 updates per epoch                    10         20         1000        1000        1000
 learning rate                       3e-4       5e-5        1e-4         3e-4        3e-4
 epochs critic                        10         10          n.a.        n.a.        n.a.
 learning rate critic (and alpha)    3e-4       3e-4        1e-4         3e-4        3e-4
 number minibatches                   32         64          n.a.        n.a.        1e-2
 batch size                           n.a.       n.a.        64          256         256
 buffer size                          n.a.       n.a.        5e5         1e6         1e6
 learning starts                       0          0           0         10000       10000
 policy update interval               n.a.       n.a.         2           1           1
 polyak weight                        n.a.       n.a.       5e-3         5e-3        5e-3
 trust region loss weight             n.a.       10          10          n.a.        n.a.


 normalized observations             True       True        True         False       False
 normalized rewards                  True       False       False        False       False
 observation clip                    10.0        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.
 reward clip                         10.0        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.
 critic clip                          0.2        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.
 importance ratio clip                0.2        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.


 hidden layers                      [64, 64]   [64, 64]   [512, 512]   [512,512]   [512,512]
 hidden layers critic               [64, 64]   [64, 64]   [512, 512]   [512,512]   [512,512]
 hidden activation                    tanh       tanh        relu         relu        relu
 initial std                           1.0        1.0        1.0          1.0         1.0


                                                 19
