Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT: A N EW L ENS ON R ETRIEVAL
AUGMENTED G ENERATION S YSTEMS
 Hailey Joren∗                       Jianyi Zhang†                          Chun-Sung Ferng
 UC San Diego                        Duke University                        Google
 hjoren@ucsd.edu                     jianyi.zhang@duke.edu                  csferng@google.com

 Da-Cheng Juan                            Ankur Taly                     Cyrus Rashtchian
 Google                                   Google                         Google
 dacheng@google.com                       ataly@google.com               cyroid@google.com



                                                    A BSTRACT

             Augmenting LLMs with context leads to improved performance across many
             applications. Despite much research on Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
             systems, an open question is whether errors arise because LLMs fail to utilize the
             context from retrieval or the context itself is insufficient to answer the query. To
             shed light on this, we develop a new notion of sufficient context, along with a
             method to classify instances that have enough information to answer the query. We
             then use sufficient context to analyze several models and datasets. By stratifying
             errors based on context sufficiency, we find that larger models with higher baseline
             performance (Gemini 1.5 Pro, GPT 4o, Claude 3.5) excel at answering queries when
             the context is sufficient, but often output incorrect answers instead of abstaining
             when the context is not. On the other hand, smaller models with lower baseline
             performance (Llama 3.1, Mistral 3, Gemma 2) hallucinate or abstain often, even
             with sufficient context. We further categorize cases when the context is useful, and
             improves accuracy, even though it does not fully answer the query and the model
             errs without the context. Building on our findings, we explore ways to reduce
             hallucinations in RAG systems, including a new selective generation method
             that leverages sufficient context information for guided abstention. Our method
             improves the fraction of correct answers among times where the model responds by
             2–10% for Gemini, GPT, and Gemma. Code for our selective generation method
             and the prompts used in our autorater analysis are available on our github.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Providing Large Language Models (LLMs) with additional context, such as in Retrieval Augmented
Generation (RAG) systems, has led to major improvements in LLM factuality and verifiability when
adapting to new domains (Lewis et al., 2020). In the case of open-domain question answering, a
retrieval model provides context at inference time in the form of snippets or long-form text (Zhu
et al., 2021). Then, the model synthesizes the query along with this added context to generate the
answer. Unfortunately, current RAG-based LLMs exhibit many undesirable traits, such as confidently
predicting the incorrect answer with retrieved evidence (Mishra et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024; Ru
et al., 2024), being distracted by unrelated information (Cuconasu et al., 2024; Yoran et al., 2024),
and failing to properly extract answers from long text snippets (Hsieh et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024).
The ideal outcome is for the LLM to output the correct answer if the provided context contains
enough information to answer the question when combined with the model’s parametric knowledge.
Otherwise, the model should abstain from answering and/or ask for more information. One core
challenge in achieving this ideal outcome is building models that can use the provided context only
when it helps answer the question correctly. Several works have investigated this issue by evaluating
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Google.
    †
        Work done during an internship at Google.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


models in the presence of irrelevant information in the context (discussed in Section 2). However,
“relevant information” can range from directly containing the answer to simply being topically related
to the question. Even “golden” or oracle documents in datasets vary in how much information they
provide about the query, and whether they directly inform the ground truth answer or not. In other
words, while the goal seems to be to understand how LLMs behave when they do or do not have
sufficient information to answer the query, prior work fails to address this head-on.
As our first contribution, we put forth a new notion of sufficient context. We divide instances into two
categories based on whether the context provides enough information to construct an answer to the
query. The sufficient context designation is a function of an input pair consisting of one question and
the associated context. Crucially, it does not require a ground truth answer. Figure 1 shows examples
and a breakdown of model responses after splitting the data based on sufficient vs. insufficient context.
To divide the dataset, we use an LLM-based autorater to classify instances as sufficient or not. Here,
an autorater is a model that evaluates instances based on a property, e.g., a sufficient context autorater.
Using our sufficient context autorater, we uncover new insights into LLM behavior and into existing
benchmark datasets. First, we find models generate incorrect answers on a non-trivial fraction of
instances that have sufficient context to answer the query. In other words, open-book QA cannot
be solved by improving retrieval alone. Second, when given instances without sufficient context,
models tend to hallucinate more than they abstain, especially for multi-hop questions. This finding
complements prior work, which shows that LLMs are not robust to noisy retrieval (Yoran et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024). Third, models generate correct answers in many cases, even when the
provided context is insufficient. Surprisingly, this remains true after we filter out questions that the
model answers correctly in a closed book (w/o RAG) setting. Together, our analysis deepens our
understanding of RAG systems by revealing nuances in how models generate responses with retrieval.
As a final contribution, we explore ways to use sufficient context labels to reduce model hallucinations.
We implement a new selective generation framework that improves accuracy. We use a smaller,
intervention model to determine when the model generates or abstains, providing a controllable
trade-off. Moreover, we can combine our method with any LLM, including proprietary models like
Gemini and GPT. Our main result is that using sufficient context as an additional signal leads to much
higher accuracy over the fraction of answered queries, for most coverage levels and across multiple
models/datasets. We also find that fine-tuning open-source models with sufficient context information
does not easily reduce the hallucination rate. Instead, for LLama 3.1 and Mistral 3, fine-tuning can
lead to a higher abstention rate at the cost of fewer correct answers. Code for our selective generation
method and the prompts used in our autorater analysis are available on our github.
To summarize, our main contributions are

1. We define the notion of sufficient context, unifying existing work on relevance for RAG systems.
   Then, we design a sufficient context autorater (achieving 93% accuracy), enabling us to label
   instances scalably and to analyze model responses with or without sufficient context.
2. Our analysis leads to several new findings about retrieval-augmented model performance. One
   takeaway is that SOTA LLMs output correct responses 35–62% of the time with insufficient
   context. Hence, intervention strategies to increase accuracy should not solely rely on sufficiency.
3. Building on our findings above, we develop an efficient and general method for selective generation,
   using both confidence and sufficient context signals. Our method improves the fraction of correct
   answers (among total model responses) by up to 2–10% for Gemini, GPT, and Gemma.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Many papers have shown that reaping the benefits of RAG (e.g., better factuality) will require a deeper
understanding of how LLMs respond to variations in the queries and provided context (Asai et al.,
2024; Fan et al., 2024; Ram et al., 2023; Rau et al., 2024). We review two main areas. First, much
work has evaluated RAG systems with poor retrieval, uncovering cases where LLMs are led astray by
irrelevant context. Another line of study aims to reduce LLM hallucinations in RAG settings.
(Ir)relevant Context. Prior studies uncover a lack of robustness to imperfect retrieval. However,
these studies vary in terms of how they evaluate retrieval quality, without anchoring to a precise
“relevance” definition. Shi et al. (2023a) adds sentences to math questions (based on GSM8K) which


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                        Proprietary + Conﬁdential


 Examples: sufficient context                          Categorizing Model Responses (Musique Dataset)

    Question: Who is Lya L. married to?
                   Context A
                   Lya L. married Paul in 2020… They
     Sufficient
                   looked happy together at the
      Context
                   recent event.
                   Context B
                   Lya L. – Wikipedia
     Sufficient
                   Born: October 1, 1980
      Context
                   Spouse: Paul (m. 2020)
                   Context C
                   Lya L. married Tom in 2006…
    Insufficient
                   They divorced in 2014… Lya went
       Context
                   on dates with Paul in 2018…
                   Context D
                   Lya L. is an astronaut, born in
    Insufficient
                   Ohio…. Lya has two children…
       Context
                   Lya’s parents are lawyers…


Figure 1: New insights into RAG systems by looking at whether instances have sufficient context.
On the left, we show examples of sufficient context; on the right, a breakdown of model responses on
the Musique dataset. Adding RAG improves the percentage of correct answers. Unfortunately, with
RAG, models hallucinate more than abstain, and the insufficiency of the context does not account for
this major issue. Also, standard datasets have many instances with insufficient context (here, 55.4%).
We include results for other datasets (FreshQA, HotPotQA) in Appendix B, showing similar trends.


should not impact the answer at all (and GSM8K is designed to have sufficient context by definition).
Xie et al. (2024) looks at having counter-memory context, by either replacing the entity name with
an erroneous one or using an LLM to generate a synthetic context supporting the erroneous entity.
Ret-Robust (Yoran et al., 2024) trains a model to be robust to irrelevant context, with an NLI-based
entailment to determine relevance, and only uses the relevance scores to influence the training mixture
of relevant vs. irrelevant documents. Wu et al. (2024) looks at questions where the LLM gets the
answer correct without retrieval and is non-robust to changes in the retrieval. Multiple methods use
a model to predict relevance scores (as part of a larger pipeline), without calibration to a formal
definition (Wang et al., 2024a; Zhou et al., 2024), including for iterative retrieval (Jiang et al., 2024;
Yan et al., 2024). In terms of analysis studies, Cuconasu et al. (2024) distinguishes golden and
relevant documents, but simply uses “does not contain the answer” as a proxy for irrelevant context.
Reducing Hallucinations. There have also been efforts to improve RAG factuality on open-book QA
tasks (Asai et al., 2023; Mineiro, 2024; Simhi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024b).
The main theme is to improve both the generation and retrieval quality, often by fine-tuning one or
more components. Also, since RAG leads to very long contexts, another issue that arises is the “lost
in the middle” problem (Hsieh et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024). These works start with
the premise that the provided query/context should be precisely answerable by the LLM, and hence,
only analyze their findings in the sufficient context scenario. Independent of RAG, many papers
have studied interventions and tools for calibrating LLM confidence in their responses (Chuang
et al., 2024; Kadavath et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a) and performance across
disaggregated subsets of data (Paes et al., 2022; Joren et al., 2023).


3       S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT

At a high level, our aim is to classify input instances based on whether the context contains enough
information to answer the query. We split possible contexts into two cases: (1) Sufficient Context.
The context is sufficient to answer the query if it contains all the necessary information to provide a
definitive answer. (2) Insufficient Context. Otherwise, a context is insufficient. A context may also
be insufficient if the query requires specialized knowledge that is not provided in the context or if
the information in the context is incomplete, inconclusive, or contradictory. In this section, we more
thoroughly discuss sufficient context. Then, we show how to accurately and scalably label instances.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   D EFINITION OF S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT

We first set some notation for a generic open-domain question-answering setting following Trivedi
et al. (2020). Consider a dataset D with instances of the form q = (Q, C; A), where Q is the query
and C is the context that consists of a set of facts. At inference time, we also consider instances
q ′ = (Q, C) without the ground truth answer, where the goal is to predict an answer A′ from Q, C,
and the model’s parametric knowledge. To measure correctness, we compare A′ and A, where there
are many options such as exact match, F1 score, or an LLM-based assessment of answer sameness
(we use an LLM). Using this notation, we can now define our notion of sufficient context.
Definition (Sufficient Context). An instance q ′ = (Q, C) has sufficient context if and only if there
exists an answer A′ such that A′ is a plausible answer to the question Q given the information in C.
To understand this, we can build on the Attributable to Identified Sources (AIS) framework (Rashkin
et al., 2023). Entailment via AIS answers a slightly different question. Namely, given an instance
q = (Q, C; A), the entailment objective is to determine the truth value of the proposition: The
answer to the question Q is A given the information in C. The key difference between entailment
and sufficient context is that for sufficient context we do not presuppose that we have the answer A′
in advance, only that such an answer exists. Finally, we only consider “plausible” answers, where
we mean that A′ could be an answer to the question Q. For example, if the question asks about a
person’s birthplace, then A′ should be a location. We note that this allows for the possibility that the
context contains an incorrect answer to the question. This is a key requirement, because (i) we would
like to be able to use signal from sufficient context at inference time, where we do not have ground
truth answers (see Section 5.1) and (ii) we hope to elucidate findings that are robust to ground truth
label noise.
Remark 1 (Multi-hop queries). In most benchmark dataset (e.g., Musique, HotPotQA), models are
expected to be able to do multi-hop reasoning up to four hops, in which they must combining facts to
form the answer. However, they should not infer connections that are not in the context. For example,
if “Bob’s mother was born in New York” then this does not suffice to say Bob was born in New York.
But, if the context also says “Bob’s mother is Alice...” and “... all of Alice’s children were born in
New York” then this instance has sufficient context.
Remark 2 (Ambiguous queries). If the query is ambiguous, then the context is sufficient if and
only if (i) the context can disambiguate the query and (ii) the context provides an answer to the
disambiguated query. For example, the question could be “What sport does Mia play?” and the
context could contain both “Mia, from New York, plays basketball. . . ” and “... Mia, from California,
plays volleyball.” This is sufficient because if the query is referring to either Mia from New York or
Bob from California, then the context can answer the question.
Remark 3 (Ambiguous contexts). Assume the context contains multiple plausible answers to the
query. Then it is sufficient if and only if it also provides enough information to distinguish between
queries that would lead to each answer. For example, if the question is “What country does Ali live
in?” and the context is “Ali lives in Paris” then this instance does not have sufficient context because
it is not clear if Ali lives in Paris, France or Paris, Texas, USA. If the context further contains “This
weekend, Ali took the train from Paris to Marseille.” Then this becomes sufficient because it is almost
certain that Ali lives in France as one cannot take a train from Texas to France.

3.2   S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT AUTO R ATER

Next, we consider automating the task of labeling whether instances have sufficient context or not.
We investigate two questions: (1) Can today’s models achieve high accuracy on a challenging,
human-annotated dataset? (2) How does an entailment model compare to general-purpose LLMs? To
answer these questions, we evaluate methods on human-labeled data. Table 1 shows that Gemini 1.5
Pro can serve as an accurate autorater to label instances in terms of sufficient context. It achieves
93% accuracy, outperforms other methods, and operates without needing a ground truth answer.
Sufficient Context Labeled Dataset. Using the above definition, we construct gold labels for
each (query, context) pair. We did not use ground truth answers or model responses. For
the instances, we sample a total of 115 instances (queries, contexts, and answers) from standard
benchmarks (PopQA, FreshQA, Natural Questions, EntityQuestions). We design the dataset to
be very challenging, including single- and multi-hop questions, as well as adding highly related


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Sufficient Context AutoRater. Evaluating model ability to classify sufficient context on a
gold-labeled dataset of 115 (query, context; answer) instances. Gemini 1.5 Pro (1-shot)
performs the best, while FLAMe can be a cheaper alternative. TRUE-NLI and Contains GT need
ground truth (GT) answers, while others only use (query, context). Best in column in bold.
                       Metrics:      F1 Score    Accuracy      Precision   Recall    No GT Answer
 Methods
 Gemini 1.5 Pro (1-shot)               0.935       0.930        0.935       0.935           ✓
 Gemini 1.5 Pro (0-shot)               0.878       0.870        0.885       0.871           ✓
 FLAMe (fine-tune PaLM 24B)            0.892       0.878        0.853       0.935           ✓
 TRUE-NLI (fine-tune T5 11B)           0.818       0.826        0.938       0.726
 Contains GT                           0.810       0.809        0.870       0.758


information in the context even if it is not sufficient (e.g., a named entity from the question often
appears in the context). We evaluate methods’ abilities to classify sufficient context (binary labels).
Methods: Operating on Query-Context pairs. We use Gemini 1.5 Pro with either instructions
(0-shot) or both instructions and a 1-shot example, held out from our dataset. FLAMe 24B is a
general autorater model (Vu et al., 2024), but it has a small context window. For FLAMe, we divide
the contexts into 1600 token chunks and ask whether each chunk is sufficient. If any chunk is labeled
sufficient, we consider the instance to have sufficient context; otherwise, it’s labeled as insufficient.
We design prompts (in Appendix C) for both models based on the sufficient context definition above.
Methods: When a Ground Truth (GT) Answer is Available. For two baselines (TRUE-NLI,
Contains GT), we use answers as an additional input to classify sufficient context. TRUE-NLI is a
fine-tuned entailment model (Honovich et al., 2022) that checks if the context entails one of the GT
answers. Contains GT checks if a GT answer appears in the context. Comparing to entailment is
particularly interesting because if a given answer A is entailed by (Q, C), then the context is also
sufficient. On the other hand, the reverse is not true, since the answer A is only one possible choice
for A′ . As one consequence, if the ground truth answer A is incorrect, then it may not be entailed by
the context. This happens when a named entity is ambiguous (e.g., two people with the same name),
and the GT answer is based on one of the people while the context describes the other.
Results. Table 1 shows that Gemini 1.5 Pro (1-shot) performs the best overall in terms of F1 score
and accuracy. As expected, TRUE-NLI has higher precision and lower recall: it measures entailment,
which implies sufficient context. FLAMe outperforms TRUE-NLI in F1 and accuracy, but lags behind
Gemini (1-shot), likely because it is a smaller model. The Contains GT method works surprisingly
well, indicating that the presence of a ground truth answer correlates with context sufficiency.
Discussion. In real-world scenarios, we cannot expect candidate answers when evaluating model
performance. Hence, it is desirable to use a method that works using only the query and context.
Among these methods, Gemini 1.5 Pro (1-shot) has high accuracy and balanced precision and recall.
Therefore, we use it in Section 4 as our main method for analyzing datasets and model responses.
Later, in Section 5.1, we use FLAMe as a computationally efficient autorater to provide a signal for
selective generation. Our comparison with TRUE-NLI and Contains GT confirms that classifying
sufficient context is a different (and more complex) task than determining entailment.


4     A N EW L ENS ON RAG P ERFORMANCE

We set out to understand RAG performance by looking at sufficient context. We first analyze datasets
(Section 4.1), then we investigate model performance with/without sufficient context (Section 4.2). We
qualitatively discuss cases where insufficient context leads to correct model responses (Section 4.3).

4.1   D O B ENCHMARK DATASETS H AVE H IGH S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT ?

We introduce the datasets that we use for our analysis. Then, we investigate the percentage of
instances in these datasets that have sufficient context (according to our autorater). For our study, we
do not aim to optimize the retrieval methods (which could increase the sufficient context percentage).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     Measuring Sufficiency by Context Length


                         % of Dataset with Sufficient Context
                                                            100
                                                                                                               10000 Tokens
                                                                      77.4 77.4                                6000 Tokens
                                                                80                                             2000 Tokens
                                                                                  63.7
                                                                60
                                                                                         46.2 46.2 45.4   44.6 44.6
                                                                40                                                    33.4
                                                                20

                                                                 0
                                                                       FreshQA           HotpotQA          Musique
Figure 2: We compare the % of instances that our autorater labels as sufficient across datasets,
either with the first 10k, 6k, or 2k tokens of the provided sources. FreshQA has hand-curated URLs
that support the answers and exhibits high sufficient context. HotPotQA and Musique have lower
sufficient context (and even lower with 2000 tokens). We use 6000 token contexts in the remainder.


This is not the focus of our work, as we wish to understand how models perform with or without
sufficient context. Having a mix of both is inevitable in generic RAG systems.
Datasets. We consider FreshQA, Musique-Ans, and HotpotQA as a representative spread of open
book QA datasets. FreshQA (Vu et al., 2023) evaluates time-sensitive information and has up-to-date
URLs that should support an answer to the queries, which we use to construct the context (see
Appendix A.3 for details on the retrieval). We use the ‘True Premise’ setting (452 instances), skipping
‘False Premise’ questions that mislead by design. Musique-Ans (Trivedi et al., 2022) is a multi-hop
QA benchmark, created by composing two to four single-hop interconnected questions. Here, ‘Ans’
is the standard ‘answerable’ subset. Musique instances have 20 supporting text snippets as sources,
which we use as the context. HotPotQA (Yang et al., 2018) is a Wikipedia-based QA dataset, with
single- and multi-hop questions. The corpus is a large set of snippets; we retrieve the top 5 as the
context (via REPLUG (Shi et al., 2023b) from FlashRAG (Jin et al., 2024)). We randomly sample
500 instances from the development sets of Musique-Ans and HotPotQA for evaluation.
Sufficient Context % of Datasets. Figure 2 shows the fraction of instances that our autorater
classifies as having sufficient context. We explore three context lengths, ranging from a maximum
of 2000 to maximum of 10000 tokens. The motivation behind this is to assess if there is a large
change in sufficient context if we were to simply truncate the retrieval (e.g., for models that have
small context windows). In general, we see a modest difference from 2000 to 6000 token limit, but
effectively none from 6000 to 10000 tokens. FreshQA has the highest sufficient context percentage,
which makes sense as the context comes from oracle supporting documents. The lower sufficient
context in Musique is perhaps surprising, given that the retrieval is fixed as part of the dataset. From
the results in Figure 2, we truncate at 6000 tokens for all three datasets in the remainder of the paper.

4.2   I NITIAL F INDINGS BASED ON S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT

In general, the ideal behavior for a language generation model is to answer questions correctly when
possible and to otherwise abstain. RAG seeks to move models towards this desired behavior, such
that the provided context shifts hallucinations to correct answers, or to abstentions if needed. We
analyze several cases to assess how far we are from this ideal trade-off.
Experimental Set-up and LLMEval. We employed a basic chain of thought (CoT) prompting
approach, with the prompt structure and further information detailed in Appendix C.4. We then
processed the outputted answers to identify matches between the response and any of the ground truth
answers. Responses where a clear correct match could not be determined were processed through
the LLMEval pipeline using a zero-shot approach, with the prompt based on Krishna et al. (2024)
(see Appendix C.3). Then, for each example, we can rate it as “correct” or “abstain” or “hallucinate”
depending on the LLMEval output. We use an LLM for evaluation instead of checking for an exact
match because it is more robust to syntactic variations. See Appendix B.3 for details and examples.
Models Abstain Less with RAG. While overall performance improves with RAG, the introduction
of additional context paradoxically reduces the model’s ability to abstain from answering when


                                                                                           6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Categorizing RAG Responses: Sufficient vs Insufficient Context
                                                                                    FreshQA       Musique      HotpotQA
                                 Gemini 1.5 Pro                GPT 4o               Claude 3.5 Sonnet            Gemma 27B
                       100%
Sufficient Context

                       80%

                       60%

                       40%

                       20%

                        0%
                              Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.
                                 Gemini 1.5 Pro                GPT 4o               Claude 3.5 Sonnet            Gemma 27B
Insufficient Context


                       100%

                       80%

                       60%

                       40%

                       20%

                        0%
                              Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.   Correct Abstain Halluc.

    Figure 3: Model Performance on Datasets Stratified by Sufficient Context. Given sufficient
    context, models have a higher correct percentage on these challenging datasets. Performance drops,
    but the models are still able to answer a large portion of questions correct without sufficient context.
    One prevailing issue is that all models hallucinate rather than abstain in many cases with insufficient
    context. The smallest model Gemma 27B struggles to avoid hallucinations given insufficient context.

    appropriate. Without RAG, Claude 3.5 Sonnet abstains on 84.1% questions, while with RAG, the
    fraction of abstentions drops to 52%. Similarly, GPT 4o’s abstention fraction moves from 34.4%
    to 31.2% and Gemini 1.5 Pro’s drops from 100% to 18.6%. This phenomenon may arise from the
    model’s increased confidence in the presence of any contextual information, leading to a higher
    propensity for hallucination rather than abstention.
    Models Hallucinate with Both Sufficient and Insufficient Context. Considering Figure 3, models
    generally achieve higher accuracy with sufficient context (higher green bars, top row) than without
    sufficient context (lower green bars, bottom row). However, looking at each row separately, we
    discover several findings. First, in the sufficient context case (top row), we see that models hallucinate
    more than they abstain (red bars are higher than blue bars, usually). The trend holds across all
    three datasets. Moving to insufficient context (bottom row), we find a different distribution of model
    responses, with more abstentions and hallucinations. This tendency varies notably across different
    models. For instance, Claude abstains more (higher blue bars) with insufficient context, but answers
    fewer questions correctly (lower green bars) than Gemini and GPT. These differences underscore
    the potential for improvement in both retrieval and reasoning capabilities. Overall, Gemma has
    much more hallucinations (higher red bars) than the other models, except for HotPotQA, where we
    attribute the higher accuracy to the smaller retrieved contexts.

     4.3               Q UALITATIVELY ANALYZING RESPONSES WITH INSUFFICIENT CONTEXT

    One curious observation in our analysis is the ability of models to sometimes provide correct answers
    even when presented with insufficient context. For example, from Figure 3, all three models are able
    to correctly answer upwards of 35% of instances with insufficient context on HotpotQA. A natural
    assumption is that the models already know the answer from pre-training, and they can generate a
    correct response from parametric memory. However, this only explains part of the story.
    Looking deeper, we provide a qualitative categorization in Table 2 of instance types where our
    autorater labels an instance as insufficient context, while the LLM evaluator marks the model answer


                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Instance type          Why model may be correct         Example
    Yes/No question        50% chance of correct            Q: Is there a total eclipse in the United States this year?

                                                            Q: Which band has more members, Chvrches or
    Limited choice         Some chance of correct           Goodbye Mr. Mackenzie?
                                                            Q: Who did the original voice for the character
                                                            whose series Mickey’s Safari in Letterland is from?
    Multi-hop: fragment    Use parametric inference         Context says Mickey’s Safari is a video game
                                                            and Walt Disney voices Mickey Mouse in cartoons.
                                                            Must infer the game is in the Mickey Mouse series.
                                                            Q: Claudine’s Return starred the actress who played
                                                            which role on “Married...with Children”?
    Multi-hop: partial     Use parametric knowledge         Context lists actresses but not their roles in
                                                            “Married...with Children”. Must know extra facts.
                                                            Q: How many cyclists have won all three of women’s
                                                            cycling Grand Tours equivalents in the same year?
    Too many hops          Execute complex reasoning        Context requires cross-referencing lists of events
                                                            and lists of winners while tracking winners by year.
                                                            Q: Who is the spouse of a cast member from King
                                                            of the Mountain?
    Ambiguous query        Guess right interpretation       Context has many cast members and query/context do
                                                            not specify which spouse to answer about.

    Rater error            Mislabel insuff. or correct      —
    Closed-book correct    Known from pre-training          —

Table 2: Qualitative Analysis of Correct Answer & Insufficient Context. Examining model
responses across datasets, we identify common cases where the model generates a correct answer
even though our autorater labels the instance as insufficient. We categorize such instances into eight
types, as well as provide examples. Given that models are also correct on many questions in the
closed-book setting, we believe this mostly explains the 35–62% correct rate with insufficient context.

as correct. For example, one type accounts for when the provided context is not sufficient to answer the
query, but it bridges gaps in the model’s knowledge. Another type is when the retrieved information
clarifies ambiguities inherent in the question (without answering the question). Finally, we also have
the times where either the autorater or the evaluator model makes an error. We note that our analysis
expands on prior work by Yoran et al. (2024), who also find a large fraction of cases where the model
is correct with RAG (but not without) even though the context does not contain the answer.
We additionally investigated cases where the autorater labels an instance as having sufficient context
while the LLM evaluator marks the answer as incorrect. One source of these discrepancies occurs
when the ground truth answer conflicts with the answer provided in the source. This represents a key
difference from methods that measure entailment, where context is evaluated relative to a specific
ground truth answer (see Table 1). Another source of errors arises when the autorater correctly
identifies that the necessary information is present, but the model fails to properly compose the
information (e.g., in multihop questions or questions requiring arithmetic). In a substantial number of
cases, however, determining the source of the error proves challenging.


5     T ECHNIQUES TO R EDUCE H ALLUCINATIONS WITH RAG

From our previous analysis, we have seen that models may hallucinate rather than abstain and that
this happens more with RAG than in a closed-book setting. A natural next question is whether we
can prompt or fine-tune a model to perform closer to the ideal case. Can we steer the model to either
output the correct answer or abstain, while hallucinating an incorrect answer as little as possible?

5.1    S ELECTIVE RAG U SING S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT S IGNAL

One simple solution to improving RAG performance would be to use the sufficient context autorater
to abstain given insufficient context. However, this heavy-handed approach can lower overall
performance, since all models answer some questions correctly even with insufficient context, as
described in Table 2 and demonstrated in Figure 3. Instead, we propose a method for combining


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the sufficient context autorater outputs with model self-rated confidence scores to tune a selective
accuracy-coverage trade-off, where “coverage” denotes the portion of inputs on which the model does
not abstain. Specifically, we use these signals to train a simple linear model to predict hallucinations,
and then use it to set coverage-accuracy trade-off thresholds.
This mechanism differs from other strategies for improving abstention in two key ways. First, because
it operates independently from generation, it mitigates unintended downstream effects, whereas
strategies like fine-tuning to improve abstention can inadvertently worsen performance on certain
inputs (see Section 5.2). Second, it offers a controllable mechanism for tuning abstention, which
allows for different operating settings in differing applications, such as strict accuracy compliance in
medical domains or maximal coverage on creative generation tasks.

Abstention Signals We utilize two main signals for abstention: the self-rated probabilities as
in Li et al. (2024); Kadavath et al. (2022) and the sufficient context autorater. For the self-rated
probabilities, we use two strategies: P(True) and P(Correct). P(True) requires sampling answers
from the model multiple times, and then prompting the model multiple times to label each model as
correct or incorrect, resulting in a final probability of correctness associated with each question as in
Kadavath et al. (2022). For proprietary models, where extensive querying is prohibitively expensive,
we use P(Correct) instead. We adapt the probability-generating prompt from Li et al. (2024) to obtain
the model’s response and its estimated probability of correctness. For the sufficient context signal,
we use the binary label from an autorater. Our hypothesis is that combining these signals should lead
to more effective abstention, particularly in cases where the context is insufficient.
Methods. We calculate P(True) by sampling 20 responses for each question and querying the model
5 times to evaluate whether the answer is correct or incorrect (without using the ground truth) as
in Kadavath et al. (2022). For P(Correct), the prompt requests the most likely and second most
likely answers along with their probabilities. We use string matching to extract the response and
self-predicted probability, keeping the one with the highest probability. To determine sufficient
context, we use FLAMe, a small and efficient model for determining the sufficient context label. We
divide the retrievals into chunks of 1600 tokens to fit in the context window and label the context as
sufficient if any of these chunks are sufficient.
We combine the binary sufficient context label with the self-rated answer probability (P(True) for
open-source models or P(Correct) for proprietary models) in a simple logistic regression model to
predict hallucinations with 100 iterations of random hyperparameter search. At inference time, we
use the logistic regression model scores to threshold the outputs, abstaining when the score is below
a chosen threshold as in Joren et al. (2024). We measure the added value for selective accuracy
of the sufficient context signal (purple line in Figure 4) by comparing it with the model self-rated
confidence alone (gray line).
Results. We find that our approach leads to a better selective accuracy-coverage trade-off compared
to using model confidence alone. In particular, see gains of over 10% for Gemma 27B on HotpotQA
in the highest accuracy regions, and gains of over 5% for Gemini 1.5 Pro on the same dataset near the
70% coverage region. These gains are less pronounced on datasets with lower overall accuracy, such
as when using Gemma 27B on Musique. In this scenario, the low overall performance (18.4%) likely
means that most of the predictive gains are seen by using the self-rated confidence to predict errors
for the majority of samples. As a result, there is no added benefit from the sufficient context signal.
Discussion. As expected, we see a downward trend in which higher coverage leads to lower selective
accuracy for both methods. We conclude that the selective generation mechanism with sufficient
context has an added benefit for accuracy-coverage trade-offs compared to self-rated confidence
alone. As a prerequisite for our method, models should have a non-trivial accuracy on sufficient and
insufficient context instances. Then, intuitively, we can prioritize answering questions the model is
likely to get right before those the model struggles with. While ordering examples is impossible in
real settings, we can estimate a coverage level and use a threshold to choose when to answer.

5.2   F INE - TUNING

We also consider fine-tuning models to increase their ability to abstain instead of outputting an
incorrect answer. To do so, we train the models with some examples that contain “I don’t know”
instead of their original ground truth answer. The intuition here is that training explicitly on such


                                                   9
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     100       Gemini 1.5 Pro - HotpotQA               100     GPT 4o - HotpotQA                    100    Gemma 27B - HotpotQA
                                        P(Correct)                                   P(Correct)                                        P(True)

Selective Accuracy (%)
                                        P(Correct) + Suff. Context                   P(Correct) + Suff. Context                        P(True) + Suff. Context
                         90                                             90                                           90

                         80                                             80                                           80

                         70                                             70                                           70

                         60                                             60                                           60
                           0     20    40       60       80      100      0   20    40       60       80      100      0    20    40        60       80      100
                                      Coverage (%)                                 Coverage (%)                                  Coverage (%)
                     100       Gemini 1.5 Pro - Musique                100     GPT 4o - Musique                     100    Gemma 27B - Musique
                                        P(Correct)                                   P(Correct)                                        P(True)
Selective Accuracy (%)


                                        P(Correct) + Suff. Context                   P(Correct) + Suff. Context      80                P(True) + Suff. Context
                         90                                             90

                         80                                             80                                           60
                                                                                                                     40
                         70                                             70
                                                                                                                     20
                         60                                         60
                           0     20    40       60       80      100 0        20    40       60       80      100     00    20    40        60       80      100
                                      Coverage (%)                                 Coverage (%)                                  Coverage (%)

     Figure 4: Selective Generation: Coverage vs. Selective Accuracy. For selective generation, we
     use a linear combination of sufficient context and self-rated confidence (purple) or confidence alone
     (gray). The x-axis shows coverage (% of questions answered); the y-axis shows accuracy at each
     coverage (# correct / # answered). The combined approach matches or outperforms the baseline
     confidence-only method, especially on HotpotQA, where our method improves accuracy for most
     coverages. For Gemma 27B on Musique, the methods are identical (coeff. for stuff. context is 0).


    inputs could encourage the model to abstain instead of hallucinating. We also consider multiple
    models (Llama 3.1 8B and Mixtral 3 7B) and multiple settings, such as only changing the answers
    when the example has insufficient context. We present full details in Appendix B.1. The main
    takeaways are that fine-tuned models (i) have a higher rate of correct answers in many cases, but (ii)
    still hallucinate quite often and more than they abstain. Overall, it is likely possible to use fine-tuning
    to steer the model towards better abstention and correctness, but more work is needed to determine
    develop a reliable strategy that can balance these objectives.


      6                       C ONCLUSION

     Our work provided a new lens on LLM responses in RAG systems centered around our notion of
     sufficient context. We constructed a sufficient context autorater, which enabled scalable insights into
     model performance on different types of instances. Our analysis revealed that even with sufficient
     context, LLMs frequently hallucinate answers. We also found, surprisingly, many cases where
     a model will output a correct answer with access to only insufficient context. Qualitatively, we
     categorized such instances, leading to a fuller picture of ways context can be useful. Finally, we
     demonstrated a general-purpose selective generation method, which applies to Gemini, GPT, and
     Gemma, and can reduce hallucinations by 2–10% on queries that the model answers.
   Limitations. Our analysis focuses on QA datasets, but summarization tasks also utilize context,
   which may or may not be sufficient. For example, models may behave differently on the prompt
   “Summarize the reviews of 5-star hotels in Mallorca” depending on whether the context mentions the
   hotel reviews, whether they are for 5-star hotels, etc. Another shortcoming is an exploration of how
   often different retrieval methods lead to sufficient context. Also to achieve the best performance, we
   could have used our autorater to iteratively judge whether to retrieve more or answer the question.
     Future Work. One direction is a fine-grained sufficient context autorater, which outputs a score
     instead of a binary label. This could be useful for ranking contexts after the retrieval step. Another
     direction is to extend the definition of sufficient context to multi-modal RAG settings, such as for
     visual QA (images) or document QA (pdf files). Finally, our selective generation results suggest that
     there is room for improvement in reducing hallucinations by using auxiliary signals from the inputs.


                                                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Hrishikesh Garud, Vikram Gopali, Xun Sun, and Bruce Wang for annotating data. We
thank Ranjay Krishna and Jacob Eisenstein for helpful discussions. We also thank Alyshia Olsen for
help with the figure design and color palette. We thank the anonymous reviewers for suggestions to
improve the presentation.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
  Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Anthropic. Claude 3.5 sonnet model card addendum, 2024.

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve,
  generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.

Akari Asai, Zexuan Zhong, Danqi Chen, Pang Wei Koh, Luke Zettlemoyer, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Wen-tau
  Yih. Reliable, adaptable, and attributable language models with retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03187,
  2024.

Yung-Sung Chuang, Linlu Qiu, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Ranjay Krishna, Yoon Kim, and James Glass. Lookback lens:
  Detecting and mitigating contextual hallucinations in large language models using only attention maps. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.07071, 2024.

Florin Cuconasu, Giovanni Trappolini, Federico Siciliano, Simone Filice, Cesare Campagnano, Yoelle Maarek,
   Nicola Tonellotto, and Fabrizio Silvestri. The power of noise: Redefining retrieval for rag systems. In
   Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
   Retrieval, pp. 719–729, 2024.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
  Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. A
  survey on rag meeting llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the 30th
 ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 6491–6501, 2024.

Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
  Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju,
  Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. Gemma 2: Improving open
  language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.

Or Honovich, Roee Aharoni, Jonathan Herzig, Hagai Taitelbaum, Doron Kukliansy, Vered Cohen, Thomas
  Scialom, Idan Szpektor, Avinatan Hassidim, and Yossi Matias. True: Re-evaluating factual consistency
  evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3905–3920, 2022.

Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Yung-Sung Chuang, Chun-Liang Li, Zifeng Wang, Long Le, Abhishek Kumar, James Glass,
  Alexander Ratner, Chen-Yu Lee, Ranjay Krishna, and Tomas Pfister. Found in the middle: Calibrating
  positional attention bias improves long context utilization. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 14982–14995,
  Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.890. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.
  890.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu
  Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.

AQ Jiang, A Sablayrolles, A Mensch, C Bamford, DS Chaplot, D de las Casas, F Bressand, G Lengyel, G Lample,
  L Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b (2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhouyu Jiang, Mengshu Sun, Lei Liang, and Zhiqiang Zhang. Retrieve, summarize, plan: Advancing multi-hop
  question answering with an iterative approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13101, 2024.
Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Xinyu Yang, Chenghao Zhang, and Zhicheng Dou. Flashrag: A modular toolkit for
   efficient retrieval-augmented generation research. CoRR, abs/2405.13576, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2405.13576.
Hailey Joren, Chirag Nagpal, Katherine A Heller, and Berk Ustun.      Participatory person-
  alization in classification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 36, 2023.     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/2dbb8bfe4cd3875609b23799830ee865-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Hailey Joren, Charles Marx, and Berk Ustun. Classification with conceptual safeguards. In The Twelfth Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL https://iclr.cc/virtual/
  2024/poster/17625.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly) know what they
  know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Satyapriya Krishna, Kalpesh Krishna, Anhad Mohananey, Steven Schwarcz, Adam Stambler, Shyam Upadhyay,
  and Manaal Faruqui. Fact, fetch, and reason: A unified evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2409.12941, 2024.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
  Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
  intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
Moxin Li, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Fengbin Zhu, Qifan Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Think twice before assure:
 Confidence estimation for large language models through reflection on multiple answers. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.09972, 2024.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
  Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00638. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.tacl-1.9.
Paul Mineiro. Online joint fine-tuning of multi-agent flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04516, 2024.
Abhika Mishra, Akari Asai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yizhong Wang, Graham Neubig, Yulia Tsvetkov, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained hallucination detection and editing for language models. In COLM 2024,
  2024.
Cheng Niu, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Siliang Xu, KaShun Shum, Randy Zhong, Juntong Song, and Tong
  Zhang. RAGTruth: A hallucination corpus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented language models.
  In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 10862–10878, Bangkok,
  Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.585.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.585.
Lucas Monteiro Paes, Carol Xuan Long, Berk Ustun, and Flavio Calmon. On the epistemic limits of personalized
  prediction. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Snp3iEj7NJ.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Yoav
  Shoham. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 11:1316–1331, 2023.
Hannah Rashkin, Vitaly Nikolaev, Matthew Lamm, Lora Aroyo, Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das, Slav Petrov,
  Gaurav Singh Tomar, Iulia Turc, and David Reitter. Measuring attribution in natural language generation
  models. Computational Linguistics, 49(4):777–840, 2023.
David Rau, Hervé Déjean, Nadezhda Chirkova, Thibault Formal, Shuai Wang, Vassilina Nikoulina, and
  Stéphane Clinchant. Bergen: A benchmarking library for retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.01102, 2024.
Dongyu Ru, Lin Qiu, Xiangkun Hu, Tianhang Zhang, Peng Shi, Shuaichen Chang, Jiayang Cheng, Cunxiang
  Wang, Shichao Sun, Huanyu Li, et al. Ragchecker: A fine-grained framework for diagnosing retrieval-
  augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08067, 2024.


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny
   Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 31210–31227. PMLR, 2023a.

Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Rich James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
 Wen-tau Yih. Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12652,
  2023b.

Adi Simhi, Jonathan Herzig, Idan Szpektor, and Yonatan Belinkov. Constructing benchmarks and interventions
  for combating hallucinations in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09971, 2024.

Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Is multihop qa in dire condition?
  measuring and reducing disconnected reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 8846–8863, 2020.

Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Musique: Multihop questions
  via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:
  539–554, 2022.

Tu Vu, Mohit Iyyer, Xuezhi Wang, Noah Constant, Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Denny
  Zhou, Quoc Le, et al. Freshllms: Refreshing large language models with search engine augmentation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.03214, 2023.

Tu Vu, Kalpesh Krishna, Salaheddin Alzubi, Chris Tar, Manaal Faruqui, and Yun-Hsuan Sung. Foundational
  autoraters: Taming large language models for better automatic evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10817,
  2024.

Yuhao Wang, Ruiyang Ren, Junyi Li, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Liu, and Ji-Rong Wen. Rear: A relevance-aware
  retrieval-augmented framework for open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17497,
  2024a.

Zilong Wang, Zifeng Wang, Long Le, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Vincent Perot, Yuwei Zhang,
   Anush Mattapalli, Ankur Taly, Jingbo Shang, et al. Speculative rag: Enhancing retrieval augmented generation
   through drafting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08223, 2024b.

Siye Wu, Jian Xie, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Kai Zhang, and Yanghua Xiao. How easily do irrelevant inputs
   skew the responses of large language models? In COLM 2024, 2024.

Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and Yu Su. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn sloth: Revealing
   the behavior of large language models in knowledge conflicts. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.15884, 2024.

Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
  pher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings
  of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2018.

Zhangyue Yin, Qiushi Sun, Qipeng Guo, Jiawen Wu, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Do large language
  models know what they don’t know? In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.),
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 8653–8665, Toronto, Canada,
  July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.551. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.551.

Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. Making retrieval-augmented language models robust
  to irrelevant context. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Tan Yu, Anbang Xu, and Rama Akkiraju. In defense of rag in the era of long-context language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2409.01666, 2024.

Hanning Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Yong Lin, Yi Fung, Qing Lian, Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Heng Ji, and
  Tong Zhang. R-tuning: Instructing large language models to say ‘i don’t know’. In Proceedings of the
  2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7106–7132, 2024a.


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiahao Zhang, Haiyang Zhang, Dongmei Zhang, Liu Yong, and Shen Huang. End-to-end beam retrieval for
   multi-hop question answering. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of
   the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
   Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1718–1731, Mexico City, Mexico, June
   2024b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.96. URL https:
   //aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.96.
Yujia Zhou, Zheng Liu, Jiajie Jin, Jian-Yun Nie, and Zhicheng Dou. Metacognitive retrieval-augmented large
  language models. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024, pp. 1453–1463, 2024.

Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Chao Wang, Jianming Zheng, Soujanya Poria, and Tat-Seng Chua. Retrieving and
  reading: A comprehensive survey on open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00774,
  2021.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       S UPPORTING E XPERIMENT I NFORMATION
We provide sufficient details to reproduce all of our experiments. We list all of the prompts that we
use in the next section.

A.1     M ODELS

GPT 4o. We use the API-accessible gpt-4o-2024-08-06 model, released on August 6,
2024 (Achiam et al., 2023).
Gemini 1.5 Pro. We use the API-accessible gemini-1.5-pro-0514 model, released on May
14, 2024 (Gemini Team et al., 2023).
Claude 3.5 Sonnet. We use the only API-accessible claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620 model,
released on June 20, 2024 (Anthropic, 2024).
Gemma 2 27B. We use the publicly available instruction tuned gemma-2-27b-it model, released
on Jun 27, 2024 (Gemma Team et al., 2024).
Llama 3.1 8B. We use the publicly available instruction tuned Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct model,
released on July 23, 2024 (Dubey et al., 2024).
Mistral 3 7B. We use the publicly available instruction tuned Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
model, released on May 22, 2024 (Jiang et al., 2023).
FLAMe. We use the published FLAMe-RM-24B model (Vu et al., 2024).
TRUE-NLI model. Calculated the maximum probability over the chunks in the context. Use a
threshold of 0.05, where if the maximum probability is higher then this, then we classify as ‘sufficient
context’. The threshold of 0.05 achieved the highest F1 score on our human labeled dataset. We use
the t5_xxl_true_nli_mixture version of their model (Honovich et al., 2022).

A.2     F INE - TUNING S ETTINGS

In our fine-tuning setup, we employed the LoRA adaptation technique (Hu et al., 2022) to fine-tune
two models: LLaMA 3.1 8B instruct and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.31 . We used either a 2,000-example
random subset sampled from the training set of the Musique-Ans dataset or from the development set
of the HotPotQA data2 . The prompt template for finetuning is provided in Appendix D.
For the LoRA parameters, we set the rank to 4 and alpha to 8 for all experiments. The models were
fine-tuned over 2 epochs with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of 1 × 10−5 . We note that the
training was not smooth, and different checkpoints led to very different results. To be systematic,
we chose the best checkpoint in terms of Correct % after either 1 or 2 epochs (where for Musique it
turned out to be after 1 epoch, and for HotPotQA we found that 2 epochs was better).

A.3     DATASETS

We sample 500 examples from HotPotQA and Musique-Ans dev sets, following prior work. We use
all ‘True Premise’ questions from FreshQA.

Retrieval for HotpotQA. We adopt the FlashRAG framework (Jin et al., 2024) to implement our
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) process. Our retrieval corpus is based on the wiki-18 dataset,
utilizing ‘intfloat/e5-base-v2‘ from Hugging Face’s model hub as a Dense Retriever 3 . For each query,
we retrieved the top 5 documents, which are subsequently concatenated with the query and placed
within a prompt template for inference.
To explore advanced retrieval techniques, we also evaluated the REPLUG (Shi et al., 2023b) method.
REPLUG enhances the generation quality by prepending each retrieved document individually to the
    1
     Available at huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
    2
     We use dev set for HotPotQA since the training set had a much different distribution of sufficient context
examples. Namely, we found the train set to be over 88% sufficient context, while the dev set was only 44%.
   3
     huggingface.co/intfloat/e5-base-v2


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


input context and ensembling output probabilities across different passes. The REPLUG method is
also implemented based on the FlashRAG framework (Jin et al., 2024).

Retrieval for FreshQA We use the urls provided in the FreshQA dataset as retrieval for the
context. We scraped each url and discarded extra HTML content such as headers, footers, and
navigation. We include the title of each webpage in the text, convert any included tables to markdown,
and include the table title immediately before the table in the text. When splitting the tables and text
for smaller context windows, we keep tables and sentences intact when possible. For large tables that
require splitting, we duplicate the table row column headers to include them in each chunk.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Fine-tuned (FT) Llama 3.1 8B Instruct and Mistral 3 7B Instruct models. We compare
closed book and vanilla RAG with three FT settings, measuring % Correct (%C), % Abstain (%A),
and % Hallucinate (%H). Also, “idk” means we change the answer in training samples to be “I don’t
know” instead of the given answer (either for 20% of random examples, or 20% of examples with
insufficient context). Best %C for each model/dataset in bold.
                                                               Musique           HotPotQA
 Model     Variant                              RAG     %C      %A %H          %C %A %H
 Llama     Closed Book                                   2.8    76.4   20.8    18.8    57    24.2
 "         Vanilla RAG                           ✓      19.6    53.6   26.8    36.8   40.4   22.8
 "         FT GT answer (Data Mix 1)             ✓      29.2    31.4   39.4    39.4   27.6    33
 "         FT idk 20% rand. (Data Mix 2)         ✓      26.8    37.2    36     39.2   28.6   32.2
 "         FT idk 20% insuff. (Data Mix 3)       ✓       25     38.8   36.2     38    30.4   31.6
 Mistral   Closed Book                                   6.6    29.8   63.6     32     7.6   60.4
 "         Vanilla RAG                           ✓      28.8    11.8   59.4    46.6    9.2   44.2
 "         FT GT answer (Data Mix 1)             ✓      31.4      0    68.6    43.4     0    56.6
 "         FT idk 20% rand. (Data Mix 2)         ✓       23      1.2   75.8    41.6    0.8   57.6
 "         FT idk 20% insuff. (Data Mix 3)       ✓       23      2.2   74.8    41.2     2    56.8


B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

B.1   F INE - TUNING F ULL R ESULTS

One aspect of our selective generation framework is that we use FLAMe, a 24B model, to provide
sufficient context labels. However, we would incur significant overhead if we used a 24B model to
improve the generation of a much smaller LLM. Instead, we try directly fine-tuning Llama 3.1 8B
and Mistral 3 7B to increase accuracy with retrieval. Specifically, we experiment with different data
mixtures to encourage the model to output “I don’t know” instead of generating an incorrect response.
Fine-tuning Data. We repeat the following process separately for each of the Musique-Ans and
HotPotQA datasets to create three mixtures of training data with different answers for each dataset.
First, we sample 2000 instances. Then, for Data Mix 1, we fine-tune on these instances and keep their
given ground truth answer. For Data Mix 2, we choose 400 examples (20%) at random and change
the answer to “I don’t know” before fine-tuning. For Data Mix 3, we instead randomly choose 400
examples (20%) that our autorater labels as insufficient context and change their answer to “I don’t
know” while keeping the other answers as the ground truth. Our hypothesis is that fine-tuning on
Data Mix 2 and 3 should steer the model to abstain more and hallucinate less than with Data Mix 1.
Models, Methods, Metrics. Using the three data mixtures described above, we fine-tune the Llama
3.1 8B Instruct and Mistral 3 7B Instruct models model with LoRA (details in Appendix A.2). At
inference time, we use the standard RAG setup where we add context to the prompt. As baselines,
we also evaluate the model without fine-tuning in both the closed-book setting (w/o RAG) and the
open-book setting (Vanilla RAG). Consistent with the prior experiments, we use an LLM with ground
truth answers to classify responses as Correct (%C), Abstention (%A), or Hallucination (%H).
Fine-tuning Results and Discussion. Table 3 shows our experimental results. We verify that the FT
variants have a higher rate of generating correct answers (%C) compared to closed-book and Vanilla
RAG in three of 4 cases. On the other hand, refuting our hypothesis, Data Mix 2 and 3 do not lead
to more abstentions than Vanilla RAG. But, they do abstain more than with Data Mix 1, showing
the impact of adding “I don’t know” in the training set. In general, FT models using RAG output
incorrect answers (%H) at least 31% of the time, and often more than they abstain (%A).

B.2   P ERFORMANCE B REAKDOWN BY S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT

We explore RAG performance by different models for various RAG benchmark datasets. Here,
the first column shows performance without RAG (closed-book) while the second column shows
performance with RAG (open-book). To better understand RAG performance, we use our sufficient
context autorater to stratify the retrieval augmented generation (RAG) datasets into sufficient and


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


insufficient context. The third and fourth columns show the performance of the second column
stratified by sufficient vs insufficient context respectively.

                            Categorizing model responses (FreshQA dataset)
                                      Abstain         Hallucinate      Correct
                                           10.0%                             46.1%
                                             11.7%              9.1%                       Gemini
                100%                                  89.1%
                                                                1.7%    12.7%              1.5 Pro
                                   78.3%
                                                                                 41.2%


                    40.3%                  9.3%                                  38.2%
             8.6%                            11.7%              6.9%    17.6%
                                                      89.1%
                                                                4.0%                       GPT 4o
                                  79.0%
                51.1%                                                            44.1%


                53.2%                                                            39.2%
                                            23.1%              18.3%
                                  54.1%               54.2%                                Gemma
                                                                                    6.9%      27B
             11.8%                          22.8%             27.5%
                     35.0%                                                53.9%

             Without RAG             With RAG             With RAG         With RAG
                                                       Suff. Context   Insuff. Context
                                                     77.4% of Dataset 22.6% of Dataset
Figure 5: Correct, hallucination, and abstention fractions across models for dataset FreshQA, stratified
by sufficient context. FreshQA includes hand-curated source URLs, which explains the larger
percentage of sufficient context (77.4%). FreshQA also specifically explores questions with answers
that change based on the question’s timestamp, which may explain the frequent abstentions without
RAG (100% for Gemini 1.5 Pro).


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Categorizing model responses (HotpotQA dataset)
                                    Abstain          Hallucinate          Correct
              68.4%                 30.2%                  26.0%             33.8%
                                         12.0%                 6.5%
                                                                                      16.7%   Gemini
                                                                                              1.5 Pro
                    23.4%                              67.5%
                8.2%               57.8%                                        49.4%


                                     24.8%                  19.9%               29.0%
             25.8% 26.2%                                                             11.5%
                                         10.0%                 8.2%                           GPT 4o
                48.0%             65.2%                71.9%                  59.5%


               54.8%               42.8%                    34.2%            50.2%
                                           7.2%                                       11.9%   Gemma
                                                                1.7%
             18.0% 27.2%
                                                                                                 27B
                                    50.0%               64.1%                       37.9%

            Without RAG            With RAG            With RAG         With RAG
                                                    Suff. Context   Insuff. Context
                                                  46.2% of Dataset 53.8% of Dataset
Figure 6: Correct, hallucination, and abstention fractions across models for dataset HotpotQA,
stratified by sufficient context. HotpotQA includes questions that are more likely to be answerable
without context (e.g., yes or no questions, multiple choice questions, or questions with answers that
might be answerable due to pre-training). This explains the higher fraction of correct answers without
RAG (e.g., 48.0% for GPT 4o).


Table 4: Performance Analysis of RAG Systems Using Human-Annotated Sufficient Context
Labels. These tables include results on a curated set of challenging context-dependent questions.
Table (a) shows that while larger models generally achieve higher accuracy with sufficient context
(present in 54.8% of cases), even top performers exhibit a 14-16% error rate. Table (b) reveals that
with insufficient context (45.2% of cases), models predominantly abstain from answering (50-73%
of instances), though significant hallucination rates (15-40%) persist. These patterns of context-
dependent performance and hallucination risk are consistent with our analyses of HotpotQA, FreshQA,
and Musique datasets, despite variations in absolute performance due to different task complexities.

                         (a) Performance with Sufficient Context (54.8% of Dataset)

                 Model                     % Correct       % Abstain          % Hallucinate
                 Gemini 1.5 Pro               84.1                  1.6               14.3
                 GPT 4o                       82.5                  4.8               12.7
                 Claude 3.5 Sonnet            85.7                 11.1                3.2
                 Gemini 1.5 Flash             77.8                  4.8               17.5
                 Gemma 27B                    71.4                  3.2               25.4

                        (b) Performance with Insufficient Context (45.2% of Dataset)

                 Model                     % Correct       % Abstain          % Hallucinate
                 Gemini 1.5 Pro                9.6                 50.0               40.4
                 GPT 4o                       23.1                 61.5               15.4
                 Claude 3.5 Sonnet             9.6                 53.8               36.5
                 Gemini 1.5 Flash              7.7                 73.1               19.2
                 Gemma 27B                     9.6                 55.8               34.6



                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3    C OMPARISON OF QA E VALUATION M ETRICS

We compare two the LLM-based QA Evaluator (LLMEval) used in the paper with a deterministic
lexical matching metric (Contains Answer). The Contains Answer metric labels responses based on
whether they contain the exact ground truth answer, while LLMEval uses an LLM to assess semantic
correctness.
Table 5 presents model performance across three datasets (FreshQA, Musique, HotpotQA), split by
our sufficient context autorater. The results show Contains Answer is generally stricter than LLMEval,
though both metrics reveal similar patterns in model behavior.

Table 5: Comparison of evaluation metrics across models and datasets. We show results for
checking whether the response contains one of the ground truth answer strings ("Contains"), where
we report the % of responses that contain an answer. We compare this to our LLMEval method that
uses an LLM to evaluate if the response is correct, abstain, or hallucinated, and we report % correct.

                                      FreshQA                  Musique                 HotpotQA
 Model              Context    Contains     LLMEval     Contains     LLMEval      Contains    LLMEval
 Gemini 1.5 Pro     Suff        80.3%          89.1%      60.1%       83.4%        47.6%        67.5%
                    Insuff      31.4%          41.2%      33.6%       49.5%        34.2%        49.4%
 GPT-4              Suff        84.3%          89.1%      64.6%       83.4%        52.4%        71.9%
                    Insuff      36.3%          44.1%      44.4%       61.4%        46.1%        59.5%
 Gemma 27B          Suff        26.9%          27.5%      10.8%       23.3%        40.7%        64.1%
                    Insuff      11.8%           6.9%       7.2%       10.1%        22.7%        37.9%
 Claude 3.5         Suff        67.9%          73.1%      48.9%       74.0%        46.3%        66.7%
 Sonnet             Insuff      26.5%          33.3%      19.9%       40.4%        29.0%        38.3%

The Contains Answer metric exhibits several characteristics when compared to LLMEval:
1. Different formatting affects matching:

      Q: What date did the creator of Autumn Leaves die?
      Ground Truth: 13 August 1896
      Response: August 13, 1896.
      Contains Answer: False
      LLMEval: Correct


2. Semantic equivalents are not captured:

      Q: What former Los Angeles Lakers majority owner is the
      father of Jeanie Marie Buss?
      Ground Truth: Gerald Hatten Buss
      Response: Jerry Buss.
      Contains Answer: False
      LLMEval: Correct


3. Partial matches can be marked as correct:

      Q: What is Amazon Prime Video’s most watched premiere ever?
      Ground Truth: The Rings of Power
      Response: The series explores the forging of the Rings of Power,
      the rise of Sauron...
      Contains Answer: True
      LLMEval: Hallucinate


The LLM QA evaluator provides several practical advantages:


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Handles variations in model verbosity and formatting
      • Distinguishes between correct, abstain, and incorrect responses
      • Enables efficient evaluation across multiple datasets

Our analysis shows two key findings that are consistent across both metrics: LLMs (i) exhibit
hallucination even with sufficient context and (ii) struggle to abstain with insufficient context.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROMPTS


C.1    S UFFICIENT C ONTEXT AUTORATER P ROMPT


    You are an expert LLM evaluator that excels at evaluating a QUESTION and REFERENCES.
    Consider the following criteria:
    Sufficient Context: 1 IF the CONTEXT is sufficient to infer the answer to the question and 0
    IF the CONTEXT cannot be used to infer the answer to the question
    Assume the queries have timestamp <TIMESTAMP>.
    First, output a list of step-by-step questions that would be used to arrive at a label for the
    criteria. Make sure to include questions about assumptions implicit in the QUESTION.
    Include questions about any mathematical calculations or arithmetic that would be required.
    Next, answer each of the questions. Make sure to work step by step through any required
    mathematical calculations or arithmetic. Finally, use these answers to evaluate the criteria.
    Output the ### EXPLANATION (Text). Then, use the EXPLANATION to output the ###
    EVALUATION (JSON)
    EXAMPLE:
    ### QUESTION
    In which year did the publisher of Roald Dahl’s Guide to Railway Safety cease to exist?
    ### References
    Roald Dahl’s Guide to Railway Safety was published in 1991 by the British Railways Board.
    The British Railways Board had asked Roald Dahl to write the text of the booklet, and
    Quentin Blake to illustrate it, to help young people enjoy using the railways safely. The
    British Railways Board (BRB) was a nationalised industry in the United Kingdom that
    operated from 1963 to 2001. Until 1997 it was responsible for most railway services in Great
    Britain, trading under the brand name British Railways and, from 1965, British Rail. It
    did not operate railways in Northern Ireland, where railways were the responsibility of the
    Government of Northern Ireland.
    ### EXPLANATION
    The context mentions that Roald Dahl’s Guide to Railway Safety was published by the
    British Railways Board. It also states that the British Railways Board operated from 1963 to
    2001, meaning the year it ceased to exist was 2001. Therefore, the context does provide a
    precise answer to the question.
    ### JSON
    {"Sufficient Context": 1}
    Remember the instructions: You are an expert LLM evaluator that excels at evaluating a
    QUESTION and REFERENCES. Consider the following criteria:
    Sufficient Context: 1 IF the CONTEXT is sufficient to infer the answer to the question and 0
    IF the CONTEXT cannot be used to infer the answer to the question
    Assume the queries have timestamp TIMESTAMP.
    First, output a list of step-by-step questions that would be used to arrive at a label for the
    criteria. Make sure to include questions about assumptions implicit in the QUESTION
    Include questions about any mathematical calculations or arithmetic that would be required.
    Next, answer each of the questions. Make sure to work step by step through any required
    mathematical calculations or arithmetic. Finally, use these answers to evaluate the criteria.
    Output the ### EXPLANATION (Text). Then, use the EXPLANATION to output the ###
    EVALUATION (JSON)
    ### QUESTION
    <question>
    ### REFERENCES
    <context>



                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2     FLAM E P ROMPT


   INSTRUCTIONS:
   title: Is the context sufficient to infer the answer to the question?
   description: In this task, you will be provided with documents and a question. Use one of the
   following labels under ’judgment’:
   1. sufficient: The documents are not sufficient to infer the answer to the question.
   2. insufficient: The documents are sufficient to infer the answer to the question.
   output_fields: judgment

      CONTEXT:
      documents:<references> question: <question>



C.3     LLME VAL P ROMPT

Since the questions in our datasets ask for free form answers, the LLM responses may not exactly
match the GT answers. Hence, we use an LLM to determine: the answers are the same (Correct)
or the LLM does not answer the question (Abstain) or the answer is incorrect (Hallucinate). We
note that prior work has shown that Gemini 1.5 Pro has very high accuracy and correlation with
human judgments for this evaluating free form responses (Krishna et al., 2024). Responses resulting
in empty strings were classified as "missing," while variations of "I don’t know" were also treated
as missing. We normalized both the ground truth answers and the model’s responses by removing
punctuation, converting to lowercase, and eliminating stop words.


   ===Task===
   I need your help in evaluating an answer provided by an LLM against ground truth answers.
   Your task is to determine if the LLM’s response matches the ground truth answers. Please
   analyze the provided data and make a decision.

    ===Instructions===
   1. Carefully compare the "Predicted Answer" with the "Ground Truth Answers". 2. Consider
    the substance of the answers – look for equivalent information or correct answers. Do not
    focus on exact wording unless the exact wording is crucial to the meaning.
    3. Your final decision should be based on whether the meaning and the vital facts of the
    "Ground Truth Answers" are present in the "Predicted Answer." 4. Categorize the answer as
    one of the following:
   - "perfect": The answer is completely correct and matches the ground truth.
   - "acceptable": The answer is partially correct or contains the main idea of the ground truth.
   - "incorrect": The answer is wrong or contradicts the ground truth.
   - "missing": The answer is "I don’t know", "invalid question", or similar responses indicating
    lack of knowledge.

   ===Input Data===
   - Question: What 1876 battle featured the Other Magpie?
   - Predicted Answer: The Other Magpie fought in the Battle of the Rosebud.
   - Ground Truth Answers: Battle of the Rosebud

      ===Output Format===
      Provide your evaluation in the following format:
      Explanation: (How you made the decision)
      Decision: (One of "perfect", "acceptable", "incorrect", or "missing")

      Please proceed with the evaluation.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4   DATASET Q UESTION A NSWER P ROMPTS

The CoT prompt instructs the model to provide an accurate and concise answer based solely on
the given search results, using an unbiased and journalistic tone. The prompt includes an example
question, references, and answer to guide the model’s response format. To extract the final answer,
we implemented a pattern matching technique on the model’s response, specifically targeting the text
following "The answer is:" for CoT prompts.
Chain of Thought (CoT)



    Write an accurate and concise answer for the given question using only the provided search
    results (some of which might be irrelevant). Start with an accurate, engaging, and concise
    explanation based only on the provided documents. Must end with "The answer is:". Use an
    unbiased and journalistic tone.
    EXAMPLE:
    ### Question
    <example question>
    ### References
    <example references>
    ### Answer
    <example answer>
    ### Question
    <question>
    ### References
    <references>
    ### Answer


Answer Only (AO)



    Write an accurate and concise answer for the given question using only the provided search
    results (some of which might be irrelevant). Do not say anything other than the answer itself.
    EXAMPLE:
    ### Question
    <example question>
    ### References
    <example references>
    ### Answer
    <example answer>
    ### Question
    <question>
    ### References
    <references>
    ### Answer


D     F INE -T UNING AND RAG P ROMPTS FOR L LAMA AND M ISTRAL

Finetuning Prompt (FT)


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Answer the question based on the given document. Only give me the answer and do not
   output any other words. The following are given references.
   ### References
   <references>
   Please follow the following guideline when formulating your answer: if you are uncertain or
   don’t know the answer, respond with “I don’t know”.
   ### Question
   <question>
   ### Answer
   <answer>


Evaluation Without RAG Prompt

   Answer the question based on your own knowledge. Only give me the answer and do not
   output any other words. Please follow the following guideline when formulating your answer:
   if you are uncertain or don’t know the answer, respond with “I don’t know”.
   ### Question
   <question>
   ### Answer


Evaluation With RAG Prompt

   Answer the question based on the given document. Only give me the answer and do not
   output any other words. The following are given references.
   ### References
   <references>
   Please follow the following guideline when formulating your answer: if you are uncertain or
   don’t know the answer, respond with “I don’t know”.
   ### Question
   <question>
   ### Answer


                                               25
