Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T O C LIP OR NOT TO C LIP : THE DYNAMICS OF SGD
WITH G RADIENT C LIPPING IN H IGH -D IMENSIONS

 Noah Marshall, Ke Liang Xiao & Elliot Paquette                           Atish Agarwala
 McGill University                                                        Google Deepmind
 {noah.marshall2,keliang.xiao}@mail.mcgill.ca                             thetish@google.com
 elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca



                                             A BSTRACT

         The success of modern machine learning is due in part to the adaptive optimiza-
         tion methods that have been developed to deal with the difficulties of training large
         models over complex datasets. One such method is gradient clipping: a practical
         procedure with limited theoretical underpinnings. In this work, we study clipping
         in a least squares problem under streaming SGD. We develop a theoretical anal-
         ysis of the learning dynamics in the limit of large intrinsic dimension—a model
         and dataset dependent notion of dimensionality. In this limit we find a determin-
         istic equation that describes the evolution of the loss and demonstrate that this
         equation predicts the path of clipped SGD on synthetic, CIFAR10, and Wikitext2
         data. We show that with Gaussian noise clipping cannot improve SGD perfor-
         mance. Yet, in other noisy settings, clipping can provide benefits with tuning of
         the clipping threshold. We propose a simple heuristic for near optimal scheduling
         of the clipping threshold which requires the tuning of only one hyperparameter.
         We conclude with a discussion about the links between high-dimensional clipping
         and neural network training.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods are the standard for nearly all large scale modern op-
timization tasks. Even with the ever growing complexities of neural nets, with sufficient hyper-
parameter tuning, SGD often outperforms other more complex methods. To deal with the difficulties
of training large models over complex datasets, adaptive SGD methods have been developed. One of
the simplest such methods is gradient clipping (Mikolov, 2012; Pascanu et al., 2013). Gradient clip-
ping replaces any stochastic gradient ∇θ fθ (x) with a clipped gradient clipc (∇θ fθ (x)), for some
threshold c, where
                                                          c
                                   clipc (z) = min 1,         z.                                 (1)
                                                        ∥z∥
While gradient clipping was first introduced to address the problem of exploding gradients in recur-
rent neural networks, it has become an integral part of training models for NLP gpt3. It has also
found use in other domains such as differential privacy (Abadi et al., 2016; Pichapati et al., 2019)
and computer vision (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
Despite widespread use, the reasons behind the effectiveness of clipping remain somewhat a mys-
tery. For instance, it is unclear exactly how the gradient distribution affects training, or for which
distributions clipping can offer benefits. It is hypothesized that the distribution of the gradient norms
plays a large role (Zhang et al., 2020b). Also, it is unknown how one should adjust the clipping
threshold as the problem scales. There has been growing interest in how models and their optimal
hyper-parameters scale with dimension (Kaplan et al., 2020). Understanding this behaviour would
allow one to perform hyperparameter tuning on smaller, more efficient models before scaling to a
potentially very large final architecture.
In this work we develop a theory of clipped SGD in high-dimensions under the mean-squared error
loss (MSE) over a class of random least-squares problems. After formally introducing the class of
considered problems (Sec. 2), we show the following:


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• In high-dimensions the dynamics of clipped SGD (C-SGD) are well described by an SDE, clipped
  homogenized SGD (C-HSGD). We provide a non-asymptotic bound on the difference of the risk
  curves between C-SGD and C-HSGD. Under C-HSGD the risk evolution can be described by a
  system of ODEs (Sec. 3) which we demonstrate predict the training dynamics under real-world
  data.
• Using C-HSGD, we show that the differences between clipped and unclipped SGD can be de-
  scribed by two unitless reduction factors µ and ν which encode the effect of clipping (Sec. 3).
• The reduction factors control the stability of the algorithm. They describe the precise clipping-
  learning rate combinations which are convergent. Moreover, we identify some clipping schedules
  that improve stability (Sec. 4).
• We find a general criterion for when clipping can speed up optimization, described by a different
  ratio of the reduction factors. We then identify a problem setup where clipping never helps as well
  as one where clipping improves performance. (Sec. 5).
• Using these insights, we propose a simple, heuristic clipping and learning rate schedule. This
  schedule is shown to closely follow an optimal schedule which we prove will never underperform
  SGD.

We conclude with a discussion about the links between our analysis and quantities measurable in
real neural networks.

Related work: The distribution of noise in stochastic gradients and its effect on training was
studied by (Zhang et al., 2020b). They argue that this noise is well approximated by a Gaussian for
ResNets (He et al., 2015) trained on Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009), while a heavy-tailed distribution
is more appropriate with BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) on an NLP dataset. They show that for heavy-
tailed noise unclipped SGD diverges while clipped SGD can converge. Other theoretical analyses on
clipping often focus on imposing smoothness conditions on the loss function, and then performing
analysis for fixed learning rates (Koloskova et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020).
These works have shown that fixed rate clipped SGD can outperform unclipped SGD under certain
conditions. Other works have also studied SGD through the lens of SDEs (Li et al., 2017; Mandt
et al., 2016; Barrett & Dherin, 2021). More recently, partly spurred by the sheer size of modern
models as well as the apparent regularity at which they scale (Kaplan et al., 2020), there has been
an interest in studying stochastic optimization in high-dimensions with SDEs. There is a formal
correspondence between the dynamics of learning-relevant quantities like the loss and the trajectory
of an equivalent SDE. These relationships have been worked out for SGD in the streaming setup over
a variety of losses (Collins-Woodfin et al., 2023; Paquette et al., 2022), and the resulting analyses
lead to quantities which can be useful for understanding learning dynamics in practical models
(Agarwala et al., 2023).

2   P ROBLEM SETUP
In this work, we consider linear regression using the mean-squared loss
                                  L(θ, x, y) = ∥ ⟨x, θ⟩ − y∥2 /2,                                 (2)
in the streaming or one-pass scenario, where data is not reused. Clipped SGD (C-SGD), without
mini-batching, is described by the iteration
                        θk+1 = θk − ηk clipck (∇θ L(θk , xk+1 , yk+1 )) ,                         (3)
where ∇θ L(θk , xk+1 , yk+1 ) = (⟨xk+1 , θk ⟩ − yk+1 )xk+1 with initialization θ0 ∈ Rd . We assume
that the samples {(xk , yk )}k≥0 , consisting of data xk and targets yk , satisfy the following:
Assumption 1. The data x ∈ Rd are Gaussian with covariance K. The targets y are generated by
y = ⟨x, θ ∗ ⟩ + ϵ, where ϵ represents noise and θ ∗ is the ground-truth.
The noise is centered and subgaussian (see Vershynin (2018) for more details) with subgaussian
norm ∥ϵ∥ψ2 ≤ v and variance E[ϵ2 ] = σ 2 for some v, σ ≥ 0.

We formulate a more general version of our results for non-Gaussian data in Appendix A.

                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 1. Define the population risk and the noiseless risk:
                                                                 h           i
                                                                           2
          P(θ) = E(x,ϵ) (⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩ − ϵ)2 /2 and R(θ) = Ex ⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩ /2,

                                                                                                     (4)

as well as the distance to optimality
                                          D(θ) = ∥θ − θ ∗ ∥2 .

Our theory is phrased in terms of the intrinsic dimension, a statistical notion of dimensionality
which is occasionally much smaller than the ambient dimension d. There are interesting settings
where these dimensions are effectively interchangeable, and as such, the reader may wish to, at first
glance, consider the results to be phrased in terms of the ambient dimension.
Definition 2 (Intrinsic Dimension). Let the data x ∈ Rd have covariance matrix K. Define the
intrinsic dimension of the data to be
                                           d = Tr(K)/∥K∥,                                            (5)
where ∥K∥ refers to the operator norm. Note that d ≤ d. We will refer to d as the ambient dimension.
Assumption 2. The covariance matrix K is normalized such that ∥K∥ = 1. Note that this assump-
tion may always be satisfied by rescaling the problem.

The definition of d can be extended to and measured in real neural networks trained on real datasets;
see Appendix C.3 for more details.
We allow for the scheduling of both the clipping threshold and the learning rate. Specifically,
Assumption 3. There are continuous bounded functions η : R+ → R+ and c : R+ → R+ such
that
                                  √
                      ck = c(k/d) d                          ηk = η(k/d)/d.                     (6)

We note that while it is reasonable for c(t) = ∞ (which is to say that no clipping occurs), for
technical reasons, we shall not allow this in our main theorem.

3   C LIPPED HOMOGENIZED SGD
Our main result shows that the risk of C-SGD is well-approximated by the solution to an SDE which
we call clipped homogenized SGD (C-HSGD):
Definition 3 (Clipped Homogenized SGD). Denote the stochastic gradient as ℓθ x, where ℓθ =
⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩ − ϵ. Define the descent reduction factor and the variance reduction factor
                              ∥E[clipc (ℓθ )x]∥                         E[clip2c (ℓθ )]
                   µc (θ) =                         and      νc (θ) =                   .            (7)
                                 ∥E[ℓθ x]∥                                 E[ℓ2θ ]
Then C-HSGD is defined to be the solution to
                                                            r
                                                           2νc(t) (Θt )P(Θt )K
               dΘt = −η(t)µc(t) (Θt )∇P(Θt )dt + η(t)                          dBt ,                 (8)
                                                                     d
where initialization is taken to be the same as SGD and Bt is a standard Brownian motion.

Remark: If the noise is heavy-tailed (σ = ∞), we can reformulate the above by redefin-
ing pνc (θ) = E[clip2c (ℓθ )] and changing the coefficient on the Brownian motion term to
η(t) νc(t) (Θt )K/d. This comes from noticing that E[ℓ2θ ] = 2P(θ) and E[clip2c (ℓθ )] < ∞ even
in the heavy-tailed case due to the effects of clipping. This yields the immediate observation that
clipping improves SGD under heavy-tailed noise since clipped SGD converges while SGD does not.
C-HSGD has similar structure to an SDE previously established for unclipped SGD (Paquette et al.,
2022), with the addition of reduction factors µc and νc that capture the effects of clipping. In essence,
the homogenized SGD suggests that, clipped SGD is still driven by a drift term in the direction of
−∇θ R—but clipping provides a bias against the gradient which shrinks the descent term (hereafter


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the negative term in (8)). Meanwhile, the diffusion term is shrunk by νc (θ) due to the reduction
of variance of the clipped gradients. These terms imply a tradeoff: clipping should aim to reduce
variance (decrease νc ) more than it shrinks the descent term (decrease µc ). We investigate this
trade-off in detail in Section 5.
We compute µc and νc for select data and noise distributions (Appendix D). For Gaussian data,
Stein’s Lemma gives us a form for µc which can be interpreted as the probability of not clipping:
                                       µc (θ) = P(|ℓθ | ≤ c).                                   (9)
For non-Gaussian data the exact form of µc is challenging to compute due to its dependence on
x; however, Equation (9) can give a good approximation in many high-dimensional settings due to
Central Limit Theorem effects. As an example, risk curves for linear models trained on CIFAR10
(Figure 1 (c)) and Wikitext2 (Figure 1 (d)) are well-captured by the dynamics of C-HSGD with µc
computed using the Gaussian form from Equation 9. 1 See the experiment details in Appendix H.
This form can also be used to tractably compute µc in the non-linear setting using information
already computed during C-SGD. See Appendix C.2 for a full description of the extension of µc and
νc to this setting, as well as a demonstration of the technique during training of ResNet18 and ViT
on CIFAR10. This allows us to cheaply estimate µc and νc for many values of c through training.
There exist a set of tractable lower and upper bounds for µc and νc which can be expressed in terms
of the risk. In Appendix E, we show that for all noise distributions with well-behaved densities that
are positive near 0, there exist positive constants κl and κu such that
                                            !                                        !
                                   c                                         c
                κl min 1, p                    ≤µc (θ) ≤ κu min 1, p                           (10a)
                               2R(θ) + σ 2                              2R(θ) + σ 2
                                    c2                                    c2

                   κl min 1,                   ≤νc (θ) ≤ κu min 1,                  .          (10b)
                               2R(θ) + σ 2                            2R(θ) + σ 2
This simple form can be used to derive simple clipping schedules for MSE loss, which we explore
in Section 5.3.
We now state our main theorem, which formalizes how C-HSGD is a good description of C-SGD:
Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 hold. Suppose that Θt and θk are independent
realizations of C-HSGD and C-SGD with equal, deterministic initial conditions. Let c = supt c(t)
and η = supt η(t). There is a constant C = C(v, (n/d), c, η, ∥θ0 − θ ∗ ∥2 ), a stochastic process E,
and a constant m = m(v) so that for any 1 ≤ u ≤ md and any n

                           R(θk )      R(Θk/d )
                    sup            −               ≤ CE(n/d)u log(d)d−1/2 ,                     (11)
                   0≤k≤n   D(θk )      D(Θk/d )
with probability 1 − e−u and provided the right hand side is less than 1. The stochastic process E is
given by                                                              !
                                          Z t
                                                   Cη(s)2 σ ds
                            E(t) = exp        p
                                           0     R(Θs ) + R(θ⌊sd⌋ )
for an absolute constant C > 0. The constant C can be bounded by
               p                                     p
        C ≤ C n/d ηv2 · ((1 + ∥θ0 − θ ∗ ∥2 )v2 + c2 n/d) · exp C max{η, η 2 }(n/d) .


Informally, this theorem says that

                                R(θk )     R(Θk/d )
                        sup              −             = O(log(d)d−1/2 ).
                       0≤k≤n     D(θk )     D(Θk/d )
In particular, as d grows, the risk curves of C-SGD and C-HSGD look closer to one another for
longer time windows and with higher probability. Under additional assumptions,2 the C-HSGD
curve converges to a dimension-independent deterministic limit and thus so does clipped SGD. We
discuss how to find this deterministic limit in the following section.
The complete proof is detailed in Appendix B along with the theorem statement and proof for non-
Gaussian data.
   1
       Code to reproduce the results is available at https://github.com/nmarzz/clip.
   2
       The spectrum of K converges and the initialization θ0 − θ ∗ converges


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Extracting deterministic dynamics:         For any twice differentiable function q, the C-HSGD dy-
namics can be expressed as follows:
                                                    η(t)2
 dq(Θt ) = −η(t)µc(t) (Θt )∇P(Θt )T ∇q(Θt )dt +            νc(t) (Θt )P(Θt ) Tr(K∇2 q)dt + dMt ,
                                                       d
                                                                                             (12)
where Mt is a martingale term that vanishes as d → ∞. This is an example of the concentration
of measure phenomenon observed in high-dimensional probability. As a result, we obtain a good
deterministic approximation for the evolution of q(Θt ) by setting Mt ≡ 0.
Using this idea, we introduce deterministic equivalents, Rt and Dt , for the risk terms R(Θt ) and
D(Θt ), respectively. Solving for Rt and Dt involves forming and solving a coupled system of
d ordinary differential equations. Additionally, Theorem 1 implies that these risks under clipped
stochastic gradient descent converge to their deterministic equivalents. The complete details and
derivation of this system of ODEs along with the statement and proof of C-SGD’s convergence to
the deterministic equivalents are available in Appendix G.
A numerical comparison of C-SGD, C-HSGD, and the ODEs is provided in Figure 1. In this figure,
we demonstrate that these dynamics describe the risk of clipped SGD with both Cauchy and Gaus-
sian distributed noise, despite the fact that unclipped SGD does not converge under Cauchy noise.
In the same figure we show that these deterministic equivalents describe the dynamics of real-world
data.
A simple example of the above theory can be had when the covariance of the data is the identity
matrix.
Example 1 (Isotropic data). When the data is isotropic Gaussian, the risk Rt solves the autonomous
ODE:
                         Ṙt = −2η(t)µc(t) Rt + η(t)2 νc(t) (Rt + σ 2 /2),                     (13)
where R0 = R(Θ0 ).

Since the data is Gaussian, it is possible to express µc and νc as functions of the risk. As a slight
abuse of notation we shall also write µc (R(θ)) or νc (R(θ)) for µc (θ) or νc (θ) respectively. We
will suppress the dependence on θ where appropriate, as we have in Example 1.

4    S TABILITY ANALYSIS
In this section we establish stability conditions for streaming SGD with clipping. Stability thresholds
from convex models are useful for understanding dynamics in deep learning (Cohen et al., 2021;
Agarwala et al., 2023). Additionally, a larger range of stable learning rates can prevent failures in
costly training runs. We show that the largest stable learning rate is structurally similar to that of the
unclipped SGD case, but with the introduction of the reduction factors µc and νc which account for
the effects of clipping.
From Equation (12), we observe that for either the risk R or the distance to optimality D, the
instantaneous time derivative is quadratic in the learning rate η(t). This implies that we can com-
pute a stability threshold for the learning rate, determining whether, in high-dimensions, these mea-
                                                                             ∗          ∗
sures of suboptimality increase or decrease. We find the critical values ηR    (t) and ηD (t) such that
E[dR(Θt )] = 0 and E[dD(Θt )] = 0 . In particular,
               ∗         d∥∇P(Θt )∥2 µc(t) (Θt )              ∗         R(Θt ) µc(t) (Θt )
              ηR (t) =                                   and ηD (t) =                      .         (14)
                         Tr(K2 )P(Θt ) νc(t) (Θt )                      P(Θt ) νc(t) (Θt )
This implies that clipping increases instantaneous stability (for both R and D) relative to unclipped
SGD when
                                            µc(t) (Θt )
                                                        > 1.                                    (CSC)
                                            νc(t) (Θt )
We refer to this as the clipped-stability-criterion (CSC). This can be interpreted as as a relative
signal-to-noise-ratio; the fraction of clipped gradients µ reduces the signal, while clipping reduces
the noise through the reduction factor ν. Stability is increased when the relative signal-to-noise-
ratio is greater than 1. Clipping significantly enhances stability when a small fraction of samples
contribute disproportionately to the gradient norm.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       0.18                                                                     0.18
                                            C-HSGD 80.0% CI                                                           C-HSGD 80.0% CI
                                            C-SGD 80.0% CI                                                            C-SGD 80.0% CI
       0.16                                 ODE                                 0.16                                  ODE
                                            Unclipped ODE                       0.14
       0.14
Risk


                                                                        Risk
                                                                                0.12
       0.12
                                                                                0.10
       0.10                                                                     0.08
                                                                                0.06
              0.0     2.5   5.0      7.5       10.0   12.5   15.0                      0.0     2.5    5.0      7.5       10.0   12.5   15.0
                                  Iterations                                                                Iterations
              (a) Synthetic data, Gaussian noise                                       (b) Synthetic data, Cauchy noise


                                                                         Risk
Risk


       10 1                                                                     10 1


                      C-SGD 80% CI                                                             C-SGD 80% CI
                      ODE                                                                      Clipped ODE
               0    100       101          102        103     104                      0     100        101          102        103    104
                              Iterations                                                                    Iterations
       (c) CIFAR10 data, assumed Gaussian noise                                  (d) Wikitext2 data, assumed GMM noise

Figure 1: Comparison of C-SGD, C-HSGD and their deterministic equivalent (ODE) with Gaussian
or Cauchy noise, from the Student-t family. The solution to the unclipped ODE for reference in the
Gaussian case. Unclipped SGD does not converge under Cauchy noise. We also compare clipped
SGD with CIFAR10 as well as Wikitext2 data. In all cases, the deterministic equivalent ODE closely
match the actual path of clipped SGD. Experiment details are available in Appendix H.



Clipping will increase the stability of SGD with a small enough choice of c:

Theorem 2. For data x ∼ N (0, K) one may always choose the clipping schedule c small enough
to satisfy the (CSC).

The proof of this theorem follows from an application of L’Hôpital’s rule and is available in Ap-
pendix F. We provide plots of the (CSC) in Figure 2 under various settings. We conjecture that
this result extends beyond Gaussian data, but the current intractability of µ for general data makes
precise claims difficult.
Counterintuitively, clipping can also decrease stability in some cases, when the bias towards ∇θ R
(µ) is reduced more than the overall gradient norms (ν). This shows that some care must be taken
to avoid clipping being detrimental. The proof of the following theorem straightforwardly uses the
definitions of µc and νc and can be found in Appendix F.

Theorem 3. Consider x ∼ N (0, K) and noise with the distribution given by

                    P(ϵ = −λ) = p/2,                         P(ϵ = 0) = 1 − p,                       P(ϵ = λ) = p/2,                   (15)

for p ∈ (0, 1) and λ > 0. Then, there is a constant r depending on p, λ so that when Rt ≤ r there
always exists c(t) such that the (CSC) is less than 1. Therefore, clipped SGD can be less stable than
unclipped SGD.


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     W HEN DOES CLIPPED SGD OUTPERFORM UNCLIPPED SGD?
We now ask: under what settings can clipping improve the performance of SGD? Specifically, with
the optimal learning rate schedule for unclipped SGD, does there exist a clipping-learning rate com-
bination such that clipping achieves a lower loss at time T ?
We will use Equation (12) to answer this question. We first present detailed calculations in the
isotropic case to find an exact condition on the gradient distribution where clipping improves train-
ing. We then show that this condition still applies under anisotropic data. We provide examples and
plots of this condition to develop intuition on when clipping helps to improve training. Finally, we
propose a new, heuristic clipping schedule which very closely matches an optimal clipping schedule
which we prove never underperforms unclipped SGD.

5.1    I SOTROPIC DATA

Consider the case of isotropic data where x ∼ N (0, I). Define Rt∞ to be the deterministic equivalent
of R(φt ), where φt is C-HSGD with c(t) ≡ ∞ (which is to say unclipped HSGD). Example 1
shows that Rt and Rt∞ solve the following ODEs,
    dRt                    η 2 (t)                           dRt∞               η 2 (t)
        = −2η(t)µc(t) Rt +         νc(t) (2Rt + σ 2 ),            = −2η(t)Rt∞ +         (2Rt∞ + σ 2 ).
     dt                       2                               dt                   2
                                                                                                   (16)
These results enable a comparison between clipped and unclipped SGD. Since these ODEs are
quadratic in η(t), it is straightforward to greedily maximize their instantaneous rate of descent,
resulting in the globally optimal learning rate schedule. Optimizing each ODE over η(t) yields

                 dRt       Rt2      µ2c(t)                         dRt∞     (R∞ )
                                                                                    2
                     =−                                                 =− ∞ t 2 .                   (17)
                  dt    Rt + σ 2 /2 νc(t)                           dt    Rt + σ /2
When Rt = Rt∞ , we see that the rate of descent is faster and thus clipping improves SGD exactly
when there exists a c(t) such that
                                             µ2c(t) (Rt )
                                                            > 1.                                   (CCC)
                                             νc(t) (Rt )
We call this inequality the clipping-comparison-criterion (CCC). Therefore, in our setting we can
exactly understand when clipping is helpful to training. Informally, the improvement criterion tells
us that clipping is effective when it can reduce the variance of the gradient norms, via νc(t) more than
it reduces the squared reduction to the descent term µ2c(t) . This is consistent with previous observa-
tions that, in practice, clipping is effective when the distribution of the gradient norms is heavy-tailed
Zhang et al. (2020b), but gives a quantitative rule for comparison. To give some intuition, we provide
some plots of these thresholds over various types of noise distributions in Figure 2. In Appendix C.1
we provide similar plots involving the Student-t family of distributions. This family has a degrees
of freedom parameter that allows the family to vary between Cauchy (df = 1) and Gaussian (as df
goes to infinity). These plots provide an illustration of the effect that heavy-tailedness can have on
the (CSC) and the (CCC).

5.2    A NISOTROPIC DATA

The previous results show that with isotropic data, the optimal clipping schedule can be found by
maximizing the (CCC) at each time point. Inspired by this observation, we describe a procedure
which, given a learning rate schedule for unclipped SGD, gives us a learning rate-clipping schedule
pair which performs at least as well as unclipped SGD. We then provide a simple heuristic of this
procedure, which experimentally achieves the same performance.
Consider a learning rate schedule η(t), used to train unclipped SGD. We define the max-(CCC)
clipping threshold schedule as follows: At step t, we first set the clipping threshold to
                                                             µ2c (Rt )
                                      c∗ (t) = argmaxc                 .                             (18)
                                                             νc (Rt )

                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      102                                     Gau             2.5                                             Gau
                                              Rad                                                             Rad
                                              Uni             2.0                                             Uni
                                              Exp                                                             Exp
      101                                                     1.5


                                                        CCC
CSC


                                                              1.0

      100                                                     0.5
            0   5     10    15      20   25    30                   0.0   2.5    5.0    7.5     10.0   12.5    15.0
                             c                                                           c
                    (a) The (CSC)                                               (b) The (CCC)

Figure 2: The (CSC) and (CCC) across various noise distributions: Gaussian (Gau), Rademacher-
like (Rad), uniform on [−M, M ] (Uni), and symmetrized exponential (Exp) noise. The (CSC) is
computed with R = 3, σ = 9, p = 0.7; the (CCC) figure uses R = 3, σ = 5, p = 0.2 (where p is
a parameter for Rademacher-like noise). Parameters are chosen to illustrate different behaviours.


Given a clipping threshold c, we define a compensated learning rate for clipped SGD by
                                         η̃(t, c) = η(t)/µc (Rt ).                                             (19)
Effectively, this learning rate compensates for the fact that clipping biases SGD against the gradient
such that clipped SGD now has the same instantaneous descent term as unclipped SGD. We now
choose η ∗ (t) = η̃(t, c∗ (t)) as our learning rate. In Appendix C.1 we provide plots of Equation (18)
for various distributions.
This schedule will never underperform unclipped SGD. If the (CCC) is never satisfied we have
c∗ (t) ≡ ∞ and η ∗ (t) = η(t), recovering the original, unclipped SGD. However, if the (CCC) is
satisfied at any time the max-(CCC) schedule will take advantage of this and provide improvements
to optimization. In order to show this, we first have to solve for Rt under anisotropic data. In this
setting, the risk is the sum of two parts: a gradient flow term and an integrated correction term. The
gradient flow term is associated with the infinitesimal learning rate limit of SGD. It decreases the
risk and comes from solving the underlying problem. The correction term arises because the actual
learning rate is not infinitesimal. It encodes the errors made by SGD and increases the risk. Gradient
flow is defined to be,
                                         dΦgf              gf
                                            t = −∇R(Φt ) dt,                                       (20)
with Φgf                                                   gf
         0 = θ0 . Then the gradient flow term is R(Φt ). In Appendix G, we show Rt with any
learning rate η(t) and clipping schedule c(t) solves

                                    1 t 2
                                     Z
                                                                 c   c
                Rt = R(Φgf   c
                            ΓT )  +      η (s)νc(s) Tr(K2 e−2K(Γt −Γs ) )(Rs + σ 2 /2)ds,         (21)
                                    d 0
               Rt
where Γct = 0 η(s)µc(s) ds is the clipped integrated learning rate. The integral term in Equation (21)
is the finite learning rate correction. The risk of unclipped SGD can be computed using c(t) ≡ ∞:

                                      1 t 2
                                        Z
                   ∞           gf
                 Rt = R(ΦΓT ) +            η (s) Tr(K2 e−2K(Γt −Γs ) )(Rs∞ + σ 2 /2)ds.           (22)
                                      d 0
               Rt
where Γt = 0 η(s)ds. This gives us the following theorem:
Theorem 4. Given SGD with learning rate schedule η(t) and clipped SGD with learning and clip-
ping schedules η ∗ (t) and c∗ (t), then RT ≤ RT∞ . If there exists a t ∈ [0, T ] such that the (CCC)
holds then RT < RT∞ . Conversely, if µ2c (R)/νc (R) ≤ 1 for all R > 0 and c > 0, then for any
learning and clipping schedules η(t) and c(t), SGD with the compensated learning rate schedule
η(t)µc(t) has RT∞ ≤ RT .


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. With these choices, the clipped risk (21) solves
                               1 T 2 νc(s)
                                 Z
           RT = R(Φgf  ΓT ) +        η (s) 2 Tr(K2 e−2K(ΓT −Γs ) )(Rs + σ 2 /2)ds.                (23)
                               d 0          µc(s)
Note that the gradient flow term is identical to that of unclipped SGD. Since the (CCC) is satisfied,
the integrated correction term is no larger than unclipped SGD and thus RT ≤ RT∞ . If the (CCC)
occurs at some t, then in fact RT < RT∞ . For the converse, one substitutes the learning rate schedule
into (22) and sees it is smaller than (21).

We note that this result holds for any choice of the unclipped learning rate, even the optimal one.
Therefore, if the (CCC) holds at some point along the optimal unclipped SGD trajectory then the
benefits of gradient clipping cannot be matched by unclipped SGD.

                                                                         Gau
                                                                         Rad
                                                                         Uni
                                                                         Exp
                                    101
                          Max CCC


                                    100
                                          0    2     4           6   8    10
                                                          Risk

Figure 3: The maximum over c of the (CCC) for various values of the risk. Notice that the maximum
value of the (CCC) for both uniform and Gaussian noise is 1, corresponding to unclipped SGD. Plots
are computed with σ = 7, p = 0.5 where p is a parameter in the Rademacher-like noise.

The following theorems give concrete examples of our results and apply in both the isotropic and
anisotropic setting. We show that the (CCC) cannot be satisfied when the data are Gaussian. Then,
we show that, as before, broadly distributed gradients can benefit from clipping (even with all finite
moments). Both proofs straightforwardly apply the definitions of µc and νc (Appendix F).
Theorem 5. If x ∼ N (0, K) and ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) then µ2c (R)/νc (R) ≤ 1 for all R, c > 0.

Hence, in this case clipped SGD never improves over unclipped SGD (in the sense of Theorem 4).
Theorem 6. Consider x ∼ N (0, K) and the Rademacher-like noise as described in Theorem 3.
Then, there is an r > 0 depending on p and λ so that when Rt ≤ r there always exists c(t) such that
the (CCC) is satisfied.

It is interesting to note that the (CSC) is automatically satisfied if the (CCC) is, implying that when
gradient clipping improves SGD’s performance, it also enhances its stability. This dual benefit
suggests that in some settings clipping can be used to achieve both efficient and stable training.

5.3   A HEURISTIC FOR THE OPTIMAL CLIPPING SCHEDULE

When we consider the max-(CCC) clipping schedule in light of our simplifications of µc and νc
(Equation (10a)) we can arrive at a simple heuristic for the max-(CCC) optimal clipping schedule
itself. Using Equation (10a), we see that
                                              κ2l  µ2 (Rt )  κ2
                                                  ≤ c       ≤ u.                                  (24)
                                              κu   νc (Rt )   κl

               √ the upper bound might be attained by using the clipping schedule where c(t) is
This suggests that
proportional to 2Rt + σ 2 along with the approximate compensated learning rate
                          p
                ca (t) = κ 2Rt + σ 2              η a (t, c) = η(t) max (1, 1/κ) ,        (25)


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where κ ∈ R+ is a single scalar which can be tuned. In Figure 4, we compare: unclipped SGD,
clipped SGD using the max-(CCC) schedule and compensated learning rate, clipped SGD the heuris-
tic schedules from Equation (25). To obtain the max-(CCC) schedule we numerically optimize at
each step in solving the ODE equation. In contrast, we tune only κ to obtain our heuristic schedules.
As expected, we see no improvement by clipping for Gaussian noise (Figure 4a). In contrast, with
Rademacher-like noise, clipping allows SGD to learn faster and reach a lower value of the risk
(Figure 4b). Remarkably, the heuristic schedule obtains essentially identical performance as the op-
timal schedule. We show that this heuristic is effective on Wikitext2 data for next-token prediction
and explore stability to hyper-parameter changes in Appendix C.4. This heuristic shows promising
potential to improve the training of clipped SGD with minimal tuning effort, however, a comprehen-
sive evaluation is left for future work as it warrants a dedicated study to assess its effectiveness and
generalizability.

                                       C-SGD Opt 80.0% CI                  0.20                             C-SGD Opt 80.0% CI
       0.200                           C-SGD Ap. Opt. 80.0% CI                                              C-SGD Ap. Opt. 80.0% CI
                                       ∞-SGD 80.0% CI                                                       ∞-SGD 80.0% CI
       0.175                           Opt ODE                             0.15                             Opt ODE
                                       Ap. Opt. ODE                                                         Ap. Opt. ODE
       0.150                           Unclipped ODE                                                        Unclipped ODE


                                                                    Risk
Risk


       0.125                                                               0.10

       0.100                                                               0.05
       0.075
                                                                           0.00
               0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5       10.0   12.5   15.0                  0.0     2.5   5.0      7.5       10.0   12.5   15.0
                                 Iterations                                                           Iterations
                      (a) Gaussian noise                                                (b) Rademacher-like noise

Figure 4: Results of clipped versus unclipped SGD under the setting of Theorem 4. We com-
pare the optimal max-(CCC) to the heuristic schedule in Equation (25). Notice that clipping cannot
improve SGD in the setting with Gaussian noise while it noticeably improves performance with
Rademacher-like noise. Moreover, the heuristic schedule and the optimal schedule perform very
similarly. The unclipped learning rate is constantly η = 0.4 while σ = 0.8. We compare Gaussian
and Rademacher-like noise with p = 0.2. SGD is presented with 80% confidence intervals over 100
runs.


6       C ONCLUSION
Our analysis of high-dimensional streaming settings shows that the effectiveness of clipping hinges
on two key quantities: descent and variance reduction factors µc and νc . The structure of the noise,
model, and data then determine the dynamics of µc and νc for a given clipping threshold. This
allows us to compare clipped SGD to unclipped SGD with learning rate and clipping schedules.
Clipping can be beneficial in the setting of non-Gaussian noise; in certain noisy regimes, clipping
helps filter noisy datapoints more than non-noisy ones. The key is that the gradient norm becomes a
strong-enough proxy for the “quality” of a datapoint, and can be used to effectively filter each point.
The local stability of clipped SGD depends on the ratio of µc to νc , the (CSC). The maximum stable
learning rate can be increased by clipping if clipping reduces the average square gradient norm more
than the probability of clipping. This can be achieved for broad distributions of gradients. Similarly,
clipping improves optimization if the ratio of µ2c to νc exceeds 1, the (CCC). This quantity informs
when the tradeoff between biasing training against the gradient and reducing the variance pays off.
One future direction is to consider more complex models and losses. Exact risk curves have been
derived in the unclipped SGD setting on more general losses (Collins-Woodfin et al., 2023); some of
these results are likely adaptable to the clipped SGD setting. Additionally, important quantities from
the analysis of high-dimensional linear models can be measured in real networks (via linearization)
and can be used to analyze learning dynamics (Agarwala & Pennington, 2024). We believe that the
generalized versions of µc and νc will be interesting to study in real networks.


                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Lechao Xiao for his feedback on the clarity and accuracy of our work, which significantly
improved the manuscript. We also extend our gratitude to Courtney Paquette for her proofreading
and assistance in shaping the final draft.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 2016.
Atish Agarwala and Jeffrey Pennington. High dimensional analysis reveals conservative sharpening
  and a stochastic edge of stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19261, April 2024. doi: 10.48550/
  arXiv.2404.19261.
Atish Agarwala, Fabian Pedregosa, and Jeffrey Pennington. Second-order regression models exhibit
  progressive sharpening to the edge of stability. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 169–195. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  agarwala23b.html.
David Barrett and Benoit Dherin. Implicit gradient regularization. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Xiangyi Chen, Steven Z. Wu, and Mingyi Hong. Understanding gradient clipping in private sgd: A
  geometric perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jh-rTtvkGeM.
Elizabeth Collins-Woodfin and Elliot Paquette. High-dimensional limit of one-pass sgd on least
  squares. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06847, 2023.
Elizabeth Collins-Woodfin, Courtney Paquette, Elliot Paquette, and Inbar Seroussi. Hitting the High-
  Dimensional Notes: An ODE for SGD learning dynamics on GLMs and multi-index models.
  arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2308.08977, August 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.08977.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:52967399.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
  2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2015.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206594692.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models, 2020.
Anastasia Koloskova, Hadrien Hendrikx, and Sebastian U Stich. Revisiting gradient clipping:
  Stochastic bias and tight convergence guarantees. In Proceedings of the 40th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Qianxiao Li, Cheng Tai, and Weinan E. Stochastic modified equations and adaptive stochastic gradi-
  ent algorithms. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2101–2110. PMLR, 2017.
Stephan Mandt, Matthew D. Hoffman, and David M. Blei. A variational analysis of stochastic
  gradient algorithms, 2016.
Tomávs Mikolov. Statistical Language Models based on Neural Networks. PhD thesis, Brno Uni-
  versity of Technology, 2012.
Courtney Paquette, Elliot Paquette, Ben Adlam, and Jeffrey Pennington. Homogenization
  of sgd in high-dimensions: Exact dynamics and generalization properties. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.07069, 2022.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomávs Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Felix X. Yu, Sashank J. Reddi, and Sanjiv Ku-
  mar. Adaclip: Adaptive clipping for private sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07643, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, Mario Lucic, and
   Alexey Dosovitskiy. Mlp-mixer: An all-mlp architecture for vision. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
   imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 24261–24272, 2021.
Roman Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in Data Sci-
  ence. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cambridge University Press,
  2018.
Bohang Zhang, Jikai Jin, Cong Fang, and Liwei Wang. Improved analysis of clipping algorithms
  for non-convex optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020a.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank Reddi, Sanjiv
   Kumar, and Suvrit Sra. Why are adaptive methods good for attention models? In H. Larochelle,
   M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
   cessing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15383–15393. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    F ULL FORMULATION OF T HEOREM 1 WITH NON -G AUSSIAN DATA
To state the more general version of Theorem 1, we require some additional technical assumptions.
Along with all of the assumptions described in Section 2 we will further assume:
Assumption 4. For some constant v ≥ 1 and any fixed θ with ∥θ∥ ≤ 1, we have ∥xT θ∥ψ2 ≤ v and
the data satisfy a Hanson-Wright inequality: for all t ≥ 0 and any fixed matrix B,
                                                  (                                )!
       T            T                                       t2                 t
   P(|x Bx − E[x Bx]| ≥ t) ≤ 2 exp − min                 √     √       ,   √     √    , (26)
                                                     v4 ∥ KB K∥2F v2 ∥ KB K∥
where K is the covariance of the data.
Assumption 5. µ and ν satisfy the following Lipschitz-like bounds for some constants Cµ and Cν .
                                                   |R(x) − R(y)|
                               |µ(x) − µ(y)| ≤ Cµ                                                 (27)
                                                   minz∈{x,y} R(z)
                                                                 !
                                                         σ
              |ν(x)P(x) − ν(y)P(y)| ≤ Cν        1+ p               |R(x) − R(y)|                  (28)
                                                     R(x) + R(y)
where R is the risk.

We may now state our more general version of Theorem 1. Here we use c = maxt c(t) and η =
maxt η(t).
Theorem 7. There is a constant C = C(v, (n/d), c, η, (1 + ∥V0 ∥2 )) and a constant c = c(v) so that
for any 1 ≤ u ≤ cd
                                             Z n/d                         !
                                                         Cν η 2 (s)σ ds

           R(θk )      R(Θk/d )
    sup             −             ≤ C exp                                    u log(d)d−1/2 , (29)
            D(θk )     D(Θk/d )
                                                     p
  0≤k≤n                                        0        R(Θs ) + R(θsd )

with probability at least 1 − e−u and provided the right hand side is less than 1. The coefficient C
can be bounded by
              p                             p
       C ≤ C n/dηv2 ((1 + ∥V0 ∥2 )v2 + c2 n/d) exp C × (1 + Cµ ) max{η, η 2 }(n/d)


for an absolute constant C > 0.

We note that when σ = 0 (so there is no noise) we arrive at the simpler conclusion that

                                  R(θk )       R(Θk/d )
                         sup               −                 = O(d−1/2 ).
                       0≤k≤n      D(θk )       D(Θk/d )

We note also that if η(s) ≡ η, the risk will be bounded below by a constant that depends only on
η, c, σ with high probability (and provided there is no warm start), and hence again this coefficient
can be bounded with high probability in a similar way to C. Moreover, for any desired d-independent
risk threshold R0 , if one makes d sufficiently large, then with very high probability, two risk curves
will agree up to the point they cross below this risk threshold.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P ROOF OF MAIN THEOREMS

In this section we prove both Theorem 1 and Theorem 7.


B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In order to prove the version of our Theorem with Gaussian data, it suffices to check that Gaussians
satisfy both Assumption 4 and 5.
It is a standard fact that the Hanson-Wright inequality is satisfied for Gaussians Vershynin (2018).
Let z be standard Gaussian then recall from (9),

                                 µc (θ) = P(| ⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩ | ≤ c)                                  (30)
                                             p
                                        = P(| 2R(θ)z − ϵ| ≤ c).                                     (31)

With a slight abuse of notation, we condition on ϵ and use I = (ϵ − c, ϵ + c) to express

                                                                !                               !
                                                   I                               I
              |µc (θ1 ) − µc (θ2 )| = P z ∈ p               ϵ       −P z ∈ p                ϵ       (32)
                                                2R(θ1 )                          2R(θ2 )
                                                            !      !
                                       c+ϵ               c+ϵ
                                ≤ P z≤p        ϵ −P z ≤ p        ϵ                                  (33)
                                        R(θ1 )            R(θ2 )
                                                 !                   !
                                         c−ϵ               c−ϵ
                                  + P z≤p       ϵ −P z ≤ p          ϵ .                             (34)
                                         R(θ1 )            R(θ2 )

Without loss of generality, we assume c + ϵ/R(θ2 ) ≤ c + ϵ/R(θ1 ), then the former term may be
bounded by
                                               !                     !
                                   c+ϵ                     c+ϵ
                          P z≤p               ϵ −P z ≤ p           ϵ                                (35)
                                    R(θ1 )                  R(θ2 )
                                              p         p
                           |c + ϵ| − 4R(θ
                                     (c+ϵ)2     R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 )
                          ≤ √ e           1 )    p               .                                  (36)
                            2 π                   R(θ1 )R(θ2 )

                  2
Maximizing te−t /4R(θ1 ) in t yields
                         !                             !
           c+ϵ                       c+ϵ                         |R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 )|
      P z≤p        ϵ         −P z ≤ p        ϵ             ≤p         p         p                   (37)
            R(θ1 )                    R(θ2 )                 2πR(θ2 )( R(θ1 ) + R(θ2 ))
                                                                    |R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 )|
                                                           ≤ Cµ                         .           (38)
                                                                    minz∈{θ1 ,θ2 } R(z)

By applying the same argument to the latter term of (34), we see that

                                                        |R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 )|
                             |µ(θ1 ) − µ(θ2 )| ≤ Cµ                         ,                       (39)
                                                        minz∈{θ1 ,θ2 } R(z)

as desired.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          2
To show (28), let us first first define f (ξ, ϵ) = E clipc (ξz − ϵ) ϵ ]. Upon conditioning on ϵ, it
                               p
follows that ν(θ)P(θ) = f         2R(x), ϵ . Differentiating with respect to ξ, we see that
              ∂
                f (ξ) = E 2z clipc (ξz − ϵ)1|ξz−ϵ|≤c

                                                                                         (40)
             ∂ξ
                               Z (c+ϵ)/ξ
                           2                            2
                      =√                 (ξz − ϵ)ze−z /2 dz                              (41)
                           2π (−c+ϵ)/ξ
                               "                              #
                                                   z=(c+ϵ)/ξ
                          −2               −z 2 /2
                      =√         (ξz − ϵ)e                      + 2ξP (|ξz − ϵ| ≤ c| ϵ)  (42)
                           2π                      z=(−c+ϵ)/ξ
                          −2 h                       2   2                     2   2
                                                                                     i
                      =√        (c − ϵ + ϵ)e−(c−ϵ) /2ξ + (c + ϵ − ϵ)e−(c+ϵ) /2ξ          (43)
                           2π
                        + 2ξP (|ξz − ϵ| ≤ c| ϵ) .                                        (44)

                             (c+ϵ)2

                           − 2ξ2
Upon noting that ξ ξc+ϵ
                      √ e
                       2π
                                      ≤ ξC, for some absolute constant C > 0 we may bound the
                  ∂
absolute value of ∂ξ f (ξ, ϵ) by
                                       ∂
                                          f (ξ, ϵ) ≤ 4Cξ + 2|ϵ|.                        (45)
                                       ∂ξ
                                                       p          p
Hence, without loss of generality, if we assume that 2R(θ1 ) ≤ 2R(θ2 ) and conditioning on ϵ,
we obtain
                                     Z √2R(x2 )
                                                   ∂
   |ν(θ1 )P(θ1 ) − ν(θ2 )P(θ2 )| ≤ √                  f (ξ, ϵ) dξ                       (46)
                                         2R(θ1 )   ∂ξ
                                                                  p      p
                                 ≤ 2c |R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 )| + 2E|ϵ| 2R(θ1 ) − 2R(θ2 ) , (47)
which completes the proof of (28).

B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7

We now prove the general version of our main result.
We simplify notation by studying the iterations vk = θk − θ ∗ . We shall also write η̃k = η(k/d) so
that η̃k /d = ηk . Before proving theorem 7 we first show a series of lemmas following closely the
proof techniques of Collins-Woodfin & Paquette (2023).
Notation 1. It is helpful to formulate some results in terms of tensor products. We use x ⊗ y to refer
the tensor product of x and y.
Notation 2. We use C to refer to a generic constant which may change from line to line.

With a slight abuse of notation, extend {vk }k≥0 to be indexed by continuous time t ∈ R+ by
vt = v⌊t⌋ . Let q be a quadratic. Via its Taylor expansion, we may write the updates of q by


                          η̃k                               η̃ 2
  q(vk+1 ) − q(vk ) = −       ∇q(vk )T clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 ) + k2 ∇2 q, (clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 ))⊗2 . (48)
                           d                               2d
This update can be decomposed into errors, martingale parts and predictable parts

                                  η̃k                      η̃ 2
            q(vk+1 ) − q(vk ) = −     µ(vk )∇q(vk )T Kvk + k2 ν(vk )P(vk ) Tr(∇2 qK)
                                   d                       d                                     (49)
                                               quad
                               + ∆Mlink +   ∆M k     + ∆E k.

Where we have martingale and error increments being contributed from both the linear and quadratic
terms. The specific form of these terms may be seen in section B.3. We will relate these quadratics to


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a manifold of functions which will close under the gradient and Hessian operations above. Choose
this family of functions to be

                                 Q = {v 7→ v T R(z; K)v,             ∀z ∈ Ω}                      (50)

where Ω is a circle of radius 2 and thus enclosing the eigenvalues of K. We further define the
stopping time τ for a parameter M .

                             τ = inf{k : ∥vk ∥ ≥ M } ∪ {td : ∥Vt ∥ ≥ M },                         (51)

and the stopped processes,
                         vkτ = vk∧τ                                  Vtτ = Vt∧(τ /d) .            (52)
We will first prove Theorem 7 for the stopped process {vkτ }k≥0 and {Vtτ }t≥0 and then bound the
probability that τ ≤ n.
Lemma 1. There is an absolute constant C > 0 so that

           τ
   sup |q(vtd ) − q(Vtτ )| ≤ sup      |Mτ,lin
                                         td | + |Mtd
                                                     τ,quad       τ
                                                            | + |Etd | + |Mτ,SDE
                                                                           t     |                (53)
 0≤t≤n/d                        0≤t≤n/d
               Z n/d
                                       Cν η 2 (s)(ms + σ)

           +          C max{η, η 2 } +                                    τ
                                                          + 2Cµ η sup |q(vsd ) − q(Vsτ )| ds, (54)
                0                               m s                q∈Q

                                 p   τ ) + R(Θτ ).
where ms is sum of risks ms =     R(θsd       sd


Proof. When context is clear, we will write R(z; K) = R(z). We begin by noting that for all q ∈ Q
since for eigenvalues and eigenvectors (λi , ωi ) of K,
                                  X              λi                X
                 ∇q(v)T Kv =                           ⟨v, ωi ⟩2 ≤   λi ⟨v, ωi ⟩2 = ⟨K, v ⊗2 ⟩.
                                      i
                                              (λi − z)             i

The same bound holds for the gradient term, and we conclude that for all q ∈ Q
                                          |∇q(v)T Kv| ≤ 2R(v + θ ∗ ).

Given a g ∈ Q, by (49), we obtain
                    Z t                             Z t 2
      τ        τ        η(s)    τ      τ T   τ         η (s)
  g(vt ) = g(v0 ) −          µ(vs )∇g(vs ) Kvs ds +          ν(vsτ )P(vsτ ) Tr(K∇2 g)ds           (55)
                     0   d                           0  d2
            + Mτ,lin
               t     + Mτ,quad
                        t      + Etτ .

Similarly, by Itô’s lemma

                                      Z t
                g(Vtτ ) = g(V0τ ) −            η(s)µ(Vsτ )∇g(Vsτ )T KVsτ ds
                                          0
                                      Z t                                                         (56)
                                     η 2 (s)
                                 +           ν(Vsτ )P(Vsτ ) Tr(K∇2 g)ds + Mτ,SDE
                                                                           t     ,
                                   0   d2

where

                                      Z t
                                            η(s)
                       Mτ,SDE
                                                       p
                        t     =             √ ∇g(Vsτ )T 2Kν(Vsτ )P(Vsτ )dBs .                     (57)
                                          0   d

First, we will show that for any g ∈ Q and any x1 , x2 ∈ Rd


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    |∇g(x1 )T Kx1 − ∇g(x2 )T Kx2 | ≤ 4 sup |g(x1 ) − g(x2 )|.                    (58)
                                                            g∈Q


The statement is obvious if g(x) = q(x). If g(x) = ∇q(x)T R(z)x then ∇g(x) = ∇2 qR(z)x +
R(z)∇q(x) and using Cauchy’s integral formula we can see,


 ∇g(x)T Kx = xT R(z)∇2 qKx + ∇q(x)T R(z)Kx                                    (59)
                   I                          I
                 1                          1
           =−        yxT R(z)∇2 qR(y)xdy −       ∇q(x)T R(z)xdz + z∇q(x)T R(z)x .
               2πi Ω                       2πi Ω                  |    {z      }
               |           {z           } |        {z         }        T3
                                  T1                              T2
                                                                                                 (60)

For any z on Ω we have that ∥R(z)∥op ≤ 1. Furthermore, the arc-length of Ω is 8π. Therefore, we
have
                                     I
                                  1
         |T1 (x1 ) − T1 (x2 )| ≤        |y| xT1 R(z)∇2 qR(y)x1 − xT2 R(z)∇2 qR(y)x2 dy     (61)
                                 2π Ω
                               ≤ 8 sup |g(x1 ) − g(x2 )|,                                  (62)
                                 g∈Q

and
                                          I
                                       1
              |T2 (x1 ) − T2 (x2 )| ≤        |∇q(x1 )T R(z)x1 − ∇q(x2 )T R(z)x2 |dz              (63)
                                      2π Ω
                                    ≤ 4 sup |g(x1 ) − g(x2 )|.                                   (64)
                                       g∈Q


If g(x) = xT R(z)∇2 qR(y)x, then using the identity R(z)K = I + zR(z),


  ∇g(x)T Kx = xT R(y)∇2 qx + zxT R(y)∇2 qR(z)x + xT R(z)∇2 qx + yxT R(z)∇2 qR(y)x.
                                                                                (65)

By the same methods as above, we see


                    |∇g(x1 )T Kx1 − ∇g(x2 )T Kx2 | ≤ 24 sup |g(x1 ) − g(x2 )|.                   (66)
                                                            g∈Q


It is simple to account for the presence of the functions µ and ν. Using Assumptions 5

                  τ      τ                                                   Cν (mt + σ)
              |ν(vtd )P(vtd ) − ν(Vtτ )P(Vtdτ )| ≤ sup |g(vtd
                                                           τ
                                                              ) − g(Vtτ )|               .       (67)
                                                   g∈Q                           mt

                                      τ
As for µ, adding and subtracting µ(vtd  )g(Vtdτ ), using µ ≤ 1 and g(Vtdτ ) ≤ 2R(Θτtd )
                                                                           Cµ 2R(Θτtd )

       τ      τ
  |µ(vtd )g(vtd ) − µ(Vtτ )g(Vtτ )| ≤ sup |g(vtdτ
                                                   ) − g(Vtτ )| 1 +            τ ), R(Θτ )} .    (68)
                                      g∈Q                           min{R(θtd           td

Note we could have also added and subtracted µ(Vtdτ )g(vtdτ
                                                             ), and so picking whichever is better, we
arrive at
                   τ      τ
               |µ(vtd )g(vtd ) − µ(Vtτ )g(Vtτ )| ≤ sup |g(vtd
                                                            τ
                                                              ) − g(Vtτ )| (1 + 2Cµ ) .
                                                   g∈Q

This completes the claim.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 2. There is an absolute constant C > 0 so that for any quadratic q with ∥q∥C 2 ≤ 1 any
n ≤ dT with T ≥ 1, any 1 ≤ u ≤ d,
                                                    √
                                      sup Mτ,lin
                                           k     ≤ C T η(2 + M )2 v2 d−1/2 u,                            (69)
                                     0≤k≤n
                                                    √
                                     sup Mτ,quad
                                          t      ≤ C T ηc2 v2 d−1/2 u,                                   (70)
                                 0≤k≤n

                                          sup Etτ ≤ CT η(2 + M )2 v4 d−1/2 ,                             (71)
                                         0≤k≤n

                                                   √
                                 sup     Mτ,SDE
                                          t     ≤ C T η(2 + M )2 v2 d−1/2 u.                             (72)
                            0≤t≤n/d

with probability at least 1 − e−u .

The proof of lemma 2 is deferred to appendix B.3.
Lemma 3. There is an absolute constant C > 0 so that for any m > 0, there exists a Q̄ ⊆ Q with
|Q̄| ≤ Cd2m such that for all q ∈ Q, there is some q̄ ∈ Q̄ that satisfies ∥q̄ − q∥C 2 ≤ d−2m .

Proof. With assumption 2, the arc length of Ω is fixed independent of d. Thus, we may construct Q̄
by restricting Q to a minimal d−2m -net of Ω.

The proof of Theorem 7 now follows easily from these results. By Lemmas 1 and 2, there is an
absolute constant C so that for any u ≥ 1


     τ
                            √        2 −1/2
                                                                  √   Z t
|q̄(vtd ) − q̄(Vtτ )| ≤ C       T ηv d                        2 2
                                                  (2 + M ) v u + c T +  2            τ
                                                                          Ls max |q(vsd ) − q(Vsτ )|ds,
                                                                                   0         q∈Q̄
                                                                                                         (73)
on an event of probability at least 1 − e−u , and where we have set
                                                  Cν η 2 (s)(ms + σ)

                                           2
                     Ls := C max{η, η } +                            + 2Cµ η .
                                                           ms

Then, from Lemma 3 with m = 1 and increasing the absolute constant C > 0 so that for all t ≤ T

        τ        τ
                        √    2 −1/2

                                              2 2     2
                                                        √   Z t                τ
sup |q(vtd )−q(Vt )| ≤ C T ηv d       (2 + M ) v u + c T +         Ls max |q(vsd )−q(Vsτ )|ds,
q∈Q                                                                                     0     q∈Q̄
                                                                                                         (74)
except on an event of probability Cd8 e−u .
An application of Gronwall’s inequality gives
                                                                                                   !
                 τ
                                          √         2 −1/2
                                                                                   √      Z T
 sup sup     |q(vtd ) − q(Vtτ )| ≤ C          T ηv d                        2 2     2
                                                                   (2 + M ) v u + c T exp     Ls ds . (75)
 q∈Q 0≤t≤T                                                                                           0

Now we note that by contour integration, both the risk v 7→ ⟨K, v ⊗2 ⟩ and suboptimality v 7→ ∥v∥2
both can be estimated by
             τ
      max{ ∥θtd − θ ∗ ∥2 − ∥Θτtd − θ ∗ ∥2 , 2 |R(θtd
                                                  τ
                                                     ) − R(Θτtd )|} ≤ 4 sup |q(vtd
                                                                                τ
                                                                                   ) − q(Vtτ )|,
                                                                                            q∈Q

proving our claim for the stopped processes. Now, it will be shown that with overwhelming τ does
not occur for n ≤ dT . It suffices to show that following lemma.
Lemma 4. There is an absolute constant C > 0 so that for all r ≥ 0 and all T ≥ 0 with probability
                 2
at least 1 − 2e−r /2 for all 0 ≤ s ≤ T ,
                                         √     −1/2           ∥Vs ∥2                      √
                                 2
                                                                         C max{η,η 2 }s+Cη T d−1/2 r
               e−C max{η,η }s−Cη T d                  r
                                                          ≤          ≤ e                             .   (76)
                                                              ∥V0 ∥2

                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Consider φ(Vt ) = log(1 + ∥Vt ∥2 ). Then,


                           µ(Xt )              T           η 2 (t)2ν(Vt )P(Vt ) Tr(K)
  dφ(Vt ) = − 2η(t)                 ∇P(V    t )  V t dt +                             dt
                         1 + ∥Vt ∥2                              1 + ∥Vt ∥2        d
                                                                                                       (77)
                                                                 2η(t) 2ν(Vt )P(Vt ) D √
                                                                      p
                  2η 2 (t)ν(Vt )P(Vt )                                                            E
                −                      ⟨V t  ⊗   V t , K⟩ dt +      √                  V t , KdB t .
                    d(1 + ∥Vt ∥2 )2                                   d(1 + ∥Vt ∥2 )

Note that, Tr(K)/d = ∥K∥ = 1 so the drift terms are all bounded above and below by absolute
constants multiplied by max{η, η 2 }. Meanwhile, the quadratic variation is bounded by
                                    Z t 2
                                       8η (s)              ⟨Vs ⊗ Vs , K⟩
                        ⟨φ(V )⟩t =            ν(Vs )P(Vs )                ds           (78)
                                     0    d                (1 + ∥Vs ∥2 )2
                                       η2
                                 ≤ 8C t,                                               (79)
                                       d
for C an absolute constant.
And so, for all r ≥ 0 , setting f (t) to be the integrated drift terms from (77)
                                                      √ √
                    P( max |φ(Vt ) − f (t)| ≥ Cη T / dr) ≤ 2 exp(−r2 /2).                              (80)
                         1≤t≤T

This implies the claim immediately as |f (t)| ≤ C max{η, η 2 }t for all t.

We can now conclude the main theorem, noting that if for some fixed T , if we pick M̃ so that
                                 (                        Z T    !             )
                         2                      2                            2
                (2 + M̃ ) = max C(1 + ∥V0 ∥ ) exp             Cs , (2 + 2)
                                                                  0

then with probability at least 1 − e−d , ∥Vt ∥ remains below M̃ up time T . As single steps of clipped
SGD cannot increase the norm of vk by more than a factor of 2 (with probability at least 1 − e−cd ),
we conclude that if τ ≤ T d, using (75)
                                                                                              !
                                    √                                 √            Z T
     M 2 = ∥vτ ∥2 ≤ 4(M̃ )2 + 4C T ηv2 d−1/2 (2 + M )2 v2 u + c2 T exp                  Ls ds .
                                                                                         0

Provided M ≥ 2 and provided that
                                                 !
                     √             √    Z T
                                                         1
                           2   2 2
                  4C T ηv v u + c T exp     Ls ds d−1/2 ≤ ,                                            (81)
                                         0               8
we have
                                                     1
                                  M 2 ≤ 4(M̃ )2 + M 2 ,
                                                     2
hence we conclude that                        √
                                        M ≤ 8M̃ .
                           √
So if we pick M larger than 8M̃ (which is larger than 2 by how M̃ was picked) we conclude that
τ > T d.

B.3   B OUNDING MARTINGALES AND ERRORS

Lemma 5. Martingale Bernstein inequality For {Mk }N
                                                  k=0 a martingale, we define


                      σk,p = inf{t > 0 : E[exp(|Mk − Mk−1 |p /tp )|Fk−1 ] ≤ 2},                        (82)
then there exists an absolute constant C > 0 such that for all t > 0
                                                   (                                         )!
                                                                            t2

                                                                   t
      P        sup |Mk − E[M0 ]| > t ≤ 2 exp − min                       , PN                     .    (83)
              1≤k≤N                                            C max σk,1 C i=1 σi,1
                                                                                 2



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This section is dedicated to bounding the martingale and error terms present in Equations (55) and
(56). These terms are

                      η̃k                                η̃k
       ∆Mτ,lin
         k+1 := −         ∇q(vkτ )T clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 ) + ∇q(vkτ )T E[clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )|Fk ]   (84)
                       d                                   d
                     η̃k                                η̃k
                  = − ∇q(vk ) clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 ) + ∇q(vkτ )T Kvkτ µ(vkτ ) − ∆Ekτ,lin ,
                              τ T
                                                                                               (85)
                      d                                  d
and

                  η̃k                                 η̃k
  ∆Mτ,quad             ∇2 q, clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )⊗2 − 2 ∇2 q, E clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )⊗2

    k+1    :=        2
                                                                                           (86)
                 2d                                  2d
                 η̃k                                η̃k
               = 2 ∇2 q, clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )⊗2 − 2 K, ∇2 q ν(vk )P(vk ) − ∆Ekτ,quad , (87)
                2d                                  d
where we recall ℓk = ⟨xk+1 , vkτ ⟩ − ϵk+1 . The error increment has contributions from both the
linear—in η̃k —and quadratic terms. More precisely,

                                     ∆Ekτ = ∆Ekτ,lin + ∆Ekτ,quad ,                             (88)
where
                                   η̃k
                    ∆Ekτ,lin = −       ∇q(θkτ )T E[clipc√d (xk+1 ℓk ) − xk+1 clipc (ℓk )]
                                    d
and
                    η̃k     2                                             h                 i
      ∆Ekτ,quad =                  ⊗2   2
                                          1             2 ≤c2 d − ∇ q, K E ℓ 1ℓ2 Tr(K)≤c2 d
                                                                   2        2

                         E ∇  q, x k+1 ℓk   ∥ℓ   x    ∥                     k                  .
                    2d2                        k  k+1                          k



B.4     M ARTINGALE FOR THE LINEAR TERMS

We’ll begin the proof for the linear terms in the increments. First, note that using the ∥q∥C 2 norm
we can bound

                        ∥∇q(x)∥ ≤ ∥∇2 q∥∥x∥ + ∥∇q(0)∥ ≤ ∥q∥C 2 (1 + ∥x∥).                      (89)
Thus,

                                   |∇q(vkτ )T Kvkτ µ(vkτ )| ≤ (1 + M ).                        (90)
From Equation (134) in the following section, for an absolute constant C > 0
                                   |∆Ekτ,lin | ≤ C(2 + M )2 ηd−3/2 v3 .                        (91)

Meanwhile, we can get subexponential bounds for the former terms of (85),

                η̃k                                  η̃k
            −       ∇q(vkτ )T clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 ) = − ∇q(vkτ )T xk+1 ℓk 1∥ℓk xk+1 ∥≤c√d         (92)
                 d                                    d
                                                     cη̃k         ℓk xk+1
                                                   − √ ∇q(vkτ )T           1            √ .    (93)
                                                        d        ∥ℓk xk+1 ∥ ∥ℓk xk+1 ∥>c d

So, by Assumptions 1 and 4, as well as Equation (89), we have


                    ∇q(vkτ )T xk+1 ℓk 1∥ℓk xk+1 ∥<c√d        ≤ ∥∇q(vtτ )T xk+1 ℓk ∥ψ1          (94)
                                                        ψ1

                                                             ≤ ∥∇q(vtτ )T xk+1 ∥ψ2 ∥ℓk ∥ψ2     (95)
                                                             ≤ (1 + M )v × (2 + M )v.          (96)


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Likewise,
      √            ℓk xk+1
     c d∇q(vkτ )T           1            √     ≤ ∇q(vkτ )T ℓk xk+1 1∥ℓk xk+1 ∥>c√d                               (97)
                  ∥ℓk xk+1 ∥ ∥ℓk xk+1 ∥>c d ψ1                                     ψ1

                                                                 ≤ ∇q(vkτ )T ℓk xk+1 ψ1                          (98)
                                                                 ≤ (2 + M )2 v2 .                                (99)

Thus, for some absolute constant C > 0

                                                         η                                             v
   σk,1 = inf{t > 0 : E[exp(|∆Mτ,lin
                               k     |/t)|Fk−1 ] ≤ 2} ≤ C (2 + M )2 v2                             1+ √     .   (100)
                                                                                d                       d
                       √
for all k. Hence once d ≥ v we may further bound away this additional fraction incurring a further
loss of a factor of 2. We may apply Lemma 5 to see that for all t > 1, and some absolute constant
c>0

   P sup |Mτ,lin              τ,lin               2 2
                                                               ≤ 2 exp −cn min t2 , t . (101)

                   k   − E[M  0     ]| > η(2 + M ) v  (n/d)t
          1≤k≤n


In the case that n ≤ dT , this implies that there is an absolute constant so that for any 1 ≤ u ≤ d
                                                                   √
                                          τ,lin                 2 2 T
                                 sup |Mk | ≤ Cη(2 + M ) v √ u                                    (102)
                               1≤k≤n                                  d
with probability at least 1 − exp(−u).

B.5     M ARTINGALE FOR THE QUADRATIC TERMS

We write
                     η̃k                              η̃k
 ∆Mτ,quad                 ∇2 q, clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )⊗2 − 2 ∇2 q, E clipc√d (ℓk xk+1 )⊗2 |Fk

   k+1    =             2
                                                                                                                (103)
                    2d                                2d
                  = T1 + T2 ,                                                                                   (104)
where

          η̃k                                         η̃k
 T1 =         ∇ 2
                  q, x ⊗2
                       k+1 ℓ2
                              1 2
                            k ℓk ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤c2 d − E       ∇ 2
                                                              q, x⊗2
                                                                  k+1 ℓ2
                                                                         1 2
                                                                       k ℓk ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤c2 d |F k . (105)
          2d2                                         2d2

Notice that
                                           k+1 ℓk 1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤c2 d ≤ ∥∇ q∥c d,
                                    ∇2 q, x⊗2   2                         2   2
                                                                                                                (106)
so that
                                                       |T1 | ≤ c2 η 2 d−1 .                                     (107)

As for T2 ,                         *              ⊗2 +
                          η̃k c2

                                           x
                     T2 =        ∇2 q,
                                             k+1
                                                         1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≥c2 d
                            2d            ∥xk+1 ∥
                              "        *                  ⊗2 +                         #                        (108)
                                η̃k c2

                                                  xk+1
                           −E              2
                                         ∇ q,                    1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≥c2 d Fk .
                                  2d             ∥xk+1 ∥

Similarly,                          *                          ⊗2 +
                           η̃k c2                                                             ηc2

                                                     xk+1
                                        ∇2 q,                         1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≥c2 d ≤       .             (109)
                             2d                     ∥xk+1 ∥                                   2d

So that overall,
                                                                        2ηc2
                                                    |∆Mτ,quad
                                                       k+1 | ≤                                                  (110)
                                                                         d

                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all k. Then, by Lemma 5 we have for t ≥ 1

       P sup |Mkτ,quad − E[M0τ,quad ]| > 2ηc2 (n/d)t ≤ 2 exp −cn min t, t2 .

                                                                                                 (111)
           1≤k≤n

Hence we conclude that for some absolute constant C and all 1 ≤ u ≤ d
                                                         √
                                          τ,quad        2 T
                                 sup |Mk         | ≤ Cηc √ u                                     (112)
                                1≤k≤n                       d
with probability at least 1 − exp(−u).

B.6     M ARTINGALE FOR THE SDE

Recall equation (57)
                                    Z t
                                          η(s) p                         √
                       Mτ,SDE
                        t     =           √      2ν(Vsτ )P(Vsτ )∇g(Vsτ )T KdBs .                 (113)
                                        0   d

We may compute the quadratic variation of Mτ,SDE
                                           t     as
                                       Z t
                                                 η 2 (s)
                    Mτ,SDE t =               2           ν(Vsτ )P(Vsτ )∇g(Vsτ )T K∇g(Vsτ )ds     (114)
                                        0           d
using (89) we see that
                                    Mτ,SDE t ≤ Cη 2 d−1 (1 + M )4 t                              (115)
so that
                                 sup        Mτ,SDE t ≤ Cη 2 d−1 (1 + M )4 T                      (116)
                                0≤t≤T

then using the sub-Gaussian tail bound for continuous martingales with bounded quadratic variation
gives for u ≥ 1
                                                       √     √

                               τ,SDE
                                       > Cη(1 + M ) T u/ d ≤ 2 exp −u2
                                                     2

                 P sup Mt                                                                   (117)
                      0≤s≤T

so that increasing the absolute constant C > 0 as needed, for all u ≥ 1
                                                                 √
                                         τ,SDE                 2 T
                                sup Mt          ≤ Cη(1 + M ) √ u                                 (118)
                              0≤t≤T                                 d
with probability at least 1 − exp(−u).

B.7     B OUNDING THE ERROR TERMS

The remaining technical difficulty is in bounding the error terms. We will first focus on the linear
error term.

B.7.1     L INEAR ERROR TERMS

                η̃k
 ∆Ekτ,lin = −       ∇q(vkτ )T E[clipc√d (xk+1 ℓk ) − xk+1 clipc (ℓk )]                            (119)
                 d
                η̃k
           = − ∇q(vkτ )T E xk+1 ℓk 1∥ℓk xk+1 ∥2 ≤c2 d − xk+1 ℓk 1ℓk Tr(K)≤c2 d

                                                                                                  (120)
                 d             "                                                                #
             η̃k c               xk+1 sgn(ℓk )                     x    sgn(ℓk )
           − √ ∇q(vkτ )T E                     1∥ℓk xk+1 ∥2 >c2 d − k+1
                                                                     p           1ℓ2k Tr(K)>c2 d (121)
                d                   ∥xk+1 ∥                            Tr(K)
                  η̃k
           =: −       E[Dk ].                                                                    (122)
                   d


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For clarity, we will write ∇q(vkτ ) as ∇qk . We see that


                                                       ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤ c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d,
           
            0,           √
                         c d∇q T xk+1 ℓk
           
           ∇qk xk+1 ℓk − |ℓ |√kTr(K) ,
                T
                                                       ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤ c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d,
           
           
           
               √                     k
    Dk =     c        T
                   d∇qk xk+1 ℓk                                                                    (123)
                                − ∇qkT xk+1 ℓk ,       ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d,
               √|ℓk |∥x k+1 ∥
           
                                   √
           
                     T                 T
             c   d∇q    x     ℓ   c d∇qk
                                       √ xk+1 ℓk ,
           
                      k k+1 k
                                −                      ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d.
           
           
                |ℓk |∥xk+1 ∥          |ℓk |   Tr(K)


Now, considering each case, we see that:
When ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤ c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d, we have

                                                                     √
                                                                    c d
                                  |Dk | = |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk |   1−      p                              (124)
                                                               |ℓk | Tr(K)
                                                               ∥xk+1 ∥
                                         ≤ |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | 1 − p       .                           (125)
                                                                 Tr(K)

When ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d, we have

                                                                  √
                                                                 c d
                                  |Dk | = |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk |                −1                        (126)
                                                            |ℓk |∥xk+1 ∥

                                                               ∥xk+1 ∥
                                         ≤ |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | 1 − p       .                           (127)
                                                                 Tr(K)

When ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d,


                                                 √ 1             1         1
                        |Dk | = |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | c d                    −p                          (128)
                                                    |ℓk |      ∥xk+1 ∥    Tr(K)
                                                    ∥xk+1 ∥
                              ≤ |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | 1 − p       .                                      (129)
                                                      Tr(K)

Now using the numerical inequality |1 − z| > t =⇒ |1 − z 2 | > max{t, t2 },
                                     !
                                            ∥xk+1 ∥2

                           ∥xk+1 ∥
                   P    1− p       >t ≤P 1−          > max{t, t2 } .                               (130)
                            Tr(K)            Tr(K)

Since, by assumption Tr(K) = d, and using Assumption 4 we see that, setting s = max{t, t2 }
                                    !
                        ∥xk+1 ∥
                                 > t ≤ P Tr(K) − ∥xk+1 ∥2 > ds

               P 1− p                                                                     (131)
                         Tr(K)
                                                         2 2
                                                           d s        ds
                                       ≤ 2 exp − min 4            ,             .         (132)
                                                        v ∥K∥2F v2 ∥K∥

Since d2 /∥K∥2F ≥ d, we conclude that for all u ≥ 1
                                                   !
                                   ∥xk+1 ∥
                                               > vu ≤ 2 exp −du2 .

                         P 1− p                                                                    (133)
                                    Tr(K)

                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The term |∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | has a second moment bounded by (compare with (96))
                                 E|∇qkT xk+1 ℓk | ≤ C(2 + M )2 v2
for an absolute constant C > 0, and hence we conclude for an absolute constant C > 0
                                |∆Ekτ,lin | ≤ C(2 + M )2 ηd−3/2 v3 .                                              (134)
Thus, taking n ≤ dT steps, we get
                                      max |Ekτ,lin | ≤ CT ηv3 (2 + M )2 d−1/2 .                                   (135)
                                     0≤k≤n

B.7.2     Q UADRATIC ERROR TERMS
This follows a similar path as the linear terms. We again express
                η̃k                                                        h                i
 ∆Ekτ,quad = 2 E ∇2 q, x⊗2               2
                                           1           2 ≤c2 d − ∇ q, K E ℓ 1ℓ2 Tr(K)≤c2 d
                                                                   2          2

                                  k+1   ℓk   ∥ℓ x
                                               k k+1 ∥                        k k               (136)
                2d       "                                    #                               !
               η̃k c2       ∇2 q, x⊗2                             ∇2 q, K
                                    k+1
                                          1                               P ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d

            +          E              2     ∥ℓ  x    ∥2 >c2 d   −                               (137)
                 2d          ∥xk+1 ∥           k k+1
                                                                   Tr K
                   η̃k
              :=       E[Dk′ ]                                                                                    (138)
                   2d2
with


                    k+1 ℓk 1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤c2 d − ∇ q, K ℓk 1ℓ2k Tr(K)≤c2 d
       Dk′ = ∇2 q, x⊗2   2                        2      2
                                                                                                                  (139)
                       ∇ q, x⊗2
                            2
                                                                    ∇ q, K  2
            + c2 d           k+1
                                       1ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 >c2 d − c2 d          12       2                             (140)
                       ∥xk+1 ∥2                                     Tr(K) ℓk Tr(K)>c d
              
                ℓ2k ∇2 q, x⊗2

              
                          k+1  − ∇2 q, K , ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤ c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d,
              
              
              
                                 2 ⟨∇ q,K⟩
              
                                     2
                   2   ⊗2     2               2        2    2         2          2
               ∇ q, xk+1 ℓk − c d Tr(K) , ℓk ∥xk+1 ∥ ≤ c d and ℓk Tr(K) > c d,
              
              
              
              
          =         ⟨∇2 q,x⊗2 ⟩                                                                                   (141)
              
              
               c2 d ∥xk+1k+1      2
                           ∥2 − ∇ q, K ℓk ,
                                           2
                                                              ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d,
              
              
              
                     2 ⊗2
                      ⟨∇ q,xk+1 ⟩ ⟨∇2 q,K⟩
              
               2
              c d      ∥xk+1 ∥2 − Tr(K)     ,                ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d.
              
              

Consider the function by cases. On ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 ≤ c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d we have


                                               ∇2 q, K
                   ∇2 q, x⊗2   2    2
                          k+1 ℓk − c d                                                                            (142)
                                               Tr(K)
                                                                                               c2 d

                      ℓ2k       ∇ q, x⊗2
                                 2                2                     2
                                                                                      ℓ2k −

               =                      k+1   − ∇ q, K          + ∇ q, K                                            (143)
                                                                                              Tr(K)
                                                                                  ℓ4k
               ≤ ℓ2k         ∇2 q, x⊗2     2
                                    k+1 − ∇ q, K          + ∇2 q, K                   Tr(K) − ∥xk+1 ∥2 .          (144)
                                                                                 c2 d
Similarly, if ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) ≤ c2 d


                       ∇2 q, x⊗2
                              k+1
               c2 d               − ∇2 q, K ℓ2k                                                                   (145)
                       ∥xk+1 ∥2
                     c2 d                                                                       c2 d

                                     ∇2 q, x⊗2     2
                                                                        + ∇2 q, K                      − w2

              =                             k+1 − ∇ q, K                                                          (146)
                   ∥xk+1 ∥2                                                                   ∥xk+1 ∥2
                                                                                 ℓ4k
              ≤ ℓ2k         ∇2 q, x⊗2     2
                                   k+1 − ∇ q, K          + ∇2 q, K                   Tr(K) − ∥xk+1 ∥2 .           (147)
                                                                                c2 d


                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and finally when ℓ2k ∥xk+1 ∥2 > c2 d and ℓ2k Tr(K) > c2 d we have

                                      !
            ∇2 q, x⊗2
                   k+1   ∇2 q, K
    2
    c d             2
                       −                  ≤ ℓ2k   ∇2 q, x⊗2     2
                                                         k+1 − ∇ q, K                              (148)
            ∥xk+1 ∥      Tr(K)
                                                             ℓ4k
                                          + ∇2 q, K              Tr(K) − ∥xk+1 ∥2 1ℓ2k Tr(K)>c2 d . (149)
                                                            c2 d

So overall,
                                                             ℓ4k
 |Dk′ | ≤ ℓ2k   ∇2 q, x⊗2     2        2
                       k+1 − ∇ q, K + ∇ q, K                     Tr(K) − ∥xk+1 ∥2 1ℓ2k Tr(K)>c2 d . (150)
                                                            c2 d

Now, we may use the Hanson-Wright inequality (Assumption 4) along with the inequality

                             √     √
                            ∥ K∇2 q K∥2F ≤ Tr(K)∥∇2 q∥2 ≤ Tr(K) = d                                (151)
to see that for all t ≥ 0
                                                                        2
                                                                       t
                      ∇2 q, x⊗2     2
                                                  > tv2 ≤ 2 exp − min

                  P          k+1 − ∇ q, K                                 ,t .                     (152)
                                                                        d

We also recall from (132) that
                                                                           2
                                 2                 2
                                                                          t
                      P |∥xk+1 ∥ − Tr(K)| > tv             ≤ 2 exp − min     ,t .
                                                                           d
Hence overall, we conclude that for some absolute constant C > 0
                                                          √
                                   |EDk′ | ≤ Cv4 (1 + M )2 d.
So that overall

                                 ∆Ekτ,quad ≤ Cηv4 (1 + M )2 d−3/2 .                                (153)

and summing over k ≤ n ≤ T d,

                               max Ekτ,quad ≤ CT ηv4 (1 + M )2 d−1/2 .                             (154)
                              0≤k≤n

This completes the proof of Lemma 2.


C       A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES

C.1       S TUDENT- T DISTRIBUTED NOISE

Here, we examine the influence of heavy-tailed noise on the (CSC) and (CCC) using the Student-t
family of distributions.
The Student-t distribution, characterized by its degrees of freedom (df) parameter, allows us to
explore a continuum of tail behaviors. As the degrees of freedom decrease, the distribution becomes
more heavy-tailed, ranging from the Cauchy distribution (df = 1) to the Gaussian distribution as df
approaches infinity.
To better understand how varying tail behaviors affect the dynamics of clipped SGD, we generate
plots of these thresholds as the degrees of freedom parameter changes. These results are in Figure 5.
As df increases, so to do values of the (CSC) and (CCC) ratios. This is unsurprising as the distribution
becomes more heavy-tailed.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      102
                                                   df50                3.0                                           df50
                                                   df10                                                              df10
                                                   df5                 2.5                                           df5
                                                   df2.5                                                             df2.5
                                                   df2.1                                                             df2.1
      101                                                              2.0


                                                                 CCC
CSC



                                                                       1.5

                                                                       1.0
      100
            0.0   2.5   5.0    7.5   10.0   12.5     15.0                    0.0   2.5   5.0    7.5    10.0   12.5     15.0
                                c                                                                c
Figure 5: The CSC and CCC where the noise is Student-t distributed. We hold the variance fixed
and vary over the degrees-of-freedom (DOF) parameter. Notice how for high DOF, the thresolds
resemble Gaussian behaviour (compare to Figure 2 in the main paper). Meanwhile for small DOF,
we see that both the CSC and CCC are high, suggesting clipping is particularly effective. This reflects
the heavy-tailed behaviour of the small DOF Student-t distribution.


C.2         M EASURING µ AND ν IN REAL NETWORKS

We can estimate µ and ν in the non-linear setting as well. Even though C-HSGD does not fully
capture the dynamics in this regime, computing estimates of µ and ν may give useful information
about how to apply clipping schedules. Given a loss function L(θ) induced by some non-linear
model z(θ), the generalization of Equation 7 is given by

                              ∥E[clipc (∇θ L)]∥                                    E[|| clipc (∇θ L)||2 ]
                   µc (θ) =                                and          νc (θ) =                          .           (155)
                                 ∥E[∇θ L]∥                                             E[||∇θ L||2 ]

Here the averages are across sampled minibatches. These forms can be derived from the original
                                                                      ∂z
calculation by making the substitution x → J, where J is the Jacobian ∂θ .
The numerator and denominator can be estimated online using a running average (e.g. exponential
moving average) updated after every C-SGD step. This does not require any additional backprop-
agation steps, but does require keeping 2 extra running averages in the shape of θ to compute µc .
However, if we use the form of µc from Equation 9, adapted as

                                            µc (θ) = P[||∇θ L|| ≤ c]                                                  (156)

(that is, the probability of unclipped gradients), no additional memory costs are incurred and the
computation is efficient.
We used this estimator to compute µ and ν for ResNet18 and ViT S/16 trained on CIFAR10 (Figure
6, left column). The models were trained without clipping, and µ and ν were computed using
different clipping values c. With a larger clipping threshold of c = 10, gradients are rarely clipped
and µ(t) ≈ ν(t) ≈ 1; there is non-trivial dynamics for smaller clipping strength. We also computed
the (CSC) and (CCC) for the different thresholds (Figure 6, right column). For ResNet18, the (CCC)
is above 1 for the smaller thresholds; if the theory holds, then clipping is beneficial here. In contrast,
for ViT it remains at or below 1 and clipping would not help.
Further investigation is needed to understand the utility of using µ and ν in the non-linear setting;
the two main obstacles are the fidelity of the H-CSGD approximation and, relatedly, the question of
whether or not the max-(CCC) is strictly better than the unclipped schedule in the non-linear setting.
Non-convex optimization can often have more effects which depend on the whole training trajectory;
the form of the H-CSGD dynamics in the linear setting allowed us to largely ignore these with the
appropriate choice of µ and ν. We leave the exploration and development of practical applications
of µ and ν to set joint learning rate and clipping schedules to future work.


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 ResNet18                                                 ResNet18
           1.0
                                                                    1.0
           0.8
                                                  µ                 0.8
           0.6                                    ν
                                                  c = 0.10          0.6
           0.4                                    c = 1.00                                                 CSC
                                                  c = 10.00         0.4                                    CCC
           0.2                                                                                             c = 0.10
                                                                    0.2                                    c = 1.00
                                                                                                           c = 10.00
           0.0                                                      0.0
                 0       50         100     150          200              0       50         100     150          200
                                 Epochs                                                   Epochs
                                 ViT S/16                                                 ViT S/16
          1.0
                                                                    1.0
          0.8
                     µ                                              0.8
          0.6        ν
                     c = 0.10                                       0.6
          0.4        c = 1.00                                                 CSC
                     c = 10.00                                      0.4       CCC
          0.2                                                                 c = 0.10
                                                                    0.2       c = 1.00
                                                                              c = 10.00
          0.0                                                       0.0
                 0       50         100     150          200              0       50         100     150          200
                                 Epochs                                                   Epochs
Figure 6: µ, ν, CSC and CCC for the realistic models of Appendix C (ResNet18 and ViT) trained
on CIFAR10. µ and ν were computed using Equations 155 and the additional approximation from
Equation 156. µ and ν are computed for three log-spaced clipping thresholds. Our theory suggests
that ResNet may benefit from clipping, but ViT in this setting does not.


C.3   M EASURING THE INTRINSIC DIMENSION IN REAL NETWORKS

Recall that the intrinsic dimension d is defined in terms of the spectrum of K:
                                                  d := Tr(K)/∥K∥.
We can extend the definition of the intrinsic dimension to the non-linear setting by considering a
linearization of the dynamics. Given a loss function L(z) and a model z(θ) on parameters θ, the
Gauss Newton matrix G of the loss is defined by:
                                             G := ∇θ z⊤ ∇2z L∇θ z.                                                      (157)
Here ∇θ z is the model Jacobian, and ∇2z L is the Hessian of the loss with respect to the model
outputs. G encodes the second derivative of the loss with respect to a linearized model z̃ = z(θ0 ) +
∇θ z(θ − θ0 ).
For a linear model on MSE loss (as we studied in the main text), we have K = G. If we took a
non-linear model during training, and locally linearized the model and loss, we would measure the
intrinsic dimension with G as well. Therefore, on non-linear models, we will define
                                                  dnl := Tr(G)/∥G∥                                                      (158)
as the non-linear intrinsic dimension.
With this definition, we can measure the intrinsic dimension on neural network models during train-
ing. We measured dnl on ResNet18 He et al. (2016) and ViT S/16 Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) for
networks trained on CIFAR10 using MSE loss (Figure 7). We see that for ResNet18, dnl increases
from ∼ 100 to 103 , while for ViT dnl stays steady at ∼ 300. In both cases dnl is large, but it is very
model dependent.
This suggests that real neural network models are in the effectively high-dimensional regime; we
leave to future work the question of which concepts from the basic theory generalize to the non-
linear setting.


                                                               27
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Intrinsic Dimension
                                                                   103


                                                                   102                                      ResNet18
                                                                                                            ViT S/16
                                                                         0        50        100           150         200
                                                                                       Epochs
   Figure 7: Non-linear intrinsic dimension dnl for models trained on MSE loss. For ResNet18 (blue),
   dnl increases by a factor of 10 over training, while for ViT S/16 (orange) dnl remains relatively
   constant.


    C.4                     F URTHER EXPERIMENTS WITH THE HEURISTIC CLIPPING SCHEDULE

   In this section we showcase some preliminary results investigating the proposed heuristic optimal
   clipping schedule given in Section 5.3. Note that a full investigation of the heuristic optimal clipping
   schedule across many datasets and in differing models is beyond the scope of this paper.

    C.4.1                       H EURISTIC CLIPPING SCHEDULE ON REAL DATA
   In this section we showcase some results on applying the heuristically optimal learning rate schedule
   for real datasets, namely the Wikitext2 dataset for next-token prediction. For experimental details
   on how the dataset was embedded and key quantities were estimated see Appendix H. A full inves-
   tigation into the efficacy of this heuristic schedule will require extensive experimentation which is
   beyond the scope of this work. Here we simply provide evidence that the schedule and heuristics
   are effective even in real world conditions.

                         1.00
                         0.95
CCC (for WikiText GMM)


                         0.90
                         0.85
                                                                                        Risk


                         0.80                                                                  10 1
                         0.75                                                                                   ∞-SGD 80.0% CI
                                                                                                                C-SGD Ap. Opt. 80.0% CI
                         0.70                                                                                   Ap. Opt. ODE
                         0.65                                                                                   Unclipped ODE
                                0      5                      10             15                       0     100               101         102   103
                                                       c                                                                    Iterations

   Figure 8: We train a linear model using the heuristic optimal clipping and learning rate schedules
   given in Section 5.3. The (CCC) is given in the left hand figure. Note that the optimal clipping in this
   scenario is not to clip. This is captured by the heuristic optimal. In fact, heuristic optimal actually
   performs slightly better due to imperfectly compensating the learning rate.


    C.4.2                       I NSENSITIVITY TO THE TUNED CONSTANT
   Here we investigate the sensitivity of the heuristic clipping schedule to the tuned hyper-parameter
   κ. In Figure 9 we first find the optimal κ through a simple grid search. To investigate the sensitivity,
   we then run clipped SGD with the heuristic schedule with both 1.5κ and κ/2. Despite the relatively
   large change in the hyper-parameter we observe a relatively small stray from the behaviour under κ.


                                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Unclipped ODE                     0.20                                      Unclipped ODE
       0.20                                      Opt ODE                                                                     Opt ODE
       0.18                                      Ap. Opt. ODE                                                                Ap. Opt. ODE
                                                 Sensitivity range                 0.15                                      Sensitivity range
       0.16
Risk


                                                                           Risk
       0.14
                                                                                   0.10
       0.12
       0.10                                                                        0.05
       0.08

               0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5       10.0   12.5     15.0                        0.0   2.5   5.0         7.5     10.0   12.5     15.0
                                 Iterations                                                                  Iterations

Figure 9: Sensitivity experiment of the heuristic clipping schedule (Equation (25) to changes in the
optimal κ. Here the sensitivity range gives the values when run with 1.5κ and κ/2.


D        S OME EXAMPLES OF µ AND ν

In this section we give some examples of µ and ν as defined in equation (7) under various common
distributions. First, we will describe how to define µc and νc as functions of the risk.
                                      law p
Notice that, with Gaussian data, ℓθ = 2R(θ)ξ − ϵ where ξ is a standard Gaussian. Thus we can
define µ̃ and ν̃ such that
                                                                E[clip2c ( 2R(Θt )ξ − ϵ)]
                            p                                             p
                  ∥E[clipc ( 2R(Θt )ξ − ϵ)x]∥
      µ̃(Θt ) =          p                            ν̃(Θt ) =      p                       (159)
                    ∥E[( 2R(Θt )ξ − ϵ)x]∥                         E[( 2R(Θt )ξ − ϵ)2 ]

and µc (Θt ) = µ̃c (R(Θt )) and νc (Θt ) = ν̃c (R(Θt )). In what follows r = R(θ) for some Θt . In
the following examples, we will simplify notation and simply let R(Θt ) = r.

D.1           G AUSSIAN DATA AND G AUSSIAN NOISE

Consider a ∼ N (0, K) and ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). First define

                                                                                   r
                                                                     z                  2 −z2 /2
                                              F (z) = erf            √         −          ze                                             (160)
                                                                       2                π

Then, we have
                                                                                                !
                                                                                    c
                                                µc (r) = erf             p                                                               (161)
                                                                          4(r + σ 2 /2)
                                                                                   !                                       !
                            2                                        c                      2                 c
                     (2r + σ )νc (r) = 2rF              p                               + c erfc      p                                  (162)
                                                         2(r + η 2 /2)                                    4(r + η 2 /2)

D.2           G AUSSIAN DATA AND R ADEMACHER - LIKE NOISE
                                      
                                      −λ with probability q/2
                                  ϵk = 0    with probability 1 − q                                                                       (163)
                                      
                                        λ   with probability q/2

Note that σ 2 = Var(ϵ) = λ2 q. For some standard Gaussian random variable z, µ and ν may be
computed as


                                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          c                       c
                  µc (r) = qP |z − λ| ≤ √      + (1 − q)P |z| ≤ √                              (164)
                                          2r                      2r

                           q      c−λ             c+λ                    c
                         =    erf √       + erf √         + (1 − q) erf √                      (165)
                           2         4r             4r                    4r


             2             q        c−λ           c+λ                        c
      (2r + σ )νc (r) = 2r      F   √       +F     √        + 2r(1 − q)F    √                  (166)
                           2          2r             2r                       2r
                                        (c + λ)2              (c − λ)2

                         qλ
                      +√         exp −             − exp −                                     (167)
                          πr               2r                    2r
                           2

                        qλ           c−λ            c+λ
                      +        erf √         + erf √                                           (168)
                         2             4r              4r
                        qc2

                                     c−λ              c+λ                         c
                      +        erfc √        + erfc √         + (1 − q)P |z| > √               (169)
                         2             2r               2r                         2r

D.3     G AUSSIAN DATA AND UNIFORM NOISE

For a ∼ N (0, K) and uniform noise supported on [−M, M ] we have σ 2 = M 2 /3 and

                                                       r !
                               1 2 − (c+M )2 cM          4r
                 µc (r) = 1 −     c e    4r (e r  − 1)                                         (170)
                              2M                          π

                           1 2                c−M                       c+M
                        −     c (M − c) erfc √         + (c + M ) erfc √                       (171)
                          2M                     4r                       4r

                                          r
         2        −1 − (c+M )2    4r   2
(2r + σ )νc (r) =    e    4r          −c + cM − M 2 − 4r + ecM/r (c2 + cM + M 2 + 4r)
                  6M              π
                                                                                    (172)

                      1 3     3              c−M         1 3       3             c+M
                   −    (c − M − 6M r) erf    √       +     (c + M + 6M r) erf    √
                     6M                         4r      6M                          4r
                                                                                    (173)
                                             r      !
                      1 2 − (c+M )2 cM         2σ 2
                   +    c e    4r  (e r − 1)                                        (174)
                     2M                         π

                      1 2                c−M                      c+M
                   +    c (M − c) erfc √         + (c + M ) erfc √                  (175)
                     2M                    4r                       4r

D.4     G AUSSIAN DATA AND SYMMETRIC EXPONENTIAL NOISE

For a ∼ N (0, K) and symmetric exponential noise, also known as Laplacian, with density

                                              f (x) = λe−|x|λ /2                               (176)

then we have


                                c
       µc (r) = 2 erf       √                                                                  (177)
                                2r2
                                                  (c − λr2 )             (c + λr2 )

                                2
             + eλ(−2c+λr )/2 (e2cλ − erf            √             2cλ
                                                               − e erf     √          − 1)/2   (178)
                                                      2r2                    2r2


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, if Tc (r) satisfies

                                  2                                      2
    (8 + 4λ2 r2 )T (r) = 2eλ(2c+λr )/2 (2 − 2cλ + c2 λ2 ) − 2eλ(−2c+λr )/2 (2 + 2cλ + c2 λ2 )   (179)

                             −c2
                                 2
                                   p             2 2       2  2           c
                       − 4ce 2r λ 2r /π + 2λ r + 2λ r (erf √
                               2        2                                       − 1)            (180)
                                                                         2r2

                                                 c
                       + (4 + 2λ2 r2 + 8) erf √                                                 (181)
                                                 2r2
                                                                  c − λr2

                                     2
                       − 2eλ(−2c+λr )/2 (2 + 2cλ + c2 λ2 ) erf     √                            (182)
                                                                      2r2
                                                                c + λr2

                                   2
                       − 2eλ(2c+λr )/2 (2 − 2cλ + c2 λ2 ) erf    √                              (183)
                                                                    2r2

we have


                             νc (r) = Tc (r) + c2 (1 − µc (r))/(2r + σ 2 )                      (184)


E     S IMPLIFICATION OF µ AND ν

Theorem 8. Let x ∼ N (0, K) and let the noise be σϵ for a fixed random variable ϵ and σ > 0.
Assume that the characteristic function of ϵ, φ(t) = E[eitϵ ] is integrable. This assumption implies
that ϵ has a continuous density g(y). We will additionally assume that g(0) > 0.
Then, there exist absolute constants κl , κu depending on the distribution of the noise (but not σ)
such that,


                                   c                                       c
                   κl min 1, √                  ≤ µc (R) ≤ κu min 1, √                          (185)
                                 2R + σ 2                                2R + σ 2

                                                                                law p
Proof. We first complete the upper bound. Let g ∼ N (0, 1). Notice that ℓθ =            2R(θ)g − σϵ.
Thus,


                                        µc (θ) = P(|ℓθ | ≤ c).                                  (186)

Going forward, we omit the dependence on θ for clarity. Let f be the density of ℓ. Then, by the
Fourier inversion theorem

                                            Z
                                          1             2
                                 f (x) =      e−ixt e−Rt φ(σt)dt
                                         2π
                                            Z                                                   (187)
                                          1        2
                                       ≤      e−Rt |φ(σt)|dt,
                                         2π

where φ(t) is the characteristic function of ϵ. Now consider cases: when 2R ≥ σ 2 ,

                                                  Z
                                             1             2   2
                                  f (x) ≤             e−Rt /σ |φ(t)|dt
                                            2πσ
                                                                                                (188)
                                                        1
                                       ≤ π −1/2 √
                                                      2R + σ 2

Meanwhile, if σ 2 < 2R


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Z
                                           1          2    2
                                  f (x) ≤        e−Rt /σ |φ(t)|dt
                                         2πσ
                                         R                                               (189)
                                           |φ(t)|dt       1
                                      ≤ √           √
                 R
                                             2π       σ 2 + 2R
By assumption, |φ(t)|dt < ∞ and while it depends on the noise distribution it does not depend
on the variance/scale parameter σ. Since,
                                                     Z c
                                            µc =           f (x)dx,                            (190)
                                                      −c

putting the two cases together completes the bound.
We now proceed with the lower bound. Let A ≥ 1 and again consider cases. First, let σ < Ac and
√
  2R < Ac for some A. Then,

                                 µc = P(|ℓθ | ≤ c)
                                         √
                                    = P(| 2Rg + σϵ| ≤ c)
                                                                                               (191)
                                    ≥ P(|g| ≤ 1/2A)P(|ϵ| ≤ 1/2A)
                                    = κA > 0.
Where κA is bounded away from 0 by assumption. And so,

                                                   c
                             µc ≥ κA min 1, √              .                                   (192)
                                                σ 2 + 2R

Now for the remaining cases. We can express µc by integrating over the density of ℓθ . Let L
represent the law of σϵ. Then,
                                            Z cZ
                                      1                         2
                              µc = √                     e−(x+y) /4R dL(y) dx.                 (193)
                                     4πR        −c   R
                          √                 √
Consider the case where       2R > Ac and       2R > σ. Then,

                                      Z c Z 1/A
                                  1                     2
                          µc ≥ √                e−(x+yσ) /4R g(y)dy dx
                                 4πR −c −1/A
                                                             2
                                                                                               (194)
                                                    4me−1/8A

                                           c
                             ≥ min 1, √                √
                                         2R + σ 2     A 2π
                                                       2
where we may lower bound the integrand since |(x + yσ)√ /4R| ≤ 1/2A over the rectangle (x, y) ∈
[−c, c] × [−1/A, 1/A]. Similarly, we consider the case 2R < σ and σ > Ac. Then,

                               Z c Z 1/A                √         !
                           1                −y 2 /2       2Ry − x
                   µc ≥ √                 e         g               dy dx
                         σ 2π −c −1/A                       σ
                                                           2
                                                                                               (195)
                                               4me−1/2A

                                     c
                      ≥ min 1,   √                    √      .
                                   2R + σ 2        A 2π
                          −1/8A2

Choosing κl = min κA , 4me √
                         A 2π
                                   completes the proof.

Corollary 1. In the same setting as Theorem 8,

                               c2                                             c2

                   κl min 1,                    ≤ νc2 (R) ≤ κu min     1,                  .   (196)
                             2R + σ 2                                       2R + σ 2

                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. νc is trivially less than or equal to 1. Recall the definition,

                                         1
                                               E ℓ2θ 1|ℓθ |≤c + c2 (1 − µc )

                            νc (R) =         2
                                      2R + σ
                                                                                               (197)
                                        c2
                                    ≤
                                      2R + σ 2
which gives the upper bound with coefficient 1. Now for the lower bound. We can write,
                                            Z ∞
                                   1
                      νc =                      P(ℓ2θ 1|ℓθ |≤c ≥ t) dt + c2 (1 − µc )
                                2R + σ 2     0
                                            Z 2  c
                                                                             !
                                   1
                          =                          P(ℓ2θ ≥ t) dt + c2 (1 − µc )              (198)
                                2R + σ 2     0

                            c2
                          ≥       2(1 − µc )
                         2R + σ 2
So we can now use the µc bound derived above to obtain the desired bound for νc .



F     P ROOF OF STABILITY AND EFFECTIVENESS THEOREMS

F.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

To see there exists c > 0 such that (CSC) holds, it is simpler to work with the inverse of the ratio.
We remark that
                        νc       E(ℓ2 1|ℓ|≤c + c2 1|ℓ|>c )
                    lim    = lim                                                               (199)
                   c→0+ µc  c→0+       P(|ℓ| ≤ c)
                                                           c2 (1 − P(|ℓ| ≤ c))
                                            Z
                                     1
                           = lim                   ℓ2 dP +                                     (200)
                            c→0+ P(|ℓ| ≤ c) |ℓ|≤c               P(|ℓ| ≤ c)
                                                                c2
                                            Z
                                     1
                           = lim                   ℓ2 dP +            .                        (201)
                            c→0+ P(|ℓ| ≤ c) |ℓ|≤c          P(|ℓ| < c)
Therefore, it suffices to show that (201) is less than 1. Indeed, the former term converges to 0 by
the Lebesgue-Differentiation Theorem. For the latter, let us assume that ϵ ∼ π for some probability-
measure π. Given that x ∼ N (0, K), let us denote f to be the (Gaussian) density of ⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩. It
follows that
                              P(|ℓ| ≤ c) = P(−c + ϵ ≤ ⟨x, θ − θ ∗ ⟩ ≤ c + ϵ)                   (202)
                                           Z Z c+ϵ
                                         =          f (x) dx dπ(ϵ).                            (203)
                                                 R    −c+ϵ

Differentiating with respect to c yields,
                     Z Z c+ϵ                     Z
                 d
                                 f (x) dx dπ(ϵ) =   f (c + ϵ) + f (−c + ϵ) dπ(ϵ).              (204)
                 dc    R −c+ϵ                     R

By L’Hôpital’s rule, the latter term of (201) becomes
                               c2                            2c
                          lim         = lim R                                                  (205)
                       c→0 P(|ℓ| < c)   c→0     f (c +  ϵ) + f (−c + ϵ) dπ(ϵ)
                                              R
                                                      2c
                                      = lim+ R                                                 (206)
                                        c→0
                                                R
                                                  2f (ϵ) dπ(ϵ)
                                            = 0.                                               (207)


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

First, notice that σ 2 = qλ2 . In the limit as |Rt | → 0 we have,


                                       µ(Rt ) = P(|ϵ| ≤ c)                                   (208)

                                                  1       λ≤c
                                              =                                              (209)
                                                  1−q λ>c


                                                       1        λ≤c
                                       ν(Rt ) =                                              (210)
                                                       c2 /λ2   λ>c

thus


                        µ(Rt )
                               =1                                                λ<c         (211)
                        ν(Rt )
                        µ(Rt )                                             p
                               >1                                     c<       (1 − q)λ      (212)
                        ν(Rt )
                        µ(Rt )                                  p
                               ≤1                                   (1 − q)λ ≤ c < λ         (213)
                        ν(Rt )

thus c may always be chosen such that the (CSC) is less than 1.

F.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

With µ and ν given by equations (161) and (162) we have that

                                            µ2 (Rt )  2
                                         lim         = <1                                    (214)
                                        c→0 ν(Rt )    π

Meanwhile, it can be seen that for all Rt ≥ 0 µ2c (Rt )/νc (Rt ) is increasing and continuous in c.
Since,

                                                 µ2c (Rt )
                                             lim           =1                                (215)
                                             c→∞ ν(Rt )


we are done.

F.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

In light of Section F.2 above, we see that


                        µc (Rt )2
                                  =1                                             λ<c         (216)
                        νc (Rt )
                        µc (Rt )2
                                  >1                                    c < (1 − q)λ         (217)
                        νc (Rt )
                        µc (Rt )2
                                  ≤1                             (1 − q)λ ≤ c < λ            (218)
                        νc (Rt )

thus c may always be chosen such that the (CCC) holds.


                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     T HE RISK UNDER ANISOTROPIC DATA
In this section, we describe how to use equation (12) to solve for the risk. First, define

                                          qz (z) = zT R(z; K)z/2,                              (219)

where R(z; K) = (K − zI)−1 is the resolvent of K. Using Itô’s Lemma and the resolvent identity
R(z; K)(K − z) = I.

                   dqz (Θt ) = − η(t) ∥Θt − θ ∗ ∥2 + 2zqz (Θt ) µc(t) (R(Θt ))dt


                                     η 2 (t)                                                   (220)
                                 +           Tr(KR(z; K))νc(t) (R(Θt ))dt + dMt .
                                        d
We shall let Qz (t) be the deterministic equivalent of this equation, that is
       d                                               η 2 (t)
          Qz (t) = −η(t) (Dt + 2zQz (t)) µc(t) (Rt ) +         Tr(KR(z; K))νc(t) (Rt ),        (221)
       dt                                                 d
where (recalling Ω is the circle of radius 2)
                             −1                              −1
                                  I                              I
                      Dt =            Qz (t)dz and Rt =            zQz (t)dz.
                             2πi Ω                           2πi Ω
These are analogues of the same formulas that hold exactly for D(Θt ) and R(Θt ) when replacing
Qz by qz (Θt ).
Now it is possible to precisely compare the solution of these ODEs to SGD, as the same machin-
ery developed for Theorem 1 applies. In particular, Lemma 1 bounds the supremum difference
supz∈Ω |qz (Θt ) − Qz (t)| (although now with MSDEt   ≡ 0). Hence, we conclude the following:
Theorem 9. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 hold. Suppose that {θk } is C-SGD. Let c =
supt c(t) and η = supt η(t). There is a constant C = C(v, (n/d), c, η, ∥θ0 − θ ∗ ∥2 ), a stochastic
process E, and a constant m = m(v) so that for any 1 ≤ u ≤ md

                                R(θk )      Rk/d
                      sup                −          ≤ CE(n/d)u log(d)d−1/2 ,                 (222)
                     0≤k≤n       D(θk )    Dk/d

with probability 1 − e−u and provided the right hand side is less than 1. The stochastic process E is
given by                                                           !
                                             Z t
                                                   Cη(s)2 σ ds
                               E(t) = exp        p
                                              0    R(Θs ) + Rs
for an absolute constant C > 0. The constant C can be bounded by
                p                                   p
         C ≤ C n/d ηv2 · ((1 + ∥θ0 − θ ∗ ∥2 )v2 + c2 n/d) · exp C max{η, η 2 }(n/d)


for an absolute constant C > 0.

We note that further details in this direction are shown in Collins-Woodfin et al. (2023).

G.1   G ETTING A SYSTEM OF ODE S

We may use Equation (221) to get an equivalent coupled system of d ODEs which can solve for Rt .
First, we may diagonalize,


                        d                                            d
                        X                                            X      1
                  K=          λi wi wiT                  R(z; K) =              wi wiT         (223)
                        i=1                                          i=1
                                                                         λi − z

Where {λi }di=1 and {wi }di=1 are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of K respectively. Therefore,


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       d
                                                    1X 1                         2
                                  Qz (Θt ) =                     ⟨Θt − θ ∗ , wi ⟩ .                    (224)
                                                    2 i=1 λi − z

                                2              Pd                    Pd
Define vi (t) = ⟨Θt − θ ∗ , wi ⟩ /2. Then, Rt = i=1 vi (t)λi and Dt = i=1 2vi (t). Now, we can
find a system of ODEs which describes the evolution of {vi }di=1 .
Choose Ωi to be a complex curve enclosing only the i-th eigenvalue of K. Integrating over both
sides of equation (221) and using Cauchy’s integral formula, we see that


             dvi                             η(t)2
                 = −2η(t)vi λi µc(t) (Rt ) +       λi νc(t) (Rt )(Rt + σ 2 /2),            ∀i ∈ [d].   (225)
             dt                                d
This final system of ODEs is used in all experiments to solve for Rt .

G.2     G ETTING AN I NTEGRAL E QUATION

Using Equation (221) and an integrating factor we see that

                                  Z t
                         c   1                                                     c   t
 Qz (t) =Qz (0)e−2zΩt +                 η(s)2 νc(s) (Rs ) Tr(KR(z; K)e−2z(Ωt −Ωs ) )(Rs + σ 2 /2)ds
                             d      0                                                                  (226)
                        −2zΩct
           − η(t)Dt e            µc(t) (Rt )
              Rt
where Ωct = 0 η(s)µc(s) (Rs )ds is the integrated clipped learning rate. Now, multiplying by z,
integrating both sides around Ω, and multiplying by −1/2πi, we get
                                            Z t
                               1                                          c   c
               Rt = R(Φgf
                       ΓcT ) +                    η̃ 2 (s)νcs Tr(K2 e−2K(Γt −Γs ) )(Rs + σ 2 /2)ds,    (227)
                                        d    0

where the first term is identified with gradient flow as in Paquette et al. (2022).

H     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
H.1     C LIPPED SGD AND H OMOGENIZED C LIPPED SGD

The code to reproduce these results is available at https://github.com/nmarzz/clip.

H.1.1    F IGURE 1
The experiments creating Figure 1 were carried out on an M1 Macbook Air. Homogenized clipped
SGD is solved via a standard Euler-Maruyama algorithm. The procedure for solving for the risk is
described in Appendix G.
The synthetic data was generated with ambient dimension d = 500 while the intrinsic dimension is
d = 180. For both experiments, ct = 0.9, η = 0.7. We plot the 80% confidence interval across 100
runs.
The CIFAR10 data was used to perform binary classification by regressing to ±1 labels. The data
is split into classes 1 and 2 where class 1 contains: birds, cats, and dogs. Class 2 contains: trucks,
ships, and planes. The data matrix D is first passed through a random features model so that

                                                    Drf = tanh DA                                      (228)

where A is a random features matrix of independent standard Gaussians. In order to estimate θ ∗
the regression problem was first solved using Sci-kit learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) and the resulting


                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


solution was taken to be θ ∗ . The differences {yi − ⟨θ ∗ , xi ⟩} for all xi ∈ Drf was then assumed
to be the noise. A histogram of this noise is available in Figure 10a. The noise was then fitted to a
Gaussian. Finally, η = 0.1 and c = 0.5 and the C-SGD plot represents the 80% confidence interval
over 50 runs.
The Wikitext2 data was first processed for next-token-prediction. The data was tokenized and split
into context lengths of at most 512. The data was then embedded using the Huggingface imple-
mentation of GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and passed through the same random features model as
with CIFAR10. We again used Sci-kit learn to estimate θ ∗ and the noise terms whose histogram is
available in Figure 10b. The noise resembled a mixture of 3-Gaussians and we therefore fit the noise
to a Gaussian mixture model. In this case η = 0.4 and c = 0.5 and the C-SGD plot represents the
80% confidence interval over 50 runs.

                       Estimated PDF                                   1.0                        Estimated PDF
          0.5
                       Empirical density                                                          Empirical density
                                                                       0.8
          0.4
Density


                                                             Density
                                                                       0.6
          0.3

          0.2                                                          0.4

          0.1                                                          0.2

          0.0                                                          0.0
                3       2       1      0        1   2   3                    2    1         0          1              2
                            (a) CIFAR10 noise                                    (b) Wikitext2 noise

Figure 10: Histograms of the estimated noise distributions for the CIFAR10 and Wikitext2 datasets.


H.1.2               F IGURE 4
The experiments creating were again carried out on an M1 Macbook Air. Numerical optimization
of the max-(CCC) clipping schedule (Equation (18)) was done via the Nelder-Mead algorithm using
standard python libraries.

H.2             I NTRINSIC DIMENSION EXPERIMENTS

The experiments in Appendix C.3 were carried out on 8 P100 GPUs trained in parallel with batch
size 128. This allowed for efficient computation of the full batch Gauss-Newton operator norm via
power iteration. Both networks were trained for 200 epochs. ResNet18 was trained with cosine
learning rate decay (base learning rate 0.05), while ViT was trained with linear warmup for 2 epochs
followed by a cosine learning rate decay (base learning rate 0.00625). Both networks used GELU
activation function.


                                                            37
