Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E MPOWERING LLM AGENTS WITH Z ERO -S HOT O PTI -
MAL D ECISION -M AKING THROUGH Q- LEARNING

 Jiajun Chai 1,2 , Sicheng Li 1,2 , Yuqian Fu 1,2 , Dongbin Zhao 1,2,∗, Yuanheng Zhu 1,2,∗
 1
   Institution of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 2
   School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
 {chaijiajun2020, lisicheng2024, fuyuqian2022, yuanheng.zhu,
 dongbin.zhao}@ia.ac.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

             Large language models (LLMs) are trained on extensive text data to gain gen-
             eral comprehension capability. Current LLM agents leverage this ability to make
             zero- or few-shot decisions without reinforcement learning (RL) but fail in mak-
             ing optimal decisions, as LLMs inherently perform next-token prediction rather
             than maximizing rewards. In contrast, agents trained via RL could make opti-
             mal decisions but require extensive environmental interaction. In this work, we
             develop an algorithm that combines the zero-shot capabilities of LLMs with the
             optimal decision-making of RL, referred to as the Model-based LLM Agent with
             Q-Learning (MLAQ). MLAQ employs Q-learning to derive optimal policies from
             transitions within memory. However, unlike RL agents that collect data from envi-
             ronmental interactions, MLAQ constructs an imagination space fully based on LLM
             to perform imaginary interactions for deriving zero-shot policies. Our proposed
             UCB variant generates high-quality imaginary data through interactions with the
             LLM-based world model, balancing exploration and exploitation while ensuring a
             sub-linear regret bound. Additionally, MLAQ incorporates a mixed-examination
             mechanism to filter out incorrect data. We evaluate MLAQ in benchmarks that
             present significant challenges for existing LLM agents. Results show that MLAQ
             achieves a optimal rate of over 90% in tasks where other methods struggle to
             succeed. Additional experiments are conducted to reach the conclusion that intro-
             ducing model-based RL into LLM agents shows significant potential to improve
             optimal decision-making ability. Our interactive website is available at this link.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive comprehension capabilities and are widely utilized
to address decision-making tasks as an LLM agent(Guo et al., 2024) in a zero- or few-shot manner,
meaning that the agents make decisions without or with minimal interactions with the environment.
In this work, we aim to further empower LLM agents with optimal decision-making via reinforcement
learning (RL). Most existing LLM agents improve decision-making through prompt optimization
(Wei et al., 2022; Mandi et al., 2023), which heavily relies on the basic LLMs, lacking the ability
to maximize rewards. In contrast, recent studies have introduced the Markov Decision Process
(MDP) framework to leverage MDP-based planning (Hao et al., 2023). Figure 1 (a) illustrates a
typical framework for MDP-based LLM agents, in which the domain description is a manual in
natural language to explain the problem to be solved (Yao et al., 2023a). For clarifications, a domain
represents an environment characterized by unique state and action spaces (e.g., block cubes and
robotic arm control are different domains), while a task within a domain entails an original-target state
pair (e.g., assembling a beef sandwich and a bacon sandwich are different tasks). Among existing
LLM agents, the most common framework combines an Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS (Kocsis &
Szepesvári, 2006))-Planner with a Replay Buffer to derive the optimal policy (Zhang et al., 2024d).
The replay buffer is task-specific, which stores transitions within the same task, sourced either from
the environmental interaction (Murthy et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023) or the imaginary interaction
     ∗
         Corresponding Authors


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Avai. actions func. / Dynamic func. / Reward func.                                                         MLAQ Agent
                                           Domain Description                              State   Q-Planner                              Brief Domain Description
                                                                                                                                            Rearrange the blocks on the table.
     Env. Tools             Prompt
                                                                                                                                            [Action Space Definition], [Action Template],
                                                                                                                                            and [Detailed Constraints for Action]
      LLM-based Imagination Space                                              Env     Action
                                                                                                     Q update                               [State Space Definition], [State Template],

              Self-Examine                                                                         ...                                      and [Detailed Constraints for State]

                                                                                                                    Replay
                                                               State                                      ...       Buffer
    World Model             Basic Policy                                               Expand             ...
                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                                    LLM-based Imagination
                                                                                         &                                                        Action
                                                                                       Correct        Extract
                              Planner                         Action                               ...
                                                    Agent                Env                                        Re-utilize
                                                                                                    ...       ...
                                                                                                    ...       ...
                                                                                                    ...   ... ...     Expand
     Memory                Replay Buffer                                                                  ...
                                                                                                          ...                    Basic                                 World
                                                                                                                                            Predicted State
                                                                       (a)           (b)                                         Policy                                Model
                                                                                                    Memory



Figure 1: (a) A typical framework of MDP-based LLM agent, where the gray arrows represent
processes used by most MDP-based LLM agents and the red arrows and blocks depict processes and
modules unique to MLAQ. (b) The overall MLAQ framework. MLAQ interacts with the environment
through the Q-Planner, which is supported by the domain-specific memory that extracts a task-specific
replay buffer for Q-Update.

(Hao et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a) with world model. The concept of the imagination space is derived
from Dreamer Hafner et al. (2020), consisting of an Basic Policy to generate actions and an World
Model to predict next states. In this work, both of them is based on LLM, and their interactions could
generate imaginary transitions, reducing the demand for environmental interactions. However, most
of existing LLM agents choose to sacrifice algorithms’ generality by utilizing environmental tools,
including dynamics (Zhao et al., 2024), available actions (Ding et al., 2023), and reward functions
(Hao et al., 2023). For example, Ding et al. (2023) use scripts to determine which actions are available
under current state. These methods not only fail to leverage RL for optimal decision-making but also,
due to these sacrifices, reduce the generality provided by LLMs.
In this work, we empower the LLM agent with optimal decision-making capability by combining the
advantages of the RL and LLM. As shown in Figure 1 (b), we introduce Model-based LLM Agent
with Q-Learning (MLAQ), a novel LLM agent framework without accessing any environmental tools.
The main contribution is three-fold. (1) MLAQ integrates a Q-planner, memory, and imagination
space to implement an model-based RL framework in natural language. This allows for generating
imaginary transitions with LLMs to minimize environmental interactions, and facilitates Q-learning
to optimize the policy for maximizing future rewards. (2) An MCTS-style planning approach is
proposed to balance exploration and exploitation within the imagination space. By introducing the
concept of virtual nodes, this approach efficiently guides the exploration without any environmental
tools, ensuring a sub-linear regret bound by a rigorous theorem. (3) A mixed-examine mechanism is
proposed to improve the quality of imaginary transitions. It uses LLM-based self-examine to filter
out erroneous transitions in the memory and refines the world model with environmental transitions.
Empirically, we evaluate MLAQ on well-known benchmarks for LLM agents (BlocksWorld
(Valmeekam et al., 2022) and RoCo-benchmark (Mandi et al., 2023)), which require optimal decision-
making for long horizons. There is no existing LLM agent has successfully obtained the optimal
policy, while MLAQ achieves over 90% optimal / success rate across most difficulty levels. The
comparison with methods including RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023) and RAP (Hao et al., 2023) fully
demonstrates MLAQ’s superior performance in optimal decision-making. Through comparative and
ablation experiments, we get a key conclusion: integrating the model-based RL framework with an
LLM agent in the form of MLAQ can effectively achieve zero-shot optimal decision-making.

2      BACKGROUND
MDP-based framework for an agent. An MDP can be defined as a tuple U = {S, A, T, R, γ},
where st is the state in state space S at timestep t, and at is the action in action space A, T(st+1 |st , at )
is the dynamics function, R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
The agent receives a reward rt = R(st , at , st+1 ) based on changes in state. For single-agent scenarios
the agent policy is denoted as at ∼ π(·|st ). For multi-agent scenarios with agent number n, the
policy in a centralized manner takes the system as a unified agent to make joint decisions according
to global states at = {ai,t }ni=1 ∼ π(·|st ). The policy in a decentralized manner allows each agent
i making decisions ai,t ∼ πi (·|oi,t , ρi,t ) according to its local observation oi,t and communication


                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


message ρi,t , which can be observations (Hu et al., 2023), features (Ding et al., 2024; Chai et al.,
2024), or natural language-based dialogues (Mandi et al., 2023; Chen et al.,P
                                                                            2024). The state value is
                                                                             ∞
defined as the discounted accumulated return under state st : V π (st ) = E[ k=0 γ k rt+k ].
LLM-based framework for an agent. Existing approaches construct the above MDP using natural
language sentences or paragraphs, benefiting from the autoregressive nature of the Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), without the need to align the state and action space dimensions
across different domains (Yao et al., 2023a). An LLM-based world model T̂(st+1 |st , at ; τ ) is utilized
to approximate the dynamics function, and an LLM-based basic policy π(·|st ; τ ) is utilized to
interact with either the world model or the environment, where τ is a brief domain description in
nature language (Hao et al., 2023). In addition, due to the current limitation of LLMs in accurately
evaluating state values, this work adopts a sparse reward setting, meaning that the environment
provides a non-zero reward only when the agent reaches a terminal state.
Q-learning. Q-learning is a traditional RL algorithm, in which the Q-value indicates the expected
return obtained by executing a under s. The update rule of the Q function at k-th iteration is:

                                                                        ′
             Qk+1 (st , at ) = Qk (st , at ) + α rt + γ max
                                                         ′
                                                            Qk (st+1 , a  ) − Qk (st , at )  ,  (1)
                                                         a

where α is the learning rate. As an off-policy approach, Q-learning can use a replay buffer to store
transitions (s, a, r, s′ ), enabling policy update through them. With enough iterations and a sufficiently
diverse replay buffer, the Q function and its greedy policy can converge to optimality.
Multi-Armed Bandit. Given state s with m available actions δ(s), the successive plays on
action i yields (i.i.d.) Q-values, which are sampled from an unknown distribution with an un-
known    expectation Q(s, i) (Auer et al., 2002). The player aims to minimize the expected regret
                                            ∗              ∗ .
P
   j:∆j >0 ∆j E[Cj (N (s))], where ∆i = Q − Q(s, i), Q = maxi {Q(s, i)}, N (s) is the visit count
of s, and Ci (N (s)) is the selection number of action i. The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) (Auer
et al., 2002) could achieve a sub-linear regret bound by selecting actions through the following rule:
                                                   h                p                   i
            a∗ = arg max UCB s, a = arg max V c(s, a) + w N (s)/N (c(s, a)) ,

                                                                                                   (2)
                   a∈δ(s)                   a∈δ(s)

where c(s, a) is the child node of applying a in s, and w is a coefficient.

3     M ETHOD
The essence of MLAQ is to empower LLM agents with optimal decision-making, while also retaining
their ability to make decisions with little to no interaction with the environment (i.e., zero- or few-
shot). While integrating RL-based optimization into LLM agents is relatively straightforward, the key
challenge lies in preserving their zero- or few-shot abilities when incorporating RL. In this section,
we first illustrate how our agent uses RL approaches to achieve task-specific optimal decision-making
under the fully LLM-based framework (Section 3.1). We then introduce how to achieve fully LLM-
based imaginary interactions without any environmental tools (Section 3.2). Finally, we present a
mixed-examine mechanism to improve the quality of imaginary transitions (Section 3.3).

3.1   O PTIMIZING LLM AGENT WITH Q-P LANNER
As shown in Figure 1 (b), we develop an RL-style LLM agent framework, which contains a memory
module, a Q-Planner, and an LLM-based imagination space. The RL-based optimization is achieved
by Q-Planner, which utilizes the transitions (s, a, r, s′ ) in the memory module to optimize the
agent through Q-learning. These transitions are generated from both environmental and imaginary
interactions. The overall algorithm is detailed in Appendix F.1.
Q-Planner. It serves as the core of the decision-making process, utilizing the optimal decision-
making advantage of RL to output the action with the highest Q-value for a given state, where these
values are derived from a tabular Q-learning iterations in Eq. (1). The tabular Q-function saves
the Q values of actions under a state as a list, and outputs the action with the highest Q value when
making decisions. We perform Q-learning not directly on the domain-specific memory M but rather
a task-specific replay buffer D extracted from it, aiming to reduce the exploration space in imaginary
interactions. Assuming there are ten available actions, but only two lead to the target state of the
current task, exploring the others is completely meaningless.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     LLM-based Imagination
      I. Node Selection    (II. Transition Imagination)            End of an Interaction Round                                                 Feedback

                                                                                                                               Action

                                                                                                             Basic Policy                      Action Checker                  Task Description
                                                          Simulate by
                                                                                                                               ...
                                                          Repeating I                                                                                                          Long-term memory
                                                                                                                                 ... ...
                                                            (and II)                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                 ... ... ...
                                                                                                                                     ... ...
                                                              ... ...                                                                ...                                       State Node
                                                                                                                               Memory
                                                                                                                                                                               Virtual Node
      ... ...             ... ...                                       ... ...                                                                      Predicted
                                                                                                                                                       State                   Terminal Node

                                                                                                                            Prediction Checker                   World Model
                                                                                     Success: +1       (b)                               Feedback
                                                (a)                                  Failure: -1


Figure 2: (a) Imaginary interaction process, which expands the memory and replay buffer through two
phases: node selection and transition imagination (might be triggered). (b) Imagine a new transition
with self-examine mechanism, where the checkers identify the validity of actions and predictions.

Replay Buffer. When a new task starts, a Q function Q(·, ·) is obtained by performing Q-learning on
M, and the initial replay buffer stores the transitions along the optimal trajectory (if exists) produced
by Q(·, ·). If this trajectory does not exist or is demonstrated to be non-optimal through environmental
interactions, the agent keeps exploring in the imagination space to expand the replay buffer until the
best trajectory is demonstrated to be optimal. This process can be seen in Appendix F.
Imaginary Interaction. As shown in Figure 1 (b), an LLM-based basic policy and world model are
established to perform imaginary interactions. Without accessing the environment, their understanding
of the domain is entirely reliant on the given domain description (manual). Therefore, MLAQ could
preserve the zero-shot decision-making capabilities of LLM agents while satisfying the training data
requirements of Q-learning. The details will be described in the subsequent section.
Environmental Interaction. MLAQ agent obtains the current state and domain description τ from
the environment, explores the imagination space to derive the optimal policy using the Q-planner, and
then outputs actions to interact with the environment. The domain description τ includes the domain
goal, state/action definitions, and also some detailed constraints for decision-making and predicting.
Please refer to Appendix J for more detail.

3.2      LLM- BASED I MAGINATION FOR MLAQ
This section presents an MCTS-style planning method that balances exploration and exploitation
while using only LLMs to generate imaginary transitions, thus efficiently expanding the memory and
replay buffer. Without any environmental tools, MLAQ should the available actions for any seen
states from scratch. Given a new task, MLAQ performs multiple imagination rounds, with each
consisting of an imaginary trajectories from the original state to the target state. An imagination round
comprises two phases: node selection and transition imagination. See Appendix F.2 for pseudo-codes.
Node selection. This phase involves balancing exploration and exploitation through a novel selection
rule. As denoted in Figure 2 (a), the transitions (s, a, r, s′ ) in the replay buffer adopt a tree-like
structure, wherein two nodes s → s′ are linked by an action and reward edge (a, r). The original UCB
treats planning as a multi-armed bandit problem, but using LLMs for planning without environmental
tools presents a variation, as the ground-truth available actions δ(s) are unknown. Therefore, we
begin with an empty available action set δ̂(s) and introduce the concept of virtual nodes to gradually
expand it. Within the replay buffer, a actual (state) node is created based on a state s, and a virtual
node is appended as its first child node, with the edge is a virtual action. Then, MLAQ starts with the
empty δ̂(s) and iteratively leverages LLMs to explore potential actions and expand it. This process
can be modeled as follows:
A Variant of Multi-Armed Bandit. In a scenario with m available actions (a = {1, 2, . . . , m})
in state s, initially only the virtual node y can be selected. Selecting y enables the least-indexed
non-selectable node in a to be selectable, while selecting other node involves estimating its Q-value.
When y is selected for the j-th times, i.e., |δ̂(s)| = j, the actual nodes {1, 2, . . . , j} can be selected
by the planning policy. Moreover, due to the introduction of virtual nodes, we propose a variant of
the original UCB algorithm by modifying its selection rule as follows:
           a∗ = arg max vUCB s, a = arg max V c(s, a) + f N (s), N (c(s, a)) ,

                                                                                                         (3)
                                    a∈δ̂(s)                                          a∈δ̂(s)


                                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     p
where f (N (s),
             qN (c)) is the confidence bound, defined as w               N (st )/N (c(st , a)) for actual nodes
and g(|δ̂(st )|) N (st )/|δ̂(st )| for virtual nodes. g(x) is a coefficient function that must satisfy some
properties, which are discussed in the Appendix C. However, since we do not know the number of
                                                2
available actions, it is set to g(x) = wg (e−x − ϵg ) in practice, where ϵg and wg are hyper-parameters.
Theorem 1. Suppose the player employs the node selection rule defined in (2). Then, in a scenario
with m available actions in state s, the bound of the expected cumulative regret is:
                                                                                          m
                        X                                X        ln N (s)           π2 X
          Regret =              ∆j E[Cj (N (s))] ≤ [8         (            )] + (1 +   )(   ∆i ),           (4)
                                                                     ∆i              3 i=1
                      j:∆j >0                           i:∆i >0
                                                                      .
where ∆i = Q∗ − Q(s, i) for action index i in {1, 2, ..., m} and Q∗ = maxi {Q(s, i)}, N (s) is the
visit count of s, and Ci (N (s)) is the selection number of action i.

This theorem demonstrates that our proposed variant of UCB shares the same sub-linear regret
bound, enabling efficient exploration and exploitation without environmental tools. Please refer to
the Appendix C for the proof. MLAQ turns to the transition imagination phase if virtual nodes are
selected. Otherwise, it iterates until a terminal state is reached. A terminal state denotes either success
states when reaching target states or failure states when the LLM-based basic policy determines no
actions are available. When a terminal state is reached, an imagination round ends.
Transition imagination. This phase is triggered when selecting virtual nodes and generates an
imaginary transition. Beginning from st , we first mark the existing actions in δ̂(st ) as forbidden,
where the specific prompt can be found in Appendix G. We then instruct the basic policy to output an
action at excluding forbidden actions to explore and expand δ̂(st ). If the pair (st , at ) could be queried
in M, we directly re-utilize the stored next state c(st , at ) as its child state to skip LLM queries.
Otherwise, we employ the LLM-based world model to predict the next state st+1 ∼ T̂(st , at ; τ ).
The reward is also calculated by LLMs, following a sparse reward setting. In addition, if the basic
policy determines that no available action exists except forbidden actions, we select the best action
in δ(s) to continue the imaginary interaction. Since we cannot confirm if the available actions are
exhausted, the virtual node always remains after the addition of the next state node.

3.3   M IXED -E XAMINATION FOR I MAGINARY T RANSITIONS
Within the imagination space, we propose a mixed-examination mechanism to improve the quality of
imaginary transitions without accessing any environmental tools.
Env-examination. MLAQ treats environmental transitions as ground truth to correct the imaginary
transitions and refine the LLM-based world model. When using domain descriptions to understand
the environment for LLMs, both LLM’s comprehensions and descriptions could be incomplete,
leading to a gap between the LLM-based world model and the environment dynamics. To address this,
during interactions with the environment, MLAQ corrects the transitions stored in memory based on
environmental transitions and records the discrepancies into the world model’s prompt for refinement.
Self-examination. Considering the hallucinations inherent in LLMs, even when the prompt contains
complete information about the environment, the model may still produce incorrect outputs. To
this end, as shown in Figure 2 (b), MLAQ adopts an LLM-based action checker and prediction
checker to check the validity of the outputs of the basic policy and world model. Current models
(e.g., GPT-4) already possess the ability to improve output accuracy through self-examination, which
will be validated in subsequent experiments. Prompt templates of the two checkers are provided in
Appendix G. Take the action checker as an example, given the current state and the action should be
checked, it queries the LLM to check if the action breaks any constraint following the instructions.
The checkers continuously check and provide feedback until the outputs are correct.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we conduct experiments in several challenging environments for LLM agents to
answer the following questions: (A) Does the introduction of a complete RL framework improve the
optimal decision-making capabilities of LLM agents? (B) Can the MLAQ agent preserve zero- or


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    Exsiting Trajectories in Memory
                                                                               Aggregated Trajectory for the New Task


      Original                                                                                                          Target
       State                                                                                                             State


                                         ... ...         ... ...                           ... ...


Figure 3: An instance with an optimal step of 6. It illustrates that MLAQ, due to its ability to leverage
transitions across multiple tasks within the same domain, can obtain an optimal policy through
RL-based optimization without requiring any search in the imagination space when given a new task.

few-shot decision-making capabilities? (C) Does the current LLM have the potential to improve
its output performance through self-examination? (D) Does expanding the memory scope from
task-specific to domain-specific improve the agent performance?

4.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We conduct experiments on the BlocksWorld benchmark (Valmeekam et al., 2022) for the single-agent
setting and the RoCo-benchmark (Mandi et al., 2023) for the multi-agent setting. Agents in these
domains require multi-step decision-making to achieve the final goal, necessitating the ability to
maximize expected future rewards. Additionally, the decision-making space for LLM agents in the
RoCo-benchmark is significantly larger than that in BlocksWorld due to the presence of multiple
agents. The details of these benchmarks can be found in Appendix D.
We compare MLAQ with CoT (Wei et al., 2022), RAP (Hao et al., 2023), Rex (Murthy et al., 2023),
RAFA (Liu et al., 2023), and RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023). In line with RAP (Hao et al., 2023), we group
all tasks by their optimal steps, indicating the length of the tasks’ optimal decision sequences. Within
a domain, the experiments are conducted from the tasks with smaller optimal steps to those with larger
steps. Consequently, only the memory size of MLAQ would increase gradually with the experiments
due to its domain scope, empowering the LLM agent with optimal decision-making capability with
Q-Planner. Furthermore, we also conduct exhaustive ablation experiments to verify the effect of
our domain-specific memory module, further expansion in memory, and the mixed-examination
mechanism. The details of hyper-parameters can be found in Appendix I.

4.2    M AIN R ESULTS

Single-agent scenario. As shown in Table 1, the                                                                      1.0
                                                         70000   Average Token           Memory Re-Utilization Ratio
optimal steps of BlocksWorld vary from 2 to 12. The
                                                         60000                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                 Memory Re-Utilization Ratio


optimal rate in this table denotes that the agent could
                                                         50000
                                                                   Average Tokens


reach the target state under the optimal steps. Our                                                                  0.6
                                                         40000
agent achieves more than 90% optimal rate across all
                                                         30000                                                       0.4
difficulty levels, indicating an affirmative response
                                                         20000
to Question A. In contrast, the other LLM agent can                                                                  0.2
                                                         10000
only succeed in tasks with smaller optimal steps. In
                                                             0                                                       0.0
order to qualitatively provide an affirmative answer           2         4      6         8       10           12
                                                                               Optimal Steps
to Question D, we use a task with 6 optimal steps in
Figure 3 as an example to backtrack the transitions in
memory. In this case, MLAQ agent finds an optimal Figure 4: Tendency of memory re-utilization
decision sequence, represented by black solid arrows, ratio and token consumption.
from the initial replay buffer without querying LLMs. The colored dashed arrows indicate existing
trajectories stored in memory. This 6-step sequence is aggregated from trajectories of multiple tasks,
including two 2-step and three 4-step trajectories. This clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 1: The optimal rate of experimental methods in BlocksWorld domain.
        Methods                         2-step     4-step     6-step    8-step        10-step       12-step
        CoT (Wei et al., 2022)          0.22       0.14       0.02      0.02          0.00          0.00
        REX (Murthy et al., 2023)       0.80       0.45       0.25      -             -             -
        RAFA (Liu et al., 2023)         -          0.97       0.75      -             -             -
        RAP (Hao et al., 2023)          0.67       0.76       0.74      0.48          0.17          0.09
        MLAQ                            1.00       1.00       1.00      0.97          0.93          0.90


our domain memory in enhancing the agents’ decision-making capabilities in long-horizon tasks.
Quantitative analysis will be provided in the ablation experiments.
Besides, we also investigate the memory re-utilization ratio in transition imagination phase. As
shown in Figure 4, higher re-utilization ratio commonly leads to a lower average consumed tokens.
As the increase of the optimal step, the ratio of memory re-utilization increases from 19% to 90%.
Meanwhile, the average token consumption of each task first increases and then decreases significantly.
The increase of tokens from 2-step task to 4-step task is attributed to the increased task difficulty,
requiring the agent to employ more imagination to make optimal decisions. Then, as the memory
becomes enriched with the data collected from resolved tasks within the same domain, the probability
of re-utilizing stored transitions increases, leading to a reduction in average token consumption.
Multi-agent scenario. In RoCo-benchmark, robotic arms need to efficiently allocate tasks internally
and collaborate to achieve the final goal. Table 2 shows the experimental results of RoCo and MLAQ
on Sort domain. MLAQ achieves a success rate approaching 100% across all difficulty levels and
maintains an optimal performance exceeding 50% across most tasks, further giving an affirmative
response to Question A. In this table, we introduce "success rate" as an additional metrics as the
expanded search space from the presence of multiple agents significantly reduces their optimal rate.
The notation "MLAQ− " denotes that MLAQ agent terminates its imagination upon reaching the target
state, without further exploring to get a better policy. A detailed analysis of "MLAQ− " is provided
in the ablation section. The optimal steps for Sort range from 1 to 6, with MLAQ consistently
achieving higher success and optimal rates than RoCo, especially in long-horizon tasks. Due to space
limitations, the results and analysis on Sandwich domain are provided in Appendix H.2.

       Table 2: Comparison of multiple metrics between MLAQ and RoCo in Sort domain.

  Metrics          Methods     1-step     2-step     3-step      4-step        5-step        6-step        Average
                   RoCo        1.00       0.64       0.47        0.10          0.03          0.00          0.35
  Success Rate
                   MLAQ        1.00       0.96       0.97        1.00          0.93          1.00          0.98
  Env Replans      RoCo        0.30       6.30       5.60        9.74          7.67          6.92          6.41
  (n-shot)         MLAQ        0.00       0.04       0.03        0.10          0.10          0.04          0.06
                   RoCo        0.80       0.36       0.27        0.00          0.00          0.00          0.21
  Optimal Rate     MLAQ−       0.95       0.64       0.57        0.67          0.33          0.43          0.58
                   MLAQ        1.00       0.86       0.77        0.73          0.50          0.75          0.75
                   RoCo        10605      530817     332730      305175        345762        320045        322630
  Average Token    MLAQ−       7093       15104      16436       22197         18133         8220          15216
                   MLAQ        8491       66367      156490      119916        409495        243151        175560
                   RoCo        0.35       3.37       3.43        3.33          2.97          2.00          2.72
  Optimal Gap      MLAQ−       0.10       0.64       0.73        0.53          1.20          0.46          0.65
                   MLAQ        0.00       0.32       0.40        0.43          0.80          0.25          0.39
   Memory Re-Util. Ratio       0.27       0.61       0.71        0.72          0.73          0.83          0.66

In Table 2, the average token consumption of each task still shows a trend of increasing first
and then decreasing, and is lower than RoCo’s in Sort. The Env Replans metric denotes the
frequency of environment feedback, which reflects the zero-shot decision-making ability of the
LLM agent. A smaller Env Replans indicates that the agent requires less ground-truth information
from the environment to refine its decisions. The results show that the number of environmental


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 3: The optimal rate for optimizing multiple epochs in Sort domain.
             Methods                1-step   2-step     3-step   4-step                  5-step    6-step
             MLAQ-1st epoch         1.00     0.86       0.77     0.73                    0.50      0.75
             MLAQ-2nd epoch         1.00     0.93       0.90     0.77                    0.57      0.88
             MLAQ-3rd epoch         1.00     0.93       0.90     0.77                    0.57      0.92

replans for MLAQ has decreased by approximately two orders of magnitude compared to RoCo,
indicating that the MLAQ agent almost does not require environmental transitions to correct imaginary
transitions. In contrast, existing methods require the environment to verify action’s validity and
provide environmental feedback, facilitating LLM agents to replan until actions are available (Mandi
et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). This result indicates an affirmative answer to the Question B. In
addition, since we provide two types of basic policy (central and dialogue) in multi-agent scenarios,
we also conduct experiments to compare them in Appendix H.1.

4.3   MLAQ WITH M ULTIPLE E POCHS

This experiment aims to demonstrate the potential of MLAQ                  Token        Optimal Rate
to enhance its optimal decision-making ability through iter-      0.90
ative optimization. In previous experiments, each domain’s                        0.83       0.85 180


                                                                                                            Average Token (Thousands)
experiment starts with an empty memory. In this section, we       0.75  0.75


                                                                  Average Optimal Rate
conduct multiple epochs of MLAQ experiments by perform-           0.60                               140
ing MLAQ with a non-empty memory to further enhance its
decision-making capabilities and utilize memory re-utilization    0.45
                                                                                                     100
to reduce token consumption. At the beginning of each epoch,
                                                                  0.30
the input memory is the memory of the last MLAQ epoch after       RoCo
finishing all given tasks of the domain. As shown in Table 3      0.15                               60
and Figure 5, an additional training epoch results in an improve-        1         2          3
ment of the optimal rate while reducing token consumption.                       Epochs
Although MLAQ with multiple epochs no longer constitutes
zero-shot decision-making, the small magnitude of env replans Figure 5: Tendency of optimal rates
implies that minimal environmental information is injected into and tokens with epochs.
subsequent epoch decisions. Consequently, it still provides a more definitive affirmative answer to
Question A and Question B.

4.4   A BLATION R ESULTS

The key components of MLAQ are the Q-planner, memory, and imagination space. In this section,
we validate their effects by individually diminishing their capabilities. The ablation experiments are
conducted under 8-step tasks in the BlocksWorld domain. This is primarily because the task difficulty
at this optimal step is moderate for an appropriate comparison.

                         Table 4: Ablation results in BlocksWorld domain.
              Ablation Methods                 Optimal Rate      Token                    Env Replans
              RAP                                     0.48       -                                -
              MLAQ w/o domain memory                  0.87       378941                         0.02
              MLAQ w/o self-examine                   0.57       20115                          0.81
              MLAQ w/o env-examine                    0.95       40772                          0.05
              MLAQ                                    1.00       39688                          0.02

Removing further optimization. This experiment evaluates the impact of the Q-planner’s inability
to further optimize. In our framework, if the best decision sequence derived from the Q-Planner
is determined to non-optimal through environmental interactions, the MLAQ agent would keep
exploring in the imagination space to continually expand the memory and replay buffer for further
optimization. Within the imagination space, we allow the MLAQ agent to complete only one
successful imagination round by terminating the exploration process upon reaching the target state,
referring to this method as MLAQ− . As demonstrated in Tables 2, this deletion of further optimization


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


decreases token consumption while concurrently diminishing the optimal rate. The ‘Optimal Gap
(OG)’ represents the gap between average completion steps and optimal steps. The results indicate
that MLAQ achieves lower OG than MLAQ− , which fully demonstrates the effectiveness of the
expansion of the replay buffer and the optimization based on Q-Planner. The experiments on the
Sandwich domain presented in Appendix H.2 also yields the similar results.
Removing LLM-based self-examine and env-examine. This experiment reduces the quality of
transitions generated in the imaginative space by separately removing self-examine and env-examine,
thereby evaluating their effect. (1) The self-examine utilizes an LLM-based action checker and
prediction checker to enable error correction within the imagination space. We remove it from MLAQ
agent to directly output the actions and predictions without LLM-based examination, which is denoted
as MLAQ w/o self-examine in Table 4. Note that the initial memory stores transitions from the 2-step
to 6-step experiments rather than starting from scratch. The results demonstrate a notable reduction
in token consumption alongside a significant decrease in the optimal rate. Moreover, the frequency
of environmental feedback has significantly increased, providing support for affirmative answers
to Question C. (2) The env-examine corrects the imagination process by treating environmental
transitions as ground truth. Removing it allows for an evaluation of the imagination capability using
only the LLMs. The results of MLAQ w/o env-examine indicate only a slight performance decline
compared to MLAQ. Combined with the env replans metrics of MLAQ, this leads to the conclusion
that the current LLMs (e.g., GPT-4) possess the capability to efficiently generate imaginary transitions
through self-examination, resulting in a relatively low dependency on ground truth, answering
Question C from the opposing viewpoint. Removing both of them will lead to a decline in the quality
of imaginary transitions, thereby reducing the decision-making performance of our MLAQ agent.
Narrowing memory scope. This experiment narrows the scope of the memory module from domain-
specific to task-specific like existing methods (Hao et al., 2023) in order to evaluate the effect of
constructing memory in an RL manner. This approach is denoted as MLAQ w/o domain memory
in Table 4. The results indicate a significant increase in token consumption alongside a decrease
in the agent’s optimal rate, quantitatively answering the Question C. This decline stems from the
MLAQ agent’s inability to leverage prior decision-making experiences to solve new tasks within the
same domain. However, the optimal rate of the MLAQ agent still exceeds that of RAP, owing to the
influence of other components within the MLAQ framework.

4.5   S ELF -E XAMINATION A NALYSIS

This section quantitatively evaluates the LLM-based self-examination, showing that while hallucina-
tions may occur during the examining process, performing multiple checks in transition imagination
significantly reduces the erroneous transitions. In the self-examination process, the LLM-based
checkers may erroneously identify correct outputs as incorrect, and vice versa. We sample 128
random states from the Sort domain, providing correct actions for 64 states and incorrect actions for
the others, with each incorrect action breaking only one constraint. The testing for the prediction
follows a similar approach, where each incorrect prediction only violates one constraint.

                    Table 5: Results on identification capability of the checkers.
                 Checker Type            TP ↑    FN ↓    FP ↓    TN ↑     Precision ↑
                 Action Checker          63      1       6       58       91.3%
                 Prediction Checker      64      0       10      54       86.5%

As shown in Table 5, we evaluate the performance of the checkers using five metrics. True Positives
(TP) identify correct outputs (actions or predictions) as correct, False Negatives (FN) identify correct
outputs as incorrect, False Positives (FP) identify incorrect outputs as correct, True Negatives (TN)
identify incorrect outputs as incorrect, and Precision = TP / (TP + FP) is a proportion of correctly
identified correct cases among all cases identified as correct. Results in Table 5 suggest that while
both checkers accurately identify correct outputs, they may misidentify incorrect outputs as correct
ones, leading to inaccuracies in imaginary transitions and subsequent impacts on agent performance.
To further investigate the impact of inaccuracies in self-examination, similar methods are used to
test the accuracy of the basic policy and world model. Without forbidden actions, the accuracy of
the basic policy is 84.4%, while the accuracy of the world model is 100%. Therefore, the combined


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


calculation yields a probability of 1.36% = (1 - 84.4%) * [6 / (6 + 63)] for an wrong transition to be
stored in memory. Compared to the probability of 15.6% = (1 - 84.4%) without self-examination,
MLAQ can greatly improve the quality of imaginary transitions. These results provide support for
affirmative answers to Question C. Furthermore, some erroneous transitions stored in memory could
be excluded from the best policy derived from RL-based optimization due to their low values, while
the others could be corrected by env-examination. Experimental data in Table 2 also indicate that
these errors minimally impact the decision-making capabilities of LLM agents.

5      R ELATION TO OTHER M ETHODS
In this section, we compare the MLAQ framework with several representative works in LLM agents.
Table 6 presents the interaction between Agent, World Model (WM), and Environment (Env) in
existing approaches, as well as the forms of their memory. (1) The Agent-Env interaction is central
to most LLM agents, with efforts to optimize agents through techniques like self-reflect (Shinn et al.,
2023) and dialogue (Mandi et al., 2023) for prompt enhancing, and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
for transition-level optimization (Ding et al., 2023). (2) The Agent-WM interaction is originated from
model-based RL (Hafner et al., 2020) to expand memory through the agent’s imaginary interactions.
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) and ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) construct an LLM-based world model for MCTS-
based planning in a single task, but they still not try to narrow the gap between the world model
and environment. (3) The WM-Env interaction requires using the environmental data to correct the
mistakes made by LLM-based world model, which is achieved by LATS (Zhou et al., 2023a). (4)
Finally, the memory modules of LLM agents differ in the level and scope. Insight-level memory
stores agents’ natural language summaries of their insights (Ding et al., 2023), while transition-level
memory retains RL-like transitions (Hao et al., 2023). The scope here represents the time span of the
data in memories, encompassing (a) Step: the single transition, (b) Task: multiple transitions within
the same task, and (c) Domain: multiple transitions in multiple tasks within the same domain. We
present different scopes of memory in Appendix A, and detailed related works in Appendix B.

             Table 6: Different interactions in existing LLM-based decision-making methods.
    Method                           Agent-Env         Agent-WM     WM-Env          Memory Level-Scope
    Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023)   Self-reflection   -            -               Insight-Task
    Expel (Zhao et al., 2024)        Self-reflection   -            -               Insight-Domain
    RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023)        Dialog Feedback   -            -               Transition-Step
    XoT (Ding et al., 2023)          MCTS Extraction   -            -               Transition-Task
    RAP (Hao et al., 2023)           Direct            MCTS         -               Transition-Task
    ToT (Yao et al., 2023a)          Direct            MCTS         -               Transition-Task
    LATS (Zhou et al., 2023a)        Self-reflection   MCTS         Env-examine     Transition-Task
    MLAQ (Ours)                      Q-Planner         UCB-guided   Mixed-examine   Transition-Domain



6      C ONCLUSION
This work introduces MLAQ, a powerful MDP-based LLM agent framework that achieves zero-shot
optimal decision-making. MLAQ consists of a memory module, a Q-planner, and an imagination
space to fully leverage the general comprehension capabilities of LLMs and the optimization capabil-
ities of RL. The imagination space is entirely based on LLM to generate imaginary transitions, which
are then provided to the Q-planner for RL-based optimization. The proposed planning algorithm
balances the exploration and exploitation by introducing the concept of virtual nodes, while ensuring
a sub-linear regret bound guaranteed by a theorem. Moreover, a mixed-examine mechanism is em-
ployed to improve the quality of the imaginary transitions. We evaluate MLAQ on both single-agent
BlocksWorld and multi-agent RoCo-benchmark domains, comparing it with several advanced LLM
agents. Results indicate that MLAQ outperforms existing methods, especially in tasks involving long-
horizon decision-making. Furthermore, we conduct exhaustive additional experiments to investigate
how MLAQ enables LLM agents to achieve zero-shot optimal decision-making capabilities. The core
conclusion of this work is that constructing a model-based RL framework in natural language for
current LLMs can further enhance the decision-making abilities of LLM agents. In future work, we
intend to deploy this method on physical robotic platforms to fully exploit its advantages.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62136008 and Grant 62293541, in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4232056,
and in part by Beijing Nova Program under Grant 20240484514.

R EFERENCES
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine learning, 47:235–256, 2002.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Jiajun Chai, Weifan Li, Yuanheng Zhu, Dongbin Zhao, Zhe Ma, Kewu Sun, and Jishiyu Ding. Unmas:
   Multiagent reinforcement learning for unshaped cooperative scenarios. IEEE transactions on
   neural networks and learning systems, 34(4):2093–2104, 2021.

Jiajun Chai, Yuqian Fu, Dongbin Zhao, and Yuanheng Zhu. Aligning credit for multi-agent coop-
   eration via model-based counterfactual imagination. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
   Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’24, pp. 281–289, 2024.

Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu,
 Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
 Sun, and Jie Zhou. AgentVerse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent
 behaviors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Ruomeng Ding, Chaoyun Zhang, Lu Wang, Yong Xu, Minghua Ma, Wei Zhang, Si Qin, Saravan
  Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. Everything of thoughts: Defying the law of penrose
  triangle for thought generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04254, 2023.

Shifei Ding, Wei Du, Ling Ding, Lili Guo, and Jian Zhang. Learning efficient and robust multi-agent
  communication via graph information bottleneck. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 38(16):17346–17353, 2024.

Vladimir Egorov and Alexei Shpilman. Scalable multi-agent model-based reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  AAMAS ’22, pp. 381–390, 2022.

Nikolaos Gkanatsios, Ayush Jain, Zhou Xian, Yunchu Zhang, Christopher G Atkeson, and Katerina
  Fragkiadaki. Energy-based models are zero-shot planners for compositional scene rearrangement.
  In RSS 2023 Workshop on Learning for Task and Motion Planning, 2023.

Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest,
  and Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and
  challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680, 2024.

Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning
  with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8154–8173, 2023.

Guangzheng Hu, Yuanheng Zhu, Dongbin Zhao, Mengchen Zhao, and Jianye Hao. Event-triggered
  communication network with limited-bandwidth constraint for multi-agent reinforcement learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 34(8):3966–3978, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International conference on
 machine learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and brian ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2022b.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. Machine Learning, 2006:
  282–293, 09 2006.
Yilun Kong, Jingqing Ruan, YiHong Chen, Bin Zhang, Tianpeng Bao, shi shiwei, du guo qing,
  xiaoru hu, Hangyu Mao, Ziyue Li, Xingyu Zeng, Rui Zhao, and Xueqian Wang. Boosting task
  planning and tool usage of large language model-based agents in real-world systems. In ICLR
  2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents, 2024.
Teyun Kwon, Norman Di Palo, and Edward Johns. Language models as zero-shot trajectory generators.
  IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
Zhihan Liu, Hao Hu, Shenao Zhang, Hongyi Guo, Shuqi Ke, Boyi Liu, and Zhaoran Wang. Reason
  for future, act for now: A principled framework for autonomous llm agents with provable sample
  efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17382, 2023.
Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. RoCo: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023.
Rithesh Murthy, Shelby Heinecke, Juan Carlos Niebles, Zhiwei Liu, Le Xue, Weiran Yao, Yihao
  Feng, Zeyuan Chen, Akash Gokul, Devansh Arpit, et al. REX: Rapid exploration and exploitation
  for AI agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08962, 2023.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. QMIX: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent rrinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304, 2018.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 36, pp. 8634–8652, 2023.
Zhiyuan Sun, Haochen Shi, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Glen Berseth, Xingdi Yuan, and Bang Liu.
  Enhancing agent learning through world dynamics modeling. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp. 3534–3568, 2024.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning, second edition. MIT Press, Nov
  2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel Bowman. Language models don't always say
 what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, pp. 74952–74965, 2023.
Karthik Valmeekam, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Large language
  models still can’t plan (a benchmark for LLMs on planning and reasoning about change). In
  NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karthik Valmeekam, Kaya Stechly, and Subbarao Kambhampati. LLMs still can’t plan; can LRMs?
  a preliminary evaluation of OpenAI’s o1 on planbench. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13373, 2024.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 2017.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2609–2634, 2023a.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe,
  explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with LLMs enables open-world multi-task agents. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yue Wu, Xuan Tang, Tom Mitchell, and Yuanzhi Li. SmartPlay: A benchmark for LLMs as intelligent
  agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Zelai Xu, Chao Yu, Fei Fang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Language agents with reinforcement learning for
  strategic play in the WereWolf game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18940, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 11809–11822, 2023a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, Han Lin, Jaehong Yoon, and Mohit Bansal. EnvGen: Generating and
  adapting environments via LLMs for training embodied agents. In First Conference on Language
 Modeling, 2024.
Ceyao Zhang, Kaijie Yang, Siyi Hu, Zihao Wang, Guanghe Li, Yihang Sun, Cheng Zhang, Zhaowei
  Zhang, Anji Liu, Song-Chun Zhu, Xiaojun Chang, Junge Zhang, Feng Yin, Yitao Liang, and
  Yaodong Yang. ProAgent: Building proactive cooperative agents with large language models.
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(16):17591–17599, 2024a.
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tianmin
  Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.
Yang Zhang, Shixin Yang, Chenjia Bai, Fei Wu, Xiu Li, Xuelong Li, and Zhen Wang. Towards
  efficient LLM grounding for embodied multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14314,
  2024c.
Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and
  Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.13501, 2024d.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: LLM
  agents are experiential learners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38
  (17):19632–19642, 2024.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp.
  31967–31987, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yupeng Zheng, Zebin Xing, Qichao Zhang, Bu Jin, Pengfei Li, Yuhang Zheng, Zhongpu Xia, Kun
  Zhan, Xianpeng Lang, Yaran Chen, et al. Planagent: A multi-modal large language agent for
  closed-loop vehicle motion planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01587, 2024.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Language
  agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.04406, 2023a.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables
  complex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023b.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A Detailed Descriptions of Memory Scope                                                             16

B Related Work                                                                                      16

C Proof for Theorem 1                                                                               19

D Experimental Environments                                                                         21
    D.1 BlocksWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
    D.2 RoCo-benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21

E Experiments on Crafter                                                                            23

F Pseudo-code for the Overall Algorithm                                                             25
    F.1   Overall algorithm for MLAQ agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
    F.2   LLM-based Imagination for MLAQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
    F.3   Expand the replay buffer from the memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
    F.4   Q function update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29

G Detailed Prompt Template                                                                          30
    G.1 Basic policy prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
    G.2 Action checker prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
    G.3 World model prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
    G.4 Prediction checker prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

H Detailed Experiment Results                                                                       33
    H.1 Basic Policy Analysis for Multi-Agent Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33
    H.2 Main Results in the Sandwich domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33

I   Hyper-Parameters                                                                                34

J   Prompt Example                                                                                  35
    J.1   Policy Prompt and Response of the State-based Decision-Making . . . . . . . . . .         35
    J.2   Policy Prompt and Response of the Observation-based Decision-Making . . . . . .           39
    J.3   Action Checker Prompt and Response Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          42
    J.4   World Model Prompt and Response Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           44
    J.5   Prediction Checker Prompt and Response Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          46


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    D ETAILED D ESCRIPTIONS OF M EMORY S COPE

MLAQ employs a memory module with domain scope. In order to better illustrate its difference from
the memory scope in previous LLM agents, we present the memory module under different scopes
in Figure 6. Figure 6 (a) shows a memory with Step scope, which only retains the interaction data
between the agent and the environment at the current time step. For instance, when refining LLM
agent’s decisions, RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023) only relies on the feedback provided by the environment
in the current state. Figure 6 (b) shows a memory with Task scope, which focuses on solving the
current given task and retains the data obtained from the interactions between the agent and the
environment in this task. Most LLM agents adopt this form of memory, which is called a replay
buffer in Figure 1. Take the RAP (Hao et al., 2023) agent as an example, it explores within an
LLM-based imagination space and retains visited trajectories to avoid repeated LLM-based state
predictions. However, the memory for each task is unique and contains only information relevant to
this single task, meaning that the agent cannot gain experience from the decision histories of other
tasks within the same domain to solve the current task. Instead, our memory with domain scope stores
environmental and imaginary interaction data from all tasks in the domain, effectively reducing the
need for LLM queries and improving the efficiency of the reinforcement learning through Q-planner.
Besides, one point to clarify is that in Figure 6 (c), cylinders are depicted in different colors only to
illustrate that they have transitions from different tasks. The transitions stored in our memory do not
contain any task-specific labeling, and are always stored in the format of (s, a, r, s′ ).


           .........                     .........                    .........
                                                                          ...
                                                                            ......      ...
                                                                                          ...
                                                                                            ...
                       .........                     ...
                                                       ...
                                                     ... ...              ...
                                                                          .........
                                                                            ...  ...
                                                                               ... ...  ...
                                                                                      ... ...
                                                                                            ...
                                                     .........
                                                       ...                       ...
                                                                                   ...  ...
                                                                                      ... ...
                                                                                            ...
                                                         ...                     .........
                       (a)
                        (a)(a)(a)                    (b)(b)
                                                         (b)(b)                   (c)(c)(c)
                                                                                         (c)


         Figure 6: Memory modules with different scope. (a) Step. (b) Task. (c) Domain.


B    R ELATED W ORK

Leveraging the Transformer network architecture, recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) have highlighted their potential in decision-making tasks. These approaches are commonly
referred as LLM agents. The research on LLM agents originated from GPT-3, an LLM with 175
billion parameters (Brown et al., 2020). Its authors found that the inference and decision-making
ability of LLM can be improved by simply adjusting the input prompt without adjusting the model
parameters. This insight leads to the development of the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) approach, which
improves the LLM’s reasoning capabilities by integrating step-by-step reasoning examples into the
prompts (Wei et al., 2022). Subsequent studies have focused on further enhancing LLM reasoning
capability through prompt engineering. Techniques such as task decomposition, exemplified by least-
to-most (Zhou et al., 2023b) and DecomP (Khot et al., 2022) prompting, are proposed to simplify the
task complexity. The aforementioned methods also could address some traditional problems in natural
language processing, such as cloze and completion task and reasoning task (Turpin et al., 2023). With
the development of LLMs, OpenAI’s O1 has been characterized as a Large Reasoning Model (LRM),
demonstrating preliminary planning capabilities (a success rate of 97.8% in BlocksWorld as reported
by Valmeekam et al. (2024)). However, due to our experiments employ a more challenging optimal
rate as the metric, the direct comparison is not presented in the main text.
LLM agents with prompt optimization. As research progresses, an increasing number of studies
focus on developing an LLM agent to tackle decision-making tasks with higher complexity. Most
methods adopt the existing paradigm, aiming to indirectly enhance the decision-making capabilities
of LLM agents by optimizing the prompts given to LLMs (Brown et al., 2020). These approaches
typically involve enriching the prompt’s informational content through environmental or human
feedback and employing some techniques to summarize these information into some insights, thereby
minimizing the prompt’s length (Zhang et al., 2024d). Huang et al. (2022b) enable the LLM agent


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to understand many semantic aspects of the world by leveraging environmental feedbacks to form
an inner monologue, acknowledging what, when, and how to do skills in embodied environments.
DEPS (Wang et al., 2023b) involves the description and self-explanation of the agent’s plans to
improve the accuracy of multi-step reasoning in long-horizon tasks. It also provides a trainable
goal selector to rank the sub-goals based on the estimated steps of completion, thus refining the
agent’s plans. Furthermore, as shown in Table 6, the self-reflect is a widely-used technique to
improve LLM agent’s decision-making capability. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) and PlanAgent
Zheng et al. (2024) empowers autonomous LLM agents to iteratively revise their actions based on
feedback, thereby optimizing their behavior. ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) introduces a closed-loop
reasoning process by alternately generating verbal reasoning traces and actions to achieve self-
correction of knowledge. Additionally, it acquires additional information from external sources
through the execution of actions. AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2024) involves multiple LLM agents
with different roles to orchestrate a collaborative group of expert agents. These agents evaluate
their executed actions to adjusting the group and discuss collaboratively for making better decisions.
There are also numerous approaches aimed at addressing decision-making problems in multi-agent
environments. ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2024a) considers scenarios involving cooperation with human
players. It performs cooperative reasoning and planning based on inference of teammates’ behavior,
corrects the agents’ beliefs using actual decisions, and stores acquired knowledge into a task memory.
Mandi et al. (2023) proposes a multi-agent benchmark RoCo-benchmark with multiple robotic
arms solving a cooperative task. It also constructs a dialog-based multi-agent framework RoCo to
address the proposed benchmark. CoELA (Zhang et al., 2024b) aims to address the multi-agent
cooperation problem with decentralized control by providing communication between LLM agents to
exchange their information and knowledge. Its framework extensively utilizes the potential of LLM
in perception, communication, planning, memory and execution.
LLM agents with action optimization under MDP framework. Those methods, which only aim
at optimizing prompts, cannot achieve satisfactory performance in long-horizon decision-making
tasks (Hao et al., 2023), which are more challenging to LLM agents. Firstly, the inherent reasoning
capabilities of these methods, bounded by the fixed parameters of the base LLM, fall short in
complex tasks necessitating long-horizon decision sequences. Secondly, adjusting input prompts
may improve reasoning to some extent but does not fundamentally optimize the policy of the
LLM agent for acquiring optimal decision sequences. Recent researches have explored using
broader language applications to model the environmental dynamics and reward functions, employing
planning algorithms to guide decision-making (Liu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024d). They formulate
the LLM agent under the Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework by decomposing original
long-horizon decision sequences into atomized state transitions. Yao et al. (2023a) propose Tree-of-
Thoughts (ToT), which establishes an incomplete MDP framework limited to state space, action space,
and value function components. ToT employs depth-first and breadth-first search techniques to derive
optimal sequences of thoughts in the decomposed "thought space". RAP (Hao et al., 2023) leverages
LLMs to explicitly construct a world model, serving as the dynamics function within the MDP. RAP
employs an LLM-based policy to generate decision trajectories by interacting with the world model
within the imagination space and utilizes the MCTS algorithm to effectively balance exploration and
exploitation, thus optimizing decision sequences. REX (Murthy et al., 2023) introduces an additional
layer of rewards and incorporates principles akin to Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) values to further
enrich exploration within the action space, resulting in more robust and efficient agent performance.
Everything-of-thought (XoT) (Ding et al., 2023) emphasizes the "Penrose triangle" in traditional
LLM agents, indicating that Performance, Efficiency, and Flexibility cannot simultaneously exist. It
utilizes LLM for thought generation and employs RL and MCTS algorithms to revise the generated
thought tree, thereby enhancing the agent’s performance. Zhao et al. (2023) establish an LLM-based
commonsense world model and basic policy to conduct MCTS-based searches. External knowledge
is obtained through datasets or interactions with human players, enabling updates to the belief of
environmental states and consequently making optimal decisions. Kong et al. (2024) integrates an
API Retriever, LLM Finetuner, and Demo Selector within a unified framework to tackle the challenges
of task planning and tool usage in complex real-world systems. Expel (Zhao et al., 2024) maintains
an insight-level memory for the LLM agent. After interacting with the environment, the agent
learns from successful trajectories and avoids failed trajectories to summarize a series of insights.
These insights are used to enrich the LLM agent’s prompts, thereby enhancing its decision-making
capabilities. However, most of them require the environmental functions to enhance decision-making
and lack the capability to leverage experiences from other tasks within the same domain.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


There are also some LLM agents aiming to be a zero-shot planner. Kwon et al. (2024) design many
task-agnostic prompts to investigate which design choices in this prompt are the most important,
thus developing a zero-shot robot manipulator. Huang et al. (2022a) decompose high-level tasks
into mid-level plans without any further training of pre-trained LLMs, and propose a procedure to
semantically translate the plans to available actions in a zero-shot manner. PS Prompting improves
upon zero-shot-CoT at the prompt level, enabling LLMs to implement planning capabilities (Wang
et al., 2023a). Gkanatsios et al. (2023) present an energy-based framework that converts language
instructions into optimizable functions to guide object rearrangement through visual-motor policies.
However, these approaches mostly design prompts for specific domains and still cannot achieve
optimal decision-making.
RL approaches in agents. Traditional RL and MARL approaches require RL-based optimization
techniques to update the parameters of agent policies. These methods either collect interaction data
between agents and the environment (Rashid et al., 2018; Chai et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023) or use
supervised learning to construct a world model that serves as a digital replica of the real environment
(Chai et al., 2024; Egorov & Shpilman, 2022), providing imagined interaction data (Hafner et al.,
2020). In contrast, the training of LLMs involves a vast and diverse dataset, enabling the construction
of task-specific basic policies and world models through task descriptions in natural language (Hao
et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a), thereby eliminating the need for parameter updates of traditional
methods. Reflextion (Shinn et al., 2023) maintains an RL-like framework, which includes Actor
and Critic modules used for action output and action evaluation, respectively. However, it does not
employ RL-based optimization at the transition level based on the Bellman equation. Instead, it
heavily relies on the decision-making capabilities of the LLM itself, leading to poor performance
in long-horizon tasks. Zhang et al. (2024c) utilize RL-based critic regression to learn a sequential
advantage function and treat the LLM planner as an optimizer to generate actions that maximize
this function. Xu et al. (2023) propose an LLM agent for Werewolf game, which utilizes LLM to
generate candidate actions in the current state, and then uses a one-step population-based RL training
process to select the optimal action from these actions. MCTS is also a traditional RL approach, but
it requires prior knowledge about environmental functions and focuses more on the search process.
Some of the previously introduced methods (Hao et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) use MCTS for
planning and achieve optimal decision-making based on some strong assumptions, but still do not
perform satisfactory performance in long-horizon tasks.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 1
Before presenting the proof of Theorem 1, we first introduce Theorem 2 from (Auer et al., 2002)
and provide part of the derivation to facilitate the subsequent steps. It is important to note that some
variables in this section may cause confusion with similarly defined variables in the main text. These
variables are introduced temporarily to improve the readability of the derivation and are only valid
within the proof of this section. For instance, while t denotes the time in the main text, it will be used
here to denote the number of UCB rounds.
Theorem 2. For all m > 1, if policy UCB is run on state s with m available action, performing each
action yields arbitrary Q-value distributions P1 , ..., Pm with support in [0, 1], then its expected regret
after any round number of T is at most:
                                                                        m
                                       X        ln N (s)           π2 X
                                 [8         (            )] + (1 +   )(   ∆i ),                           (5)
                                                   ∆i              3 i=1
                                      i:∆i >0

where Q(s, 1), ..., Q(s, m) are the expected values of P1 , ..., Pm .

Proof. The regret is defined as follows:
                                                       X
                                         Regret =               ∆j E[Cj (T )],                            (6)
                                                      j:∆j >0
                                .
where ∆i = Q∗ −Q(s, i), Q∗ = maxi {Q(s, i)}, and Ci (T ) denotes the selection number of machine
i over the first T rounds. The key of the derivation lies in the decomposition of E[Ci (T )]. Due to the
initial evaluation conducted by UCB for each machine, Ci (T ) can be rearranged as:
                                            T
                                            X                           T
                                                                        X
                              Ci (T ) =           {It = i} = 1 +                {It = i},                 (7)
                                            t=1                      t=m+1

where {·} is an indicator function. If the event {It = i} occurs, meaning that the UCB policy selects
machine i in round t, then the indicator function outputs 1. Otherwise, it outputs 0.
Auer et al. (2002) derived the conclusion of the theorem through a step-wise approach using this
equation. For a detailed derivation process, please refer to the original proof in (Auer et al., 2002).
The subsequent derivations in this paper require only the few steps outlined above.
Theorem 1. Suppose the player employs the node selection rule defined in (2). Then, in a scenario
with m available actions in state s, the bound of the expected cumulative regret is:
                                                                                                m
                       X                                      X         ln N (s)           π2 X
          Regret =              ∆j E[Cj (N (s))] ≤ [8               (            )] + (1 +   )(   ∆i ),   (8)
                                                                           ∆i              3 i=1
                      j:∆j >0                              i:∆i >0
                                                                      .
where ∆i = Q∗ − Q(s, i) for action index i in {1, 2, ..., m} and Q∗ = maxi {Q(s, i)}, N (s) is the
visit count of s, and Ci (N (s)) is the selection number of action i.

Proof. Since the definition of regret has not changed, we will continue our derivation starting from the
decomposition of Ci (T ), where T has the same meaning with N (s). We will ultimately demonstrate
that, due to the presence of the virtual node y, the player can achieve the same upper bound on regret
as UCB. In the multi-armed bandit variant, action i can be selected only if y has been selected at least
i times. Thus, we define the selection number of y at round t as A(t), and we have:
                             T
                             X                                  T
                                                                X
                 Ci (T ) =         {It = i, A(t) ≥ i} =              {It = i, A(t) ≥ i}
                             t=1                              t=i+1
                             T
                             X
                        =             {It = i, A(t − 1) ≥ i} ∪ {It = i, ξ(t − 1, i)}                      (9)
                             t=i+1
                             T
                             X                                          T
                                                                        X
                        =             {It = i, A(t − 1) ≥ i} +               {It = i, ξ(t − 1, i)},
                             t=i+2                                      t=i+1


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ξ(t, i) denotes the event in which player select y for the i-th time at round t. The derivation
in the first line follows from the fact that A(1) = 0 and A(t) ≤ t − 1. Therefore, when t ≤ i, the
event A(t) ≥ i cannot occur. The derivation from the first line to the second line primarily relies on
rewriting the original event A(t) ≥ i as the union of two mutually exclusive events, A(t − 1) ≥ i
and ξ(t − 1, i). By repeatedly applying the above decomposition operation to the first term of the
formula, we have:
                         n−i X
                         X   n                                   n X
                                                                 X t−i
             Ci (T ) =               {It = i, ξ(t − k, i)} =                {It = i, ξ(t − k, i)}
                         k=1 t=i+k                               t=i+1 k=1
                                                                                                    (10)
                         n X
                         X t−1                             n−1
                                                           X      n
                                                                  X
                     =               {It = i, ξ(x, i)} =                 {It = i, ξ(x, i)}
                         t=i+1 x=i                         x=i t=x+1

By setting x = t − k and exchanging a series of inner and outer loops, we obtain a more interpretable
formula. This formula first determines the round in which y is selected for the i-th time by iterating
the variable x over the interval [i, n − 1], followed by iterating the time t to compute the selection
number of action i. Clearly, the above expression is less than n, leading directly to a linear regret
bound. However, to achieve the goal of deriving a sub-linear bound, we should use the following fact:
                                       n
                                       X                                     X
                   Ci (T ) ≤ max             {It = i, ξ(x, i)} = max              {It = i}
                               x                                     x
                                     t=x+1                                t=x+1,n
                             n
                                                                                                    (11)
                             X
                           ≤   {It = i}
                              t=1

Thus, we can directly proceed to Equation (7) and its subsequent derivations, ultimately proving that
in this case, the player can still achieve the same regret bound:
                                                                     m
                                     X       ln N (s)           π2 X
                              [8         (            )] + (1 +   )(   ∆i ),                        (12)
                                                ∆i              3 i=1
                                   i:∆i >0

where N (s) is equivalent to T .

In the calculation of the vUCB value in (3), the confidence bound for virtual nodes includes an
additional coefficient g(x) compared to that of actual nodes. Assuming the number of available
actions is m, we expect the virtual node to be selected at most m times, and the coefficient should
decrease as the size of δ̂(s) increases. Therefore, it should possess the following characteristics:
                                                           ∂g
                                         g(m) = 0 and         <= 0                                  (13)
                                                           ∂x
However, since the number of available actions cannot be known in advance when planning in the
LLM-based imagination space without environmental tools, the first property cannot be satisfied.
                                             2
Therefore, in practice, we use g(x) = wg (e−x − ϵg ) as a substitute, whose value rapidly diminishes
as the size of δ̂(s) increases.
Theorem 3. Let the expected TV-distance between two transition distributions be bounded at each
timestep by ϵm and the policy divergence be bounded by ϵπ . Then the true returns and model returns
of the policy are bounded as:
                                                 2γ(ϵm + 2ϵπ ) 4rmax ϵπ
                             η[π] ≥ η̂[π] − [                 +         ].                          (14)
                                                   (1 − γ)2     (1 − γ)

In the above theorem, η is the returns of the policy in the true environment, η̂ is the returns of
the policy under the LLM-based world model. rmax is the maximum value of rewards, ϵm =
max(s,a)∼M [DTV (T(·|s, a))||(T(·|s, a; θ))] is the generalization error of the LLM-based world
model, (s, a) is sampled from MLAQ’s memory module M, and T(·|s, a; θ)) is the transition
distribution of the LLM-based world model. ϵπ ≥ DTV (π||πM ) is the policy divergence between
greedy policy π derived from Q-learning (output argmax actions) and the data-collecting policy in
the imagination space πM . Please refer to the proof of Theorem 3.1 in (Janner et al., 2019).


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENTS


                (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 7: Experimental environments. (a) BlocksWorld. (b) Sandwich domain of RoCo-benchmark.
(c) Sort domain of RoCo-benchmark.

As shown in Figure 7, we evaluate the methods in BlocksWorld (single-agent) and RoCo (multi-agent)
benchmarks. Next, we will provide a detailed description of each task, as well as the state and action
space.

D.1   B LOCKS W ORLD

BlocksWorld is a well-known single-agent benchmark for evaluating LLM agents (Valmeekam et al.,
2022), where an agent should rearrange some blocks into multiple stacks in a particular order. In this
work, we choose the tasks with four blocks to evaluate our methods. Hao et al. (2023) has grouped
all tasks according to the optimal step, and we randomly choose up to 30 tasks from each group for
evaluation. As shown in Figure 8 (a), the state space in the original BlocksWorld’s codes has a lot of
redundant information, which may help agents make better decisions, but may lead to errors when
making predictions by the world model. Therefore, as shown in Figure 8 (b), we adjust the format of
them in a more concise and clear manner without affecting the validity of states.
The state records what the agent’s hand is holding: (‘Empty’ or ‘Holding <block>’) and what each
block is on (‘on <block>’, ‘on table’, or ‘in hand’). The action is an instruction that moves one block,
which is one of STACK, UNSTACK, PUT, and PICK UP.

      1. PICK UP <object>: Execute if hand is empty, and <object> is on table and no block is on it.
         Pick up <object> from table. After execution, the agent will be holding the <object>.
      2. UNSTACK <object>: Execute if hand is empty, <object> is on another block and no block
         is on it. UNSTACK <object> from another block. After execution, the agent will be holding
         the <object>.
      3. PUT DOWN <object>: Execute if hand is holding <object>. Put down <object> on table.
         After execution, the agent’s hand will be empty.
      4. STACK <object> ON <target>: Execute if hand is holding <object>, and no block is on
         <target>. Stack <object> on the top of <target>. After execution, the agent’s hand will be
         empty.

D.2   RO C O - BENCHMARK

RoCo-benchmark is built upon the Mujoco engine (Todorov et al., 2012) to construct several multi-
arm scenarios. RoCo-benchmark provides 6 different tasks, including those containing two agents
and those containing three agents, and the robotic arms in them have their own movable range and
require full cooperation to complete the given task. We choose two of these tasks, Sort and Sandwich,
to evaluate our method. In Roco-benchmark’s codes, there is no fixed format for the state space, and
the states are intermingled in the form of information within the agent’s prompt. Therefore, we have
constructed the state spaces for these two tasks in a concise manner, while keeping the action spaces
consistent with the original codes.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         I have that, the orange block is                    [State]
         clear, the yellow block is clear,                   [Food States]
         the hand is <state>, the blue                       bread_slice1: <food state>
         block is <state>, the orange                        bread_slice2: <food state>
         block is <state>, the red block is                  bacon: <food state>
         <state> and the yellow block is                     cheese: <food state>
                                                             tomato: <food state>
         <state>.
                                                             cucumber: <food state>
                         (a)                                 ham: <food state>
                                                             beef_patty: <food state>
                                                             [Robot States]
                                                             1. Chad's gripper is <gripper state>
         [State]
                                                             2. Dave's gripper is <gripper state>
         [Block States]
                                                                             (c)
         blue block: <block state>
         orange block: <block state>                         [State]
         red block: <block state>
                                                             [Cube States]
         yellow block: <block state>
                                                             blue_square is on <location>
         [Hand State]                                        pink_polygon is on <location>
         <hand state>                                        yellow_trapezoid is on <location>
                         (b)                                                 (d)

Figure 8: State templates. (a) Template in original BlocksWorld codes. (b) Modified Template in
BlocksWorld. (c) Template in Sandwich domain of RoCo-benchmark. (d) Template in Sort domain
of RoCo-benchmark.


Sandwich domain. There are two robots, Chad and Dave, trying to make a sandwich following
the given recipe order. Chad can only reach for food items on the right side of the table, while
Dave can only reach for food items on the left side, with each food item starting in a fixed position.
The robots need to place the food items on the cutting board in the middle of the table one by one,
following the order given in a recipe. Different types of sandwiches contain different combinations
of food items. Take the ‘bacon’ sandwich as an example, it requires ‘bread_slice1’, ‘bacon’, ‘cheese’,
‘tomato’, and ‘bread_slice2’. In a bacon recipe, apart from the fixed positions of ‘bread_slice1’ and
‘bread_slice2’ as the two ends of the sandwich, the order of the other food items can vary across
different recipes. Therefore, one type of sandwich may have multiple different recipes. We group
all the recipes according to the optimal step to evaluate the agents. In the decision-making process,
robots cannot execute PUT actions simultaneously within one timestep to avoid collisions.
As shown in Figure 8 (c), the state records the state of each food item (‘on left/right side’, ‘atop
<another food item> or <cutting_board>’, or ‘gripped by <robot>’) and the state of each robot’s
gripper (‘holding <food item>’ or ‘empty’). The action is an instruction for each agent to interact
with the food items, which is one of PICK, PUT, and WAIT.

      1. PICK <obj>: Execute if gripper is empty and the food item’s state is not ‘atop <obj>’. Pick
         the <obj> from the table. After execution, the robot’s gripper will be holding <obj>.
      2. PUT <obj1> <obj2>: Execute if gripper is holding <obj1>. Put <obj1> on the top of <obj2>.
         After execution, the robot’s gripper will be empty.
      3. WAIT: Do nothing.

The action checker in the Sandwich environment strictly limiting the placement of food items to
follow the recipe, rather than allowing it to be placed in an incorrect order. Therefore, the size of
agents’ available action set in each state is relatively small. The agent can only choose to wait, pick
up the next food item, or place the food item from the gripper according to the recipe, so that RoCo
could achieve a high success rate in this task, but the optimal rate is still low.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sort domain. There are three robots, Alice, Bob, and Chad, trying to sort three cubes onto their
corresponding panels. There are a total of seven panels. Alice can access panels 1 to 3, Bob can
access panels 3 to 5, and Chad can access panels 5 to 7. The three cubes are a blue square, a pink
polygon, and a yellow trapezoid, with their respective target panels being panel2, panel4, and panel6.
In the decision-making process, a panel cannot contain two or more cubes, and a cube cannot be
grasped by two robots simultaneously.
As shown in Figure 8 (d), the state records the state of three cubes (on <panel>) and the action is an
instruction for each agent to interact with the cubes, which is one of PICK & PLACE and WAIT.
       1. PICK <object> PLACE <target>: Pick up <object> and place it onto <target>, where
          <object> is a cube and <target> is a panel.
       2. WAIT: Do nothing.
Given the complexity of this domain involving more agents and expansive available action spaces, its
difficulty surpasses that of the Sandwich domain. In the Sandwich domain, decision trajectories are
linear and decision loops are non-existent, meaning that the multi-agent system cannot revert to its
initial state after a series of decisions. However, in the Sort domain, the occurrence of loops adds to
the challenge of reaching target states. MLAQ could address this challenge by leveraging RL-based
optimization to make long-term optimal decisions.

E     E XPERIMENTS ON C RAFTER
To validate MLAQ’s performance in partially observable scenarios with high complexity, we chose
Crafter (Hafner, 2022) (a 2D version of MineCraft) as our experimental environment.
In Crafter, players need to mine diamonds on a 64 * 64 map. To achieve this goal, there are 16 sub-
goals to complete (collecting woods, stones, make wood pickaxe, etc.), of which 9 are essential for
diamond mining, making it a challenging task with extremely long decision sequences. Additionally,
this is an extremely difficult sparse reward problem, where reward signals are only provided when
successfully achieving a sub-goal.
Players can only observe a 9 * 9 local map centered on their position, and we adopted SmartPlay’s
(Wu et al., 2024) natural language observation setting: for multiple items within the field of view,
only the nearest one will be shown in the observation. For example, even if there are 3 trees in view,
the observation will only show "tree is 3 steps to your north-east", which further intensifies the partial
observability of Crafter.
To achieve optimal decision-making in this task (and other stochastic problems), mainly because the
same state-action pair may lead to different next states, we made two minor modifications to MLAQ:
       1. We remove the Prediction Checker, as it’s difficult to provide effective verification in the
          cases with stochasticity.
       2. We remove MLAQ’s re-utilization of memory transitions during planning, because the
          same state-action pair may lead to multiple next states, and direct re-utilization would lose
          stochasticity. However, this can be adjusted as needed in practical, such as starting random
          re-utilization when the number of next states corresponding to the same state-action pair
          exceeds a threshold.
In table 7, we compare MLAQ with several existing LLM agents, including EnvGen (Zala et al.,
2024) and DiVE (Sun et al., 2024), and the results of RL agents and human are from (Sun et al.,
2024).

                     Table 7: The scores of experimental methods in Crafter domain.
 Method      Human     MLAQ-gt   MLAQ-script   MLAQ     DiVE    EnvGen    Dreamer-V3     PPO    Random
    Scores   50.5%      46.2%       42.6%      39.9%    35.9%    32.2%       14.5%      4.6%     1.6%


We calculate The scores using the same methodology as existing works, which is determined by the
ratio of unblocked achievements. The data of MLAQ are obtained using the same testing methods


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as SmartPlay (Wu et al., 2024). In Crafter, the move action exhibits strong stochasticity, making it
impossible for players to infer post-movement observations from local information. We conducted
three experiments:

     1. MLAQ-gt utilizes ground-truth environment simulation for move actions, providing the exact
        next state for given state-action pair, thus effectively eliminating movement stochasticity.
     2. MLAQ-script generates post-movement observations through scripted randomization (e.g.,
        after moving north, nine unknown areas appear at the northernmost position, with randomly
        assigned items like stone, sand).
     3. MLAQ reconstructs the aforementioned script into prompts, allowing LLM to fully imple-
        ment an LLM-based World Model.

The results align with expectations: MLAQ-gt achieves best performance using ground-truth environ-
ment, consistently crafting iron pickaxes but struggling to explore the location of diamonds within
limited steps in 64 * 64 maps. MLAQ-script and MLAQ perform similarly but significantly below
MLAQ-gt, indicating stochasticity substantially impacts MLAQ, though still outperforming other
existing LLM agents and RL agents. It’s worth noting that these experimental data are averaged from
eight tests, serving to demonstrate to reviewers the potential of MLAQ in complex environments.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P SEUDO - CODE FOR THE OVERALL A LGORITHM
We present detailed pseudo-code for our MLAQ framework in this section, and these algorithms are
used to fully describe the overall process presented in Figure 1 and Figure 2. We have simplified
the entire algorithm process into the flowchart in Figure 9 to facilitate a better understanding of how
MLAQ makes optimal decisions for new a task.

                                                       New Task
                                               (Orginal and Target States)


                                       Extract & Expand Replay Buffer from Memory

                                   Obtain the Best Policy from Q-Planner & Replay Buffer

                                          Perform the Best Policy in Environment

                                                                               Q function
                                                       If Optimal                  Yes

                                                            No

                                   Expand Memory & Replay Buffer via LLM Imagination


Figure 9: Flowchart of MLAQ agent to obtain the optimal decision sequence for a new task, with the
input being the domain description and domain-specific memory and the output being the Q function.


F.1   OVERALL ALGORITHM FOR MLAQ AGENT

At first, Algorithm 1 shows how MLAQ agent obtains a optimal decision sequence in a given task.
Its inputs are the environment dynamics and reward function with the domain description in natural
language τ to provide interaction between the true environment and the agent (or multi-agent system),
which is also depicted in the left side of Figure 1 (a). At the beginning of the optimization of MLAQ
agent, we initialize an empty memory M and a Q function Q(·, ·) to set all Q values to -1. As
described in the experiment section, we then scan all tasks of a domain to gradually expand the
memory module through environmental and imaginary interactions.
For each single task, we have a unique pair of original state s0 and target state s̄, and initialize a
replay buffer D for this task. Before making decisions in this task, MLAQ agent will try to find
this task’s best trajectory from the memory to expand the empty replay buffer, and a task-specific
Q function Q(·, ·) will be obtained based on D. If the agent fails in finding an available trajectory
from the memory, meaning that the Q(s0 , a) is no larger than the threshold Q̃ for any action a, we
would skip the following environmental interaction phase to directly perform the imagination process
until an available decision sequence is found. Otherwise, the agent interacts with the environment by
making best decisions according to Q(·, ·) to evaluate the optimality 1(s0 , s̄) of the resulting decision
sequence. The indicator 1(s0 , s̄) is set to True only if the environmental sequence is optimal.
In order to expand the memory and replay buffer to optimize the agent, we keep performing imaginary
interactions until the optimal sequence is obtained for the indicator 1(s0 , s̄) is True or the maximum
trial number Kc is reached. As more tasks are scanned, the size of memory M will gradually increase,
and we will finally output it to assist the MLAQ agent in making optimal decisions under any tasks in
this domain. While for the tasks have not been scanned before, MLAQ would also use the transitions
stored in M to reduce LLM queries and obtain the optimal decision sequence much easier.

F.2   LLM- BASED I MAGINATION FOR MLAQ

Algorithm 2 input the original state s0 and target state s̄ with domain description τ . The memory M
contains transitions from other tasks and the temporary replay buffer D is specific to the current task.
At the beginning, we should first add a virtual node (if does not exist) for the original state s0 to start
the imaginary interactions. Then, we perform the phases of node selection and transition imagination
to expand the memory and replay buffer, and the overall process has already described in section 3.
The outputs of the imaginary interaction are the expanded memory and replay buffer. It should be
noted that after each step of transition imagination, we would perform an "Expand-Buffer" method to
find an available trajectory with better optimality within M and add nodes along this trajectory to D.


                                                             25
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 1: Obtaining optimal decision sequence for MLAQ agent
 1 Inputs:
 2     The environment, including dynamics s′ = T(s, a) and reward function r = R(s, a, s′ );
 3     Task description in natural language τ ;
 4 Initialize:
 5     memory M and Q function Q(·, ·) = −1;
 6 for task = 1, 2, 3, ... do
  7    # Each task has a unique original state s0 and target state s̄
  8    Initialize a replay buffer D for this task;
  9    Set the optimal sequence indicator for this task 1(s0 , s̄) to be False;
10     while 1(s0 , s̄) is not True AND trial < Kc do
11          # Expand the replay buffer and get a task-specific Q function based on the memory
12          D = Expand-Buffer(s0 , s̄; M, D);
13          Q(·, ·) =Q-Update(s0 , s̄; D);
14          if maxa Q(s0 , a) < Q̃ then
15               # An available trajectory does not exist based on D
16               Skip the environmental interaction phase and turn to the next trial of imagination;
17          end
18          # Environmental Interaction Phase
19          while st is not s̄ AND t < T do
20               Get the optimal action at = arg maxa Q(st , a);
21               if at is available for the environment then
 22                   Perform action to the environment st+1 = T(st , at ) and rt = R(st , at , st+1 );
23               else
 24                   Remove transition st , at , r(st , at ), c(st , at ) from M and D;
 25                   Get environmental feedback F and store st , at , F into M and D;
26               end
27               Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into M and correct the wrong transition;
28               st ← st+1 ;
29          end
30          if st is s̄ then
31               1(s0 , s̄) is True if length of decision sequence is optimal else False;
32          else
33               1(s0 , s̄) is False;
34          end
35          if 1(s0 , s̄) is not True then
36               # Perform a round of imaginary interaction to expand the replay buffer and memory
37               M, D =Imagination(s0 , s̄; τ, M, D);
38          end
39     end
40 end
41 Outputs:
42     memory M;


                                                     26
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 2: Imagination(s0 , s̄; τ, M, D) guided by UCB values
1   Inputs:
 2     Original state s0 and target state s̄ of this task with domain description in natural language τ ;
 3     The memory M and replay buffer D;
 4 Initialize:
 5     Add a virtual node as the first child node of the original state s0 , and N (s0 ) ← N (s0 ) + 1;
 6 while st is not s̄ AND t < T do
  7    # Node Selection Phase
  8    Get the optimal action at = arg maxa vUCB st , a, c(st , a) ;
  9    if c(st , at ) is a virtual node then
10          # Transition Imagination Phase
11          Action available indicator 1̂(at ) ← False;
12          # Basic policy makes decisions and action checker verifies if the output is available
13          while 1(at ) is not True AND trial < Ka do
14               Get a non-virtual action through LLM-based basic policy at ∼ π(st ; τ, M);
15               if (st , at ) in memory M then
 16                    Retrieve transition data st , at , r(st , at ), c(st , at ) from M to D;
 17                    1̂(at ) = True;
18               else
 19                    Check the action 1̂(at ) = ξa (st , at ; τ, M);
20               end
21          end
22          ▷ This trajectory is failed and terminated if 1(at ) is False;
23          if 1(at ) is True then
24               # World model predicts and prediction checker verifies if the output is available
25               Prediction available indicator 1̂(st+1 ) ← False;
26               while 1̂(st+1 ) is not True AND trial < Ks do
 27                    Predict the next state st+1 ∼ T̂(st , at ; τ, M);
 28                    Check the prediction 1̂(st+1 ) = ξs (st , at , st+1 ; τ, M);
29               end
30          end
31          ▷ This trajectory is failed and terminated if 1(st+1 ) is False;
32     else
33          st+1 = c(st , at );
34          if st+1 is not in D then
35               Add a virtual node as the first child node of st+1 ;
36          end
37     end
38     st ← st+1 and N (st ) ← N (st ) + 1;
39     if st is s̄ then
40          rt = +1;
41     else if st is a failure state then
42          rt = −1;
43     else
44          rt = 0;
45     end
46     # Expand the replay buffer and memory
47     Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into the replay buffer and memory (if does not exist);
48     # Expand the replay buffer from memory if possible
49     D = Expand-Buffer(s0 , s̄; M, D);
50 end
51 Outputs:
52     The expanded memory M and replay buffer D;


                                                      27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   F.3   E XPAND THE REPLAY BUFFER FROM THE MEMORY

  Algorithm 3 is used to expand the task-specific replay buffer based on the transitions in the memory.
  It firstly finds an available trajectory with better optimality from M and then store the transitions
  of this trajectory in the replay buffer D. This will effectively improve the exploration efficiency of
  the MLAQ agent within the imagination space. For example, if the replay buffer is empty and there
  exists an available trajectory from s0 to s̄, then the nodes and edges in this trajectory will be added to
  D. Therefore, the first trial in Algorithm 1 would not require any LLM queries to get an available
  policy for this task.
  Furthermore, if D is not empty, this algorithm could also help the MLAQ agent to aggregate transitions
  from memory for enhancing optimal decision-making capability in complex tasks. For example, if the
  agent explores a new transition and the next state corresponding to this transition has a trajectory with
  better optimality towards the target state s̄, the MLAQ agent could add the nodes in this subsequent
  trajectory to D without extra exploration within the imagination space.

   Algorithm 3: Expand-Buffer(s0 , s̄; M, D)
 1 Inputs:
 2     Original state s0 and target state s̄ of this task with task description in natural language τ ;
 3     The memory M;
 4 Q(·, ·) =Q-Update(s0 , s̄; M);

 5 if maxa Q(s0 , a) > Q̃ then
 6     st ← s0 ;
 7     while st is not s̄ do
 8         Get the optimal action at = arg maxa Q(st , a);
 9         Retrieve transition data st , at , r(st , at ), c(st , at ) from M to D (if does not exist);
10         st ← c(st , at );
11     end
12 end
13 Outputs:
14     The expanded replay buffer D;


                                                      28
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     F.4   Q FUNCTION UPDATE

     Algorithm 4 is employed to get a Q function for the given task s0 and s̄ on the basis of X , where
     X could be the memory M and the replay buffer D. At first, we initialize the Q function to set all
     Q values to -1, and assign rewards for all transitions based the target state s̄. Then, the algorithm
     would perform multiple loops of Q-learning process to get the approximated Q function Q(·, ·). This
     algorithm will be used by the Q-Planner in Algorithm 1 and the replay buffer expansion process in
     Algorithm 3.

  Algorithm 4: Q-Update(s0 , s̄; X )
1 Inputs:
2     The original state s0 and target state s̄ of the given task;
3     The memory module or replay buffer X ;
4 Initialize:
5     Initialize a Q function Q(·, ·) = −1;
6     For all transition (s, a, r, s′ ) in X , if s′ is s̄, then r = +1; if s′ is a failure state, then r = −1;
   otherwise, r = 0;
7 for loop k = 1, 2, 3, ... do
8     for (st , at , rt , st+1 ) ∈ X do
9          Perform the following Q-learning update rule for this transition;
10

                                                                               ′
                    Qk+1 (st , at ) = Qk (st , at ) + α rt + γ max
                                                                ′
                                                                   Qk (st+1 , a  ) − Qk (st , at )
                                                                   a
11    end
12 end
13 Outputs:
14    The Q function Q(·, ·);


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     D ETAILED P ROMPT T EMPLATE

This section presents the detailed prompt templates for the basic policy, world model, action checker,
and prediction checker. The prompt template has multiple parts to provide different types of informa-
tion for the modules. The prompts in the purple cube are the component-specific prompts to guide the
agent in making decisions, predicting next states, checking actions or predictions. In the prompt, we
guide the corresponding modules step-by-step to enhance the accuracy of their outputs. The prompts
in the green cube contain some task-specific information, and prompts in the blue cube contain some
self-provided information generated from self-examinations and vUCB-based planning. The prompts
in grey cube is the ‘user prompt’, which contains the current information for the modules.

G.1    BASIC POLICY PROMPT

The prompt shown in Figure 10 requires the current state and target state in natural language to make
decisions. In the [Detailed Instruction for Policy] part, we decompose the decision-making process
into five parts: [Action Planning], [Action Conclusion], [Action Constraints Check], [Forbidden
Action Check], and [Action Output], gradually guiding the agent to make decisions that satisfy
the constraints. As for the basic policy of multi-agent systems, we directly follow the prompt
design of RoCo, and the prompts can be found in (Mandi et al., 2023). The policy mistakes are the
environmental feedbacks of previous wrong actions stored in the memory M. The policy feedbacks
are the temporary feedbacks provided by the self-examination only under the current state. The
forbidden actions are the non-virtual actions of the current state node’s child nodes.

                                                  Policy
  You are a planner. You have received a [State] from the external environment. Now, you need to output
  an action to reach the target [State] from current [State]. Follow the [Detailed Instruction for Policy]
  strictly.

  [Detailed Instruction for Policy] ...
  You should output your thinking process step-by-step in the following order: [Action Planning], [Action
  Conclusion], [Action Constraints Check], [Forbidden Action Check], and [Action Output] ...

  The following lists the [Task Description], [State Space Definition], and [Action Space Definition].
  [Task Description] ...
  [State Space Definition] ...
  [Action Space Definition] ...

  [Policy Mistakes] (long-term)
  In the current state, you have chosen a wrong [Action], and the environment provides the [Feedback]:
  [Wrong actions and feedbacks] ...

  [Policy Feedbacks] (short-term)
  The following actions are the wrong actions you have made. These feedbacks are from the previous
  imagination, and may not be correct. However, you still need to pay attention to them and avoid making
  the same or similar mistakes.
  [Wrong actions and feedbacks] ...

  [Forbidden Actions]
  You should try your best to output an action that is not in the list below ...
  [Action List]

  Now you should output your action according to the following current state and target state.
  {state}
  {target_state}


                     Figure 10: A simplified template for the basic policy prompt.

                                            Action Checker
  You are an action checker. You should check if the 30 [Action] is valid based on the given [State]. You
  should follow the [Checker Instruction] to check the [Action].
  [Policy Feedbacks] (short-term)
  The following actions are the wrong actions you have made. These feedbacks are from the previous
  imagination, and may not be correct. However, you still need to pay attention to them and avoid making
  the same as
Published  or asimilar mistakes.
                 conference  paper at ICLR 2025
  [Wrong actions and feedbacks] ...

 [Forbidden Actions]
 You should try your best to output an action that is not in the list below ...
 [Action
G.2      List] CHECKER PROMPT
     ACTION

  Now
The     you should
     prompt  shown output your action
                     in Figure        according
                                11 requires  thetocurrent
                                                   the following  current
                                                           state and  the state
                                                                          actionandshould
                                                                                    target state.
                                                                                           be checked. In the
  {state} Instruction] part, we decompose the checking process into three parts: [Action Constraints
[Checker
  {target_state}
Check],  [Conclusion Justification], and [Checker Conclusion]. We provide the previous mistakes and
the corresponding feedbacks stored in the memory under this current state for the action checker to
avoid the same mistakes.

                                           Action Checker
  You are an action checker. You should check if the [Action] is valid based on the given [State]. You
  should follow the [Checker Instruction] to check the [Action].

  [Checker Instruction]
  You should follow the check instructions in [Detailed Constraints for Action] to check the [Action] step-
  by-step. Take the mistakes in the [Action Mistakes] into consideration.

  The following lists the [Task Description], [State Space Definition], and [Action Space Definition].
  [Task Description] ...
  [Action Space Definition] ...

  [Action Mistakes] (long-term)
  In the current state, you mistakenly believed that a wrong action was the correct one:
  [Wrong actions and feedbacks] ...

  Now you should check the following [Action] based on the given [State]. You have to check the
  instructions step-by-step strictly rather than your own thoughts.
  {state}
  {action}


                   Figure 11: A simplified template for the action checker prompt.


G.3    W ORLD MODEL PROMPT

The prompt shown in Figure 12 requires the current state and action to predict the next state. In the
[Predicting Instruction] part, we decompose the predicting process into three parts: [Interaction Item
Pool], [Action Forward Rule] and [Prediction Conclusion]. The prompt also contains the feedbacks
from the long-term and replay buffer. In fact, LLM can better handle the task of predicting with
step-by-step reasoning, and we also find the prediction accuracy of the world model to be nearly
100% in the experimental section.

G.4    P REDICTION CHECKER PROMPT

The prompt shown in Figure 13 requires the current state, executed action, and the prediction should
be checked. In the [Checker Instruction] part, we decompose the checking process into three parts:
[Prediction Format Check], [Prediction Rule Check], and [Checker Conclusion]. We also provide the
previous mistakes and the corresponding feedbacks stored in the memory under this state-action pair
for the prediction checker to avoid the same mistakes.


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             World Model
                                             World
  You are a state predictor. You will be given       Model
                                                a [State] and an [Action] as input. should predict the [State]
  after the [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You should follow the [Predicting Instruction] to
  You arethe
  predict  a state predictor. You will be given a [State] and an [Action] as input. should predict the [State]
              [State].
  after the [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You should follow the [Predicting Instruction] to
  predict the [State].
  [Predicting  Instruction]
  Please output your thinking process step-by-step by following theses steps: [Interaction Item Pool],
  [Predicting
  [Action     Instruction]
          Forward  Rule] and [Prediction Conclusion] ...
  Please output your thinking process step-by-step by following theses steps: [Interaction Item Pool],
  [Action
  The     Forward
      following    Rule]
                lists     and [Prediction
                      the [State          Conclusion] ...
                                 Space Definition].
  [State Space Definition] ...
  The following
  [State        lists...the [State Space Definition].
         Template]
  [State Space
  [Detailed    Definition]
            Constraints     for...State] ...
  [State Template] ...
  [Detailed Constraints
  [Prediction Mistakes] for       State] ...
                            (long-term)
  In the current state and action, you have outputted a wrong prediction as follows:
  [Prediction
  [Wrong       Mistakes]
           predcitions     (long-term)
                         and  feedbacks] ...
  In the current state and action, you have outputted a wrong prediction as follows:
  [Wrong predcitions
  [Prediction  Feedbacks]and(short-term)
                              feedbacks] ...
  I have send your prediction to a GPT-based checker to check whether your prediction is correct. The
  [Prediction
  checker  said Feedbacks]   (short-term)
                that your prediction  is incorrect ...
  I have send your
  [Feedbacks]    ... prediction to a GPT-based checker to check whether your prediction is correct. The
  checker said that your prediction is incorrect ...
  [Feedbacks]
  Now,           ... predict the next [State] after the following [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You
        you should
  have to follow the instructions strictly rather than your own thoughts.
  Now, you should predict the next [State] after the following [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You
  {state}
  have to follow the instructions strictly rather than your own thoughts.
  {action}
  {state}
  {action}
                     Figure 12: A simplified template for the world model prompt.
                                          Prediction Checker
  You are a prediction checker. You will  Prediction    Checker
                                             receive a [State], an [Action], and the subsequent [Prediction].
  You should check if the [Prediction] is valid based on the given [State] and [Action]. You should follow
  You[Checker
  the  are a prediction  checker.
                Instruction]       Youthe
                              to check  will receive a [State], an [Action], and the subsequent [Prediction].
                                           [Action].
  You should check if the [Prediction] is valid based on the given [State] and [Action]. You should follow
  the [Checker
  [Checker      Instruction]
             Instruction]  ...to check the [Action].
  You should output your thinking process step-by-step to follow these steps: [Prediction Format Check],
  [Checker Instruction]
  [Prediction Rule Check],...and [Checker Conclusion] ...
  You should follow the instructions in [Detailed Constraints for Prediction] to check if the [Prediction] is
  validfollowing
  The    based onlists
                   the the
                        given [State]
                           [Task      and [Action].
                                 Description], [State Take
                                                      Spacethe mistakesand
                                                            Definition], in the [Prediction
                                                                            [Action          Mistakes] into
                                                                                    Space Definition].
  consideration.
  [Task Description] ...
  [State Space Definition] ...
  The following
  [Action Space lists the [Detailed
                 Definition]  ... Constraints for Prediction].
  [Detailed Constraints for Prediction]
  [Prediction Mistakes] (long-term)
  [Prediction
  In the currentMistakes]
                 state, you(long-term)
                             mistakenly believed that a wrong prediction was the correct one:
  In the current
  [Wrong         state, you
           predictions   andmistakenly
                              feedbacks]believed
                                          ...     that a wrong prediction was the correct one:
  [Wrong predictions and feedbacks] ...
  Now you should check the following [Prediction] based on the given [State] and [Action]. You have to
  check
  Now youthe should
             instructions
                     checkstep-by-step strictly
                            the following       rather than
                                          [Prediction]      your
                                                         based onown
                                                                  the thoughts.
                                                                      given [State] and [Action]. You have to
  {state}
  check the instructions step-by-step strictly rather than your own thoughts.
  {action}
  {state}
  {predicion}
  {action}
  {predicion}


                 Figure 13: A simplified template for the prediction checker prompt.


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H      D ETAILED E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
H.1     BASIC P OLICY A NALYSIS FOR M ULTI -AGENT TASKS

As mentioned in the experiment section, our MLAQ agent framework is compatible with both
single-agent and multi-agent scenarios. In multi-agent scenarios, it provides two basic policy
decision paradigms. The first one treats the entire multi-agent system as a whole for centralized
decision-making, where it takes the global state as inputs and outputs joint actions for the system.
The second one adopts RoCo’s dialog mechanism (Mandi et al., 2023), where the agents conduct
multiple rounds of dialogue with each other and determine the joint actions when reaching consensus:
ai,t ∼ πi (·|oi,t , ρi,t ), where ρi,t = [di,1 , ..., di−1,j ] is the chat history between agents. di,j represents
the message output by agent i at the dialog round j.
We evaluate the agents using these two basic policies in the Sort and Sandwich domains. As shown
in Table 8, the results indicate that, with similar token consumption, the performance of centralized
decision-making significantly decreases, with env replans increasing nearly tenfold in the Sandwich
domain. The complexity of centralized decision-making significantly surpasses that of decentralized
decision-making, thereby diminishing the effectiveness of basic policies in obtaining available or
optimal actions.


 Table 8: Performance comparison of using dialog and central paradigms in multi-agent domains.
      Task      Methods      Success Rate       Optimal Rate       Token       Env Replans      Optimal Gap
                 dialog           0.98               0.75          175560          0.06              0.26
      Sort
                 central          0.88               0.59          199753          0.04              0.57
                 dialog           0.95               0.45          208024          0.07              0.61
 Sandwich
                 central          0.81               0.24          131244          0.62              3.24


H.2     M AIN R ESULTS IN THE S ANDWICH DOMAIN

Due to space limitations in the main text, we provide the experimental results in the Sandwich domain
in this section for reference. As shown in Table 9, although MLAQ is superior to RoCo in success rate
and outperforms RoCo in long-horizon tasks (10-step), the token consumption of MLAQ is higher
than that of RoCo. This is mainly due to two reasons. Firstly, the similarity between state transitions
plays an essential role in token consumption, with tasks exhibiting higher similarity being better able
to leverage stored transition data in memory to reduce token consumption. The Sandwich domain,
with its relatively fixed trajectories compared to Sort, exhibits lower similarity across different tasks.
This is evidenced by the average memory re-utilization ratio between the two domains, notably lower
in Sort. This characteristic of the Sandwich domain not only contributes to RoCo achieving a higher
optimal rate but also diminishes MLAQ’s token saving capability. Secondly, MLAQ itself involves
world model prediction and self-examination, leading to an average token consumption per time step
exceeding RoCo’s.


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 9: Comparison of multiple metrics between MLAQ and RoCo in Sandwich domain.
              Metrics           Methods    6-step     8-step     10-step   Average
                                RoCo       1.00       0.64       0.92      0.75
              Success Rate
                                MLAQ       1.00       0.92       1.00      0.95
              Env Replans       RoCo       2.50       3.87       4.33      3.86
              (n-shot)          MLAQ       0.00       0.11       0.00      0.07
                                RoCo       0.75       0.36       0.25      0.37
              Optimal Rate      MLAQ−      0.00       0.08       0.83      0.29
                                MLAQ       0.25       0.31       0.83      0.45
                                RoCo       20740      35072      65027     42266
              Average Token     MLAQ−      74881      63555      77949     68746
                                MLAQ       184609     220521     188752    208024
                                RoCo       0.50       1.13       1.83      1.27
              Optimal Gap       MLAQ−      1.25       1.88       0.17      1.33
                                MLAQ       0.75       1.35       0.17      0.96
                Memory Re-Util. Ratio      0.31       0.63       0.57      0.58


I   H YPER -PARAMETERS
Table 10 shows the hyper-parameters presented in the MLAQ training process. Except for the
environmental horizon T , all other hyper-parameters remain constant across all experiments, where
T is set to 20 for the BlocksWorld experiment, 16 for the Sandwich experiment, and 8 for the Sort
experiment.
In this paper, all experiments are conducted using the GPT API interface, without involving CPU or
GPU usage. The total cost of the API resources used in this paper does not exceed 1500 US dollars,
including preliminary tests, comparative experiments, and ablation experiments.


               Table 10: Hyper-parameters presented in the MLAQ training process
                Hyper Parameter                                Value
                LLM source                                     gpt-4-0125-preview
                Learning rate α                                1.0
                Discount γ                                     0.995
                UCB weight wg                                  2
                vUCB weight wg                                 4
                vUCB threshold ϵg                              0
                Maximum trial number for imagination Kc        2
                Maximum trial number for prediction Ks         2
                Maximum trial number for policy Ka             2
                Q threshold Q̃                                 0.5
                Q update loops                                 20
                Environmental horizon T                        20 / 8 / 16


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J      P ROMPT E XAMPLE

J.1      P OLICY P ROMPT AND R ESPONSE OF THE S TATE - BASED D ECISION -M AKING

In the LLM agent constructed by our method MLAQ, both decision-making in single-agent scenarios
and centralized decision-making in multi-agent scenarios rely on the global state. We use the prompt
template in Figure 10 to query LLM and output agent actions or joint actions of the multi-agent
system. In the following, we provide an example of a policy prompt in the Sort domain, which
includes all the elements in the template shown.


                                                        Policy
    [Detailed Instruction for Policy]
    You should output your thinking process step-by-step in the following order. You have to follow these steps one by
    one to plan the [Action]: [Action Planning], [Action Conclusion], [Action Constraints Check], [Forbidden Action
    Check], and [Action Output].
    The most important thing: Follow the instructions step-by-step and ensure each step is completed precisely. Repeat
    the instructions and fill in the blanks '[]' without introducing any modifications or additional content.
      + [Action Planning]: Plan the [Action] of the multi-agent system step by step and list the thinking process.
      + [Action Conclusion]: Conclude the [Action] in the format of [Detailed Constraints for Action].
      + [Action Constraints Check]: Follow the steps in [Detailed Constraints for Action] to check the [Action] step by
    step.
      + [Action Revise]: If there is no incorrect checking result in the [Action Constraints Check], you can pass to the
    [Forbidden Action Check]. Otherwise, you should revise the action. Take the feedback from [Action Constraints
    Check] into consideration, and follow these steps to revise the action: [New Action Planning] and [ NewAction
    Constraints Check].
      + [Forbidden & Mistake Action Check]: I will provide some forbidden joint actions, and the robots cannot
    choose the forbidden and mistake actions. Note that what is forbidden are the joint actions of the multi-agent system,
    rather than the single agent actions that appear in these joint actions.
        - list the chosen action.
        - list all actions in the [Forbidden Actions] and [Policy Mistakes].
        - check if the [Action] is in the [Forbidden Actions] or [Policy Mistakes] one by one.
        If the [Action] is not in the [Forbidden Actions] and [Policy Mistakes]:
          - Pass to the [Action Output] part.
        Else:
          - Follow these instructions to plan a new [Actions] step by step and list the thinking process:
            - Go back to a new [Action Planning] and [Action Constraints Check] process again. You should note that what
    is forbidden are the joint actions rather than the single agent actions that appear in these joint actions. Therefore, the
    individual actions of each agent in the [Forbidden Actions] can still be chosen.
            - [Forbidden Action Check]: check if the [Action] satisfies the [Detailed Constraints for Action].
            - Re-plan the [Action] until a new [Action] is obtained or there is no available action anymore. You can try 2-
    nd, 3-rd, 4-th ... Plan to get the final [Action].
      If there is no available action anymore, output [ERROR] to denote that there is no available action anymore.
      + [Action Output]: output the final action in the format of [Detailed Constraints for Action].

    The following lists the [Task Description], [State Space Definition], and [Action Space Definition].
    [Task Description]
    Task: Cooperative Sorting in a Multi-Agent System
    Agents: Alice, Bob and Chad
    Alice - Can only PICK and PLACE cube items on panel1, panel2 and panel3.
    Bob - Can only PICK and PLACE cube items on panel3, panel4 and panel5.
    Chad - Can only PICK and PLACE cube items on panel5, panel6 and panel7.
    Objective: Collaboratively place the cubes on the panels as follows: place blue_square on panel2, place
    pink_polygon on panel4, place yellow_trapezoid on panel6. The cube items will be placed randomly on all panels of
    the table at the beginning of an episode.
    [State Space Definition]
    Define the state of the multi-agent system, which is composed of one category: [Cube States].
    1. [Cube States]: Describe the status of the following three cube items: blue_square, pink_polygon,
    yellow_trapezoid.
    2. The cube items must be listed in this order: blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid.
    [State Template]
    [State]
    [Cube States]
    blue_square is on <location>                               35
    pink_polygon is on <location>
    yellow_trapezoid is on <location>
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [State Template]
 [State]
 [Cube States]
 blue_square is on <location>
 pink_polygon is on <location>
 yellow_trapezoid is on <location>
 [Detailed Constraints for State]
 You should specify the [State] according to the following constrains. A state is reasonable if it does not break the
 constraints one-by-one and step-by-step.
 1. There must be three lines of [Cube States].
 2. Check if their locations are one of: on panel1 - 7.
 3. It is not allowed to have two cubes on the same panel. Check if they satisfy constraints.
 3. The panel name should not contain " " in the middle. For example, use "panel2" instead of "panel 2".
 [Action Space Definition]
 Detail the action space for each robot with the stipulated actions: PICK PLACE, WAIT.
 - PICK <object> PLACE <target>: Execute if the gripper is empty. Pick up <object> and place it onto <target>,
 where <object> is a cube and <target> is a panel
 - WAIT: Do nothing.
 [Action Template]
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION <action>
 NAME Bob ACTION <action>
 NAME Chad ACTION <action>
 [Detailed Constraints for Action]
 [Robot Reach Range] Before showing the constraints, you should note that each robot has its own reach range, and
 it cannot PICK or PLACE items outside its reach range.
   + Alice: panel1, panel2 and panel3
   + Bob: panel3, panel4, panel5
   + Chad: panel5, panel6, panel7
 [Detailed Constraints] Then, you should follow the constraints one-by-one and step-by-step to check if the action
 is correct: [Basic Constraints] and [PICK & PLACE Constraints]. You have to follow these constraints strictly and
 do not have your own understanding of the constraints.
 The most important thing: Follow the instructions step-by-step and ensure each step is completed precisely. Repeat
 the instructions and fill in the blanks '[]' without introducing any modifications or additional content.
 [Basic Constraints] Output "[Basic Check]" and do as follows:
   + There must be three lines of actions.
   + The agents cannot all perform WAIT.
   + Agents are not allowed to PICK <object> other than blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid.
   + Agents are not allowed to PICK the same <object> at the same time.
   + Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects on the same panel.
 [PICK & PLACE Constraints] Now, output "[PICK & PLACE Check]" and do as follows:
   + For simplicity, we use [agent] to denote the agent's name: [Alice, Bob, Chad].
    - If action is PICK PLACE, follow the instructions step by step: [PICK Object Check], [PLACE Target Check].
      a. [PICK Object Check] Agents are not allowed to PICK objects out of its reach range.
      b. [PLACE Target Check] Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects out of its reach range.
      c. [PLACE Target Check] Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects on the panel that already has an object
 except it is PICKed by one of the agents at the current timestep.
   + For example: List Alice's action ... List Bob's action ... List Chad's action ...```

 [Policy Mistakes]
 No policy mistakes.
 [Temporary Mistakes]
 You have made 2 mistakes. The following actions are the wrong actions you have made.
 These feedbacks are from the previous imagination, and may not be correct. However, you still need to pay attention
 to them and avoid making the same or similar mistakes.
 The wrong action 1 is as follows:
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION WAIT
 NAME Bob ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel6
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 The feedback is as follows:
 [ERROR] The action is invalid because it violates the reach range constraint for Bob, who cannot PLACE the
 yellow_trapezoid on panel6 as it is outside of his range.Now, output your action below. You should follow the
 [Detailed Instruction for Policy] strictly and think step-by-step to plan the action.



                                                         36
 [Temporary
 The  wrong action Mistakes]
                        1 is as follows:
 You have made 2 mistakes. The following actions are the wrong actions you have made.
 EXECUTE
 These feedbacks
 NAME                are from
          Alice ACTION          the previous imagination, and may not be correct. However, you still need to pay attention
                             WAIT
 to them Bob
 NAME
Published andasavoid
               ACTION  making
                            WAIT
                 a conference    the paper
                                     same oratsimilar
                                                ICLRmistakes.
                                                        2025
 The wrong
 NAME     Chadaction
                 ACTION 1 is as follows:
                             WAIT
 EXECUTE
 The  feedback is as follows:
 NAME Alice
 [ERROR]     TheACTION
                   action isWAIT
                              invalid because all agents cannot perform WAIT simultaneously.Now, output your action
 NAMEYou
 below.   Bob should
                ACTION      WAIT
                        follow  the [Detailed Instruction for Policy] strictly and think step-by-step to plan the action.
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 The
 The wrong
      feedbackaction
                  is as2follows:
                          is as follows:
 EXECUTE
 [ERROR] The action is invalid because all agents cannot perform WAIT simultaneously.Now, output your action
 NAME     Aliceshould
 below. You      ACTION      WAIT
                        follow   the [Detailed Instruction for Policy] strictly and think step-by-step to plan the action.
 NAME Bob ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel5
 The wrong
 NAME     Chadaction
                 ACTION 2 is as follows:
                             WAIT
 EXECUTE
 The  feedback is as follows:
 NAME Alice
 [ERROR]     BobACTION       WAIT
                   cannot PICK      the yellow_trapezoid from its current location (panel1) because it is outside his reach
 NAME(panel3,
 range    Bob ACTION        PICK yellow_trapezoid
                  panel4, panel5).    This violates thePLACE   panel5Check constraint.
                                                        PICK Range
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 [Forbidden
 The feedbackActions]
                  is as follows:
 The  following
 [ERROR]     Boblists   the PICK
                   cannot   forbidden   actions:
                                    the yellow_trapezoid   from its current location (panel1) because it is outside his reach
 [Action  1]
 range (panel3,   panel4, panel5). This violates the PICK Range Check constraint.
 EXECUTE
 [Forbidden
 NAME            Actions]PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3
          Alice ACTION
 The following
 NAME             lists the WAIT
          Bob ACTION        forbidden actions:
 [ActionChad
 NAME     1] ACTION WAIT
 EXECUTE
 Now
 NAME  youAlice
            should   output PICK
                 ACTION       your action  according toPLACE
                                     yellow_trapezoid   the following
                                                                 panel3current state and target state.
 [State]
 NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
 [Cube
 NAMEStates]
          Chad ACTION WAIT
 blue_square is on panel2
 Now you should
 pink_polygon        output
                 is on        your action according to the following current state and target state.
                         panel4
 [State]
 yellow_trapezoid     is on panel1
 [Cube States]
 [Target   State]
 blue_square
 [Cube  States]is on panel2
 pink_polygonis isononpanel2
 blue_square             panel4
 yellow_trapezoid
 pink_polygon    is onis panel4
                         on panel1
 [Target State] is on panel6
 yellow_trapezoid
 [Cube States]
 blue_square is on panel2
 pink_polygon is on panel4
 yellow_trapezoid is on panel6
The response of the basic policy is shown below. Although it already outputs a forbidden action list
in the response, it finally outputs an action in this list, which indicates that the response of LLM is
  [Action Planning]
actually  imperfect. Therefore, our MLAQ agent try to optimize through RL methods.
   - For Alice, since all her cubes are in the correct position, she should WAIT.
   - For Bob, since all his cubes are in the correct position or being taken care of by Chad, he should WAIT.
   - For Chad, since yellow_trapezoid needs to be moved from panel5 to panel6, and it's within his reach, he should
  [Action
  PICK      Planning] PLACE panel6.
         yellow_trapezoid
   - For Alice, since all her cubes are in the correct position, she should WAIT.
  [Action   Conclusion]
   - For Bob,  since all his cubes are in the correct position or being taken care of by Chad, he should WAIT.
  EXECUTE
   - For Chad, since yellow_trapezoid needs to be moved from panel5 to panel6, and it's within his reach, he should
  NAME     Alice ACTION WAIT
  PICK yellow_trapezoid      PLACE panel6.
  NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
  [ActionChad
  NAME      Conclusion]
                 ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel6
  EXECUTE
  [Action
  NAME AliceConstraints
                 ACTION Check]
                             WAIT
  [Basic
  NAMECheck]
           Bob ACTION WAIT
  + There Chad
  NAME     must ACTION
                 be three lines
                             PICK of yellow_trapezoid
                                     actions: [correct].PLACE panel6
  + The agents cannot all perform WAIT: [correct].
  [Action
  + Agents Constraints
             are not allowedCheck]
                               to PICK <object> other than blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid: [correct].
  [Basic
  + AgentsCheck]
             are not allowed to PICK the same <object> at the same time: [no agent has the same <object>, correct].
  + Agents
    There must   be three
             are not       lines
                     allowed   to of actions:
                                  PLACE       [correct].
                                           objects  on the same panel. [no agent has the same <target>, correct].
  + The agents cannot all perform WAIT: [correct].
  [PICK    &  PLACE     Check]
  + Agents are not allowed to PICK <object> other than blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid: [correct].
  +
  + For  Chad:
    Agents   are not allowed to PICK the same <object> at the same time: [no agent has the same <object>, correct].
  +-Agents
     Chad's are
             action: [PICK yellow_trapezoid
                 not allowed   to PLACE objects  PLACE
                                                    on the panel6].
                                                           same panel. [no agent has the same <target>, correct].
     a. [PICK Range Check] Agents are not allowed to PICK objects out of its reach range (Chad's: [panel5, panel6,
  [PICK &[no,
  panel7]):   PLACE
                  actionCheck]
                         is incorrect].
  + For Chad:
   - Chad's action: [PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel6].
     a. [PICK Range Check] Agents are not allowed to PICK objects out of its reach range (Chad's: [panel5, panel6,
  panel7]): [no, action is incorrect].
  [Action Revise]
  Since the [PICK Range Check] for Chad's action was incorrect, the action needs to be revised. Chad cannot PICK
  the yellow_trapezoid from panel1 because it's out of his reach range. The correct action should involve Alice, who is
  in the range to PICK the yellow_trapezoid from panel1.


                                                              37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
 [Action Revise]
 Since the [PICK Range Check] for Chad's action was incorrect, the action needs to be revised. Chad cannot PICK
 the yellow_trapezoid from panel1 because it's out of his reach range. The correct action should involve Alice, who is
 in the range to PICK the yellow_trapezoid from panel1.
 [New Action Planning]
 Given the mistake identified during the [Action Constraints Check], we need Alice to move the yellow_trapezoid
 closer to Chad's range for him to eventually place it on panel6.
 - Alice can PICK the yellow_trapezoid from panel1 and PLACE it on panel3, which is within her range and makes
 it accessible for Bob or Chad in subsequent actions.
 - Bob and Chad will WAIT in this round to avoid any conflict.
 [New Action Conclusion]
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3
 NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 [New Action Constraints Check]
 [Basic Check]
 + There must be three lines of actions: [correct].
 + The agents cannot all perform WAIT: [correct].
 + Agents are not allowed to PICK <object> other than blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid: [correct].
 + Agents are not allowed to PICK the same <object> at the same time: [no agent has the same <object>, correct].
 + Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects on the same panel. [no agent has the same <target>, correct].
 [PICK & PLACE Check]
 + For Alice's action: PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3.
   a. [PICK Range Check] Agents are not allowed to PICK objects out of its reach range (Alice's: [panel1, panel2,
 panel3]): [correct].
   b. [PLACE Range Check] Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects out of its reach range: [correct].
   c. [PLACE Target Check] Agents are not allowed to PLACE objects on the panel that already has an object
 except it is PICKed by one of the agents at the current timestep: [The panel3 is empty, correct].
 [Forbidden & Mistake Action Check]
 - list the chosen action: EXECUTE NAME Alice ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3 NAME Bob
 ACTION WAIT NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 - repeat all actions and feedbacks in the [Forbidden Actions], [Policy Mistakes], and [Temporary Mistakes]:
     a. [EXECUTE NAME Alice ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3 NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT, forbidden action],
     b. [EXECUTE NAME Alice ACTION WAIT NAME Bob ACTION WAIT NAME Chad ACTION WAIT,
 [ERROR] The action is invalid because all agents cannot perform WAIT simultaneously.],
     c. [EXECUTE NAME Alice ACTION WAIT NAME Bob ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel5
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT, [ERROR] Bob cannot PICK the yellow_trapezoid from its current location (panel1)
 because it is outside his reach range (panel3, panel4, panel5). This violates the PICK Range Check constraint.]]
 - check if the [Action] is in the [Temporary Mistakes] one by one. If so, you should first judge whether the [Action]
 is correct or not. If the [Action] is correct, you can pass to the [Action Output] part. Otherwise, you should revise
 the [Action] step by step.
   + The chosen action is not listed in the [Temporary Mistakes].
 - check if the [Action] is in the [Forbidden Actions] one by one.
   + The chosen action is not listed in the [Forbidden Actions].
 [Action Output]
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel3
 NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT



The prompt and response in other tasks are also similar under the setting of state-based decision
making.


                                                          38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.2   P OLICY P ROMPT AND R ESPONSE OF THE O BSERVATION - BASED D ECISION -M AKING

In the observation-based decision-making of LLM multi-agent systems, we fully utilize the RoCo’s
Policy Prompt to perform dialogues between agents, and only add an additional part to denote the
forbidden actions. Here is an example in the Sort domain. We take the Alice’s prompt as an example,
the prompts of the other agents are also similar.


                                                 Alice’s Policy
 [Action Space Definition]
 - PICK <object> PLACE <target>: pick up <object> and place it onto <target>, where <object> is a cube and
 <target> is a panel
 - WAIT: Do nothing.
 [Action Template]
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION <action>
 NAME Bob ACTION <action>
 NAME Chad ACTION <action>
 [Action Output Instructions]
 1. Commence the output with 'EXECUTE
 '. Follow with one distinct action per robot on separate lines.
 2. Alice's action should be listed first, followed by Bob's action, and then Chad's action.
 3. Agents' reach ranges are as follows:
   + Alice: zone1=[panel1, panel2, panel3]
   + Bob: zone2=[panel3, panel4, panel5]
   + Chad: zone3=[panel5, panel6, panel7]
 You are robot Alice in front of panel2. You are collaborating with Bob, Chad to sort cubes into their target panels
 Bob is tasked to place pink_polygon on panel4, and can reach panel3, panel4, panel5
 Chad is tasked to place yellow_trapezoid on panel6, and can reach panel5, panel6, panel7
 The task is NOT done until all three cubes are sorted correctly
 There are 7 panels, ordered left to right: panel1,...,panel7. They form a straight assembly line, panel1 is closed to
 panel2 and farthest from panel7
 Your goal is to place blue_square on panel2, but you can only reach panel1, panel2, panel3: this means you can only
 pick cubes from these panels, and can only place cubes on these panels
 At current round:
 blue_square is on panel5
 pink_polygon is on panel4
 yellow_trapezoid is on panel6
 Never forget you are Alice!
 1. You can only pick these reachable cubes:
 2. You can only place them on these reachable panels: panel1, panel2, panel3
 Think step-by-step about the task and others' response. Carefully check and correct them if they made a mistake
 Improve your plans if given [Environment Feedback]
 When you respond, tell others about your goal and all constraints. Respond very concisely but informatively, and do
 not repeat what others have said
 Discuss with others to come up with the best plan, e.g. if your cube is out of your reach, ask others for help, and you
 can do the same for them
 Propose exactly one action for yourself at the **current** round, select from [Action Options]
 End your response by either: 1) output PROCEED, if the plans require further discussion, or 2) If everyone has
 made proposals and got approved, output EXECUTE
  and the final plan, must strictly follow [Action Output Instruction]!
 You are Alice, before you make decisions, you should check if the [Action] is violating the [Forbidden Actions].
 Your response is:
 Since my target is to PUT ... on ..., and other robots ...


                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here we provide a dialogue result from the above scenario, where three agents reach the consensus
on each other’s decisions through two rounds of dialogue. Finally, Bob summarizes and outputs the
final joint action.


                                                       Dialogues
   Alice - Round 1
 Since my target is to place the blue_square on panel2, and other robots have their respective targets with Bob needing to place the
 pink_polygon on panel4 and Chad needing to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, we need to coordinate our actions. The
 blue_square is currently out of my reach on panel5, so I will need Bob's help to move it into my reach. Bob can pick up the
 blue_square from panel5 and place it on panel3, which is within both of our reach ranges. This action does not violate any
 forbidden actions as it involves moving a cube to an intersection panel to facilitate its transfer between zones. After Bob moves the
 blue_square to panel3, I can then pick it up and place it on its target panel, panel2, in a subsequent round.

 Bob and Chad can proceed with their tasks as planned, with Bob moving the pink_polygon to panel4 as intended, and Chad placing
 the yellow_trapezoid on panel6. However, for this round, Bob's priority should be to assist me by moving the blue_square closer.

 Let's discuss this plan and make sure it aligns with everyone's understanding and capabilities. If we all agree, we can proceed with
 the execution.

 PROCEED

   Bob - Round 1
 Since my target is to place the pink_polygon on panel4, and other robots have their respective targets with Alice needing to place
 the blue_square on panel2 and Chad needing to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, we need to coordinate our actions carefully.
 The blue_square is currently on panel5, which is within my reach, and Alice has requested my help to move it into her reach. I can
 pick up the blue_square from panel5 and place it on panel3, which is within both Alice's and my reach ranges. This action does not
 violate any forbidden actions as it involves moving a cube to an intersection panel to facilitate its transfer between zones. After I
 move the blue_square to panel3, Alice can then pick it up and place it on its target panel, panel2, in a subsequent round.

 My pink_polygon is already on panel4, which means it is correctly placed, and I do not need to move it this round. Chad can
 proceed with his task to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, which is already in the correct position as well.

 Given Alice's plan and the current situation, my proposal for this round is to assist Alice by moving the blue_square closer to her.
 This will allow us to progress towards completing our overall task more efficiently.

 Let's confirm if this plan works for everyone, including the movement of the blue_square to panel3 by me, and if there are no
 objections or further suggestions, we can proceed with the execution.

 PROCEED

   Chad - Round 1
 Since my target is to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, and other robots have their respective targets with Alice needing to
 place the blue_square on panel2 and Bob needing to place the pink_polygon on panel4, we need to coordinate our actions carefully.
 The yellow_trapezoid is already correctly placed on panel6, which means my task for this round does not require any action on my
 part regarding the yellow_trapezoid.

 Alice has proposed a plan for Bob to move the blue_square from panel5 to panel3, which is a feasible action and aligns with the
 goal of getting the blue_square closer to its target panel, panel2. This action does not violate any forbidden actions as it involves
 moving a cube to an intersection panel to facilitate its transfer between zones. Since my cube is already in the correct position, my
 focus this round should be on ensuring the plan aligns with the overall goal and does not interfere with my ability to maintain the
 yellow_trapezoid on panel6.

 Bob has agreed to Alice's plan and has proposed to move the blue_square to panel3 to assist Alice. This action aligns with the
 collective goal of sorting all cubes into their target panels efficiently.

 Given the current situation and the proposed actions by Alice and Bob, my action for this round will be to WAIT, as my cube is
 already in the correct position, and there are no immediate actions required from me to assist with the movement of the
 blue_square. My priority is to ensure the yellow_trapezoid remains on panel6 and to support Alice and Bob in their tasks as needed
 without violating any forbidden actions.

 Let's confirm if this plan works for everyone, including my decision to WAIT this round, and if there are no objections or further
 suggestions, we can proceed with the execution.

 PROCEED


The prompt and response in Sandwich domain are also similar under the setting of observation-based
decision making.


                                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Alice - Round 2
 Since my target is to place the blue_square on panel2, and other robots have their respective targets with Bob needing to place the
 pink_polygon on panel4 and Chad needing to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, we need to coordinate our actions carefully.
 The blue_square is currently on panel5, which is out of my reach. I need Bob's assistance to move it into my reach. However, upon
 reviewing the constraints and forbidden actions, I realize that directly moving cubes to their target panels without violating any
 rules is our primary goal.

 Bob can assist by moving the blue_square from panel5 to panel3, which is within both of our reach ranges. This action is crucial as
 it does not violate any forbidden actions; it involves moving a cube to an intersection panel (panel3) to facilitate its transfer
 between zones. After Bob moves the blue_square to panel3, I can then pick it up and place it on its target panel, panel2, in a
 subsequent round.

 Bob's task of placing the pink_polygon on panel4 does not require immediate action since it's already in the correct position.
 Chad's task involves the yellow_trapezoid, which is also correctly placed on panel6. Therefore, Chad does not need to take any
 action regarding the yellow_trapezoid this round.

 Given the current situation, my proposal for this round is for Bob to assist by moving the blue_square closer to me, while I wait for
 the blue_square to be within my reach. Chad can also wait since his cube is already in the correct position.

 Let's confirm if this plan works for everyone. If there are no objections or further suggestions, we can proceed with the execution.

 PROCEED

   Bob - Round 2 (Conclusion)
 Since my target is to place the pink_polygon on panel4, and other robots have their respective targets with Alice needing to place
 the blue_square on panel2 and Chad needing to place the yellow_trapezoid on panel6, we need to coordinate our actions carefully.
 The pink_polygon is already correctly placed on panel4, which means my task for this round does not require any action regarding
 the pink_polygon.

 Alice has proposed that I assist by moving the blue_square from panel5 to panel3 to bring it within her reach. This action is within
 my capabilities and does not violate any forbidden actions, as it involves moving a cube to an intersection panel (panel3) to
 facilitate its transfer between zones. After moving the blue_square to panel3, Alice can then pick it up and place it on its target
 panel, panel2, in a subsequent round.

 Chad's task involves the yellow_trapezoid, which is already correctly placed on panel6. Therefore, Chad does not need to take any
 action regarding the yellow_trapezoid this round and can wait.

 Given the current situation and the proposed actions, my action for this round will be to move the blue_square from panel5 to
 panel3 to assist Alice. This will allow us to progress towards completing our overall task more efficiently. Since my pink_polygon
 is already in the correct position, and Chad's yellow_trapezoid is also correctly placed, there are no further actions required from
 me or Chad regarding our respective cubes.

 Let's confirm if this plan works for everyone. If there are no objections or further suggestions, we can proceed with the execution.

 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION WAIT
 NAME Bob ACTION PICK blue_square PLACE panel3
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT


                                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.3   ACTION C HECKER P ROMPT AND R ESPONSE E XAMPLE

We present the prompt and response example of the action checker in a state action pair of the
Sandwich domain.


                                             Action Checker
 You are an action checker. You should check if the [Action] is valid based on the given [State].

 [Checker Instruction]
 You should follow the check instructions in [Detailed Constraints for Action] to check the [Action] step-by-step.
 Take the mistakes in the [Action Mistakes] into consideration.

 The following lists the [Task Description] and [Action Space Definition].
 [Task Description]
 Task: Cooperative Cooking in a Multi-Agent System
 Agents: Chad and Dave
 Chad - Can only PICK food items from the right side of the table.
 Dave - Can only PICK food items from the left side of the table.
 Objective: Collaboratively prepare a meal named "[bacon_sandwich]". The food items of target state must be
 assembled in the following sequence: bread_slice1, tomato, cheese, bacon, bread_slice2.
 [Action Space Definition]
 1) PICK <obj>: Pick one food <item>. Only PICK if gripper is empty. PICK only the correct next item according to
 the recipe
 2) PUT <obj1> <obj2>: PUT <obj1> on top of <obj2>. <obj1> can be food, <obj2> can be food or cutting_board
 3) WAIT, do nothing
 Only one robot can PUT each round. You must PICK up an item before PUT
 [Action Output Instruction]
 Must first output 'EXECUTE\n', then give exactly one action per robot, put each on a new line
 Dave can only pick up the food item on the left side of the table. Chad can only pick up the food item on the right
 side of the table
 [Detailed Constraints for Action]
 Check the following constraints and Fill in blanks in '[]'. Check these constraints one by one: 1, 2...
 * Get [Extended Recipe Order]: [cutting_board, bread_slice1, ...] (cutting_board + [Recipe Order])
 1. [Line Number Check] The line of the actions should be less than or equal to two.
 2. [Agent Order Check] The first agent should be Chad and the second agent should be Dave.
 3. [WAIT Number Check] The number of WAIT should be less than or equal to one.
 4. [PUT Number Check] The number of PUT should be less than or equal to one.
 5. [PICK Side Check] PICK the food item on the side of the robot.
 6. [PICK Robot State Check] PICK the food item only if the gripper is empty.
 7. [PICK Food State Check] PICK the food item only if the food item's state is not 'atop <obj>'.
 8. [PUT Availability Check 1] If <obj2> is cutting_board, <obj1> must be bread_slice1.
 9. [PUT Availability Check 2] If <obj2> is not cutting_board, state of <obj2> should equal to the food item before
 <obj2> in the [Extended Recipe Order].
 10. [PUT Availability Check 3] If no other food item is 'atop <obj2>', this constraint is valid directly.
 11. [PUT Order Check 1] <obj1> should equal to the first item in [Reachable Items].
 12. [PUT Order Check 2] <obj2> should equal to the food item before <obj1> in [Extended Recipe Order].
 13. [PICK Order Check] For PICK action, robot should PICK the first food item in its [Reachable Items].

 [Action Mistakes]
 No action mistakes.

 Now you should check the following [Action] based on the given [State]
 [State]
 [Food States]
 bread_slice1: atop cutting_board
 bread_slice2: gripped by Dave
 bacon: atop cheese
 cheese: atop tomato
 tomato: atop bread_slice1
 cucumber: on right side
 ham: on right side
 beef_patty: on right side
 [Robot States]
 1. Chad's gripper is empty                            42
 2. Dave's gripper is holding bread_slice2

 EXECUTE
 cheese: atop tomato
 Now you should check the following [Action] based on the given [State]
 tomato: atop bread_slice1
 [State]
 cucumber: on right side
 [Food States]
 ham: on right
Published   as aside
                  conference paper at ICLR 2025
 bread_slice1: atop cutting_board
 beef_patty: on right side
 bread_slice2: gripped by Dave
 [Robot States]
 bacon: atop cheese
 1. Chad's gripper is empty
 cheese: atop tomato
 2. Dave's gripper is holding bread_slice2
 tomato: atop bread_slice1
 cucumber: on right side
 EXECUTE
 ham: on right side
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 beef_patty: on right side
 NAME Dave ACTION PUT bread_slice2 bacon
 [Robot States]
 1. Chad's gripper is empty
 [Start]
 2. Dave's gripper is holding bread_slice2
 [Extended Recipe Order]: ..., the first item in [Reachable Items]: ...
 1.
 EXECUTE
 NAME Chad ACTION WAIT
 NAME Dave ACTION PUT bread_slice2 bacon

  [Start]
  [Extended Recipe Order]: ..., the first item in [Reachable Items]: ...
  1.


  [Extended Recipe Order]: [cutting_board, bread_slice1, tomato, cheese, bacon, bread_slice2].
  1. [Line Number Check] The line of the actions should be less than or equal to two: [yes]
  2. [Agent Order Check] The first agent should be Chad and the second agent should be Dave: [yes]
  3. [WAIT Number Check] The number of WAIT should be less than or equal to one: [yes]
  4. [PUT Number Check] The number of PUT should be less than or equal to one: [yes]
  5. [PICK Side Check] PICK the food item on the side of the robot: [not applicable]
  6. [PICK Robot State Check] PICK the food item only if the gripper is empty: [not applicable]
  7. [PICK Food State Check] PICK the food item only if the food item's state is not 'atop <obj>': [not applicable]
  8. [PUT Availability Check 1] If <obj2> is cutting_board, <obj1> must be bread_slice1: [not applicable]
  9. [PUT Availability Check 2] If <obj2> is not cutting_board, state of <obj2> should equal to the food item before
  <obj2> in the [Extended Recipe Order]: [yes]
  10. [PUT Availability Check 3] Get <item>s in [State] whose state matches '<item>: atop bacon': pool=[]. If no
  other food item is 'atop bacon' (meaning pool is empty), this constraint is valid directly: [yes]
  11. [PUT Order Check 1] <obj1> should equal to the first item in [Reachable Items]: [yes]
  12. [PUT Order Check 2] <obj2> should equal to the food item before <obj1> in [Extended Recipe Order]: [yes]
  13. [PICK Order Check] For PICK action, robot should PICK the first food item in its [Reachable Items]: [not
  applicable]
  [Conclusion]
  The [Action] is valid based on the given [State].



The action checker is based on state in both single-agent and multi-agent settings, so the checking
process for all tasks is similar.


                                                             43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.4    W ORLD M ODEL P ROMPT AND R ESPONSE E XAMPLE

We present the prompt and response example of the world model in a state action pair of the
BlocksWorld task.

                                                  World Model
  You are a state predictor. You will be given a [State] and an [Action] as input. should predict the [State] after the
  [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You should follow the [Predicting Instruction] to predict the [State].
  [Predicting Instruction]
  You will be provided with the [State] and the [Action] of the agent. You should think step by step to output the
  [Prediction] of the next [State] based on the given [State] and [Action]. The format of the [Prediction] should follow
  the [Detailed Constraints for State].
  Please output your thinking process step-by-step by following theses steps:
  The most important thing: Follow the instructions step-by-step and ensure each step is completed precisely. Repeat
  the instructions and fill in the blanks '[]' without introducing any modifications or additional content.
  1. [Interaction Item Pool]: initialize the pool of the blocks that the agent is interacting with. It is a empty list at the
  beginning: pool={}.
  2. [Action Forward Rule]: Follow these steps to predict the [Prediction]:
   + If the action is "PICK UP" or "UNSTACK", the state of <object> in the [Prediction] should be "in hand". The
  state of your hand in the [Prediction] should be "Holding <object>". Add <object> to the pool: pool=[].
   + If the action is "PUT DOWN", the state of <object> in the [Prediction] should be "on table". The state of your
  hand in the [Prediction] should be "Empty". Add <object> to the pool: pool=[].
   + If the action is "STACK ON", the state of <object> in the [Prediction] should be "on <target>". The state of your
  hand in the [Prediction] should be "Empty". Add <object> to the pool: pool=[].
  3. [Prediction Conclusion]: Conclude the [Prediction] based on the [Action Forward Rule].
   + The format of the [Prediction] should follow the [Detailed Constraints for State].
   + The blocks that are not present in the pool should not change their state.
  The following lists the [State Space Definition].
  [State Space Definition]
  Define the state of the scenarios: blocks and hand.
  1. [Hand State]: The state of the hand. It can be "Empty" or "Holding <object>", where <object> is a block.
  2. [Block States]: The state of each block. It can only be one of ["on <object>", "on table", "in hand"]. The blocks
  should be listed in this order: blue block, orange block, red block, yellow block.
  [State Template]
  [State]
  [Hand State]
  <hand state>
  [Block States]
  blue block: <block state>
  orange block: <block state>
  red block: <block state>
  yellow block: <block state>
  [Detailed Constraints for State]
  The following paragraphs are the detailed constraints for State. There are three main <check items>: [Title Check],
  [Hand State Check], and [Block States Check].
  1. [Title Check] A header titled [State].
  2. [Hand State Check] A header titled [Hand State]. Then, list the Hand State.
   + Hand state must be one of ["Empty", "Holding <object>"], where <object> is a block (e.g. "Holding blue block").
  3. [Block States Check] A header titled [Block States]. Then, list the states of each block.
   + Each line represents the state of one block item.
   + The block items must be listed in this order: blue block, orange block, red block, yellow block.
   + The <block state> specifies the state of the block. It can only be "on <object>", "on table" or "in hand" (e.g.
  "blue block: on table", "orange block: on red block", "red block: in hand").
  [Prediction Mistakes]
  No prediction mistakes.
  Now, you should predict the next [State] after the following [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You have to
  follow the instructions strictly rather than your own thoughts.
  [State]
  [Hand
The     State] of the world model is relatively concise, as it only needs to infer the next state according
     response
toHolding blueinstructions.
   the given   block
  [Block States]
  blue block: in hand
  orange block: on yellow block
                                                              44
  red block: on orange block
  yellow block: on table
  EXECUTE
  + The block items must be listed in this order: blue block, orange block, red block, yellow block.
  + The <block state> specifies the state of the block. It can only be "on <object>", "on table" or "in hand" (e.g.
 "blue block: on table", "orange block: on red block", "red block: in hand").
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
 [Prediction Mistakes]
 No prediction mistakes.
 Now, you should predict the next [State] after the following [Action] is applied to the given [State]. You have to
 follow the instructions strictly rather than your own thoughts.
 [State]
 [Hand State]
 Holding blue block
 [Block States]
 blue block: in hand
 orange block: on yellow block
 red block: on orange block
 yellow block: on table
 EXECUTE
 STACK blue block ON red block


 [Interaction Item Pool]: initialize the pool of the blocks that the agent is interacting with. It is an empty list at the
 beginning: pool={}.
 [Action Forward Rule]: List the action: [STACK blue block ON red block], the state in the [Prediction] is changed
 by the [Action].
 - If the action is "STACK ON", list the <object> of action: [blue block], and <target> of action: [red block]. The
 state of <object> in the [Prediction] should be changed to "on red block". The state of your hand in the [Prediction]
 should be changed to "Empty". Add <object> to the pool: pool=[blue block].

 [Prediction Conclusion]:
 [State]
 [Hand State]
 Empty
 [Block States]
 blue block: on red block
 orange block: on yellow block
 red block: on orange block
 yellow block: on table


                                                            45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.5   P REDICTION C HECKER P ROMPT AND R ESPONSE E XAMPLE

We present the prompt and response example of the prediction checker in a state action pair of the
Sort domain.

                                             Prediction Checker
 You are a prediction checker. You will receive a [State], an [Action], and the subsequent [Prediction]. You should
 check if the [Prediction] is valid based on the given [State] and [Action]. You should follow the [Checker
 Instruction] to check the [Action].
 [Checker Instruction]
 You should follow the instructions in [Detailed Constraints for Prediction] to check if the [Prediction] is valid based
 on the given [State] and [Action]. Take the mistakes in the [Prediction Mistakes] into consideration.
 The following lists the [Detailed Constraints for Prediction].
 [Detailed Constraints for Prediction]
 Check the following constraints and Fill in blanks in '[]'. Check these constraints one by one: 1, 2... Only get your
 conclusion according to the results of these checks!
 * Get [Interaction Item Pool]: list all PICKed objects in the [Action]: <pool>=[].
 1. [Header Check] A header titled [State] -> A header titled [Cube States] -> List the Cube States.
 2. [Cube Order Check] Cubes must be listed in the following order: [blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid].
 3. [Cube Format Check] Each line should be formatted as "<cube_name> is on <panel_name>". Three lines in total.
 4. [Cube State Check] Don't have two cubes on the same panel.
 5. [PICK & PLACE Rule Check] For PICK & PLACE, state of <object> should be '<object> is on <target>'.
 * When checking, you should repeat the prompt and fill in blanks, replace <obj> and <agent> with their true values,
 and give the line conclusion (yes/no/not applicable). For example:
 4. [Cube State Check] Repeat cubes' locations: [panel1, panel2, panel3]. Don't have two cubes on the same panel:
 [yes]. Line conclusion: [yes]
 * Constraint 5 may have multiple agents of checking. If so, you should output results separately. For example:
 5.1 [PICK & PLACE Rule Check] For Alice's action: [PICK blue_square PLACE panel2], repeat
 <object>=[blue_square], <target>=[panel2], state of <object> in the prediction: [blue_square is on panel2], it should
 be '<object> is on <target>': [yes]. Line conclusion: [yes]
 5.2 [PICK & PLACE Rule Check] For Bob's action: ... 5.3 ...
 [Prediction Mistakes]
 No prediction mistakes.
 Now you should check the following [Prediction] based on the given [State] and [Action]. You have to check the
 instructions step-by-step strictly rather than your own thoughts.
 The original state is:
 [State]
 [Cube States]
 blue_square is on panel6
 pink_polygon is on panel4
 yellow_trapezoid is on panel2
 The action is:
 EXECUTE
 NAME Alice ACTION PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel1
 NAME Bob ACTION WAIT
 NAME Chad ACTION PICK blue_square PLACE panel5
 The prediction is:
 [State]
 [Cube States]
 blue_square is on panel5
 pink_polygon is on panel4
 yellow_trapezoid is on panel1
 [Start]
 Get [Interaction Item Pool]: list all ...
 1. [Header Check]
 2. [Cube Order Check] ...
 [Conclusion] ...


                                                           46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Due to passing all the checks, this prediction is considered correct.

 [Start]
 Get [Interaction Item Pool]: list all PICKed objects in the [Action]: <pool>=[yellow_trapezoid, blue_square].
 1. [Header Check] A header titled [State] -> A header titled [Cube States] -> List the Cube States: [yes].
 2. [Cube Order Check] Cubes must be listed in the following order: [blue_square, pink_polygon, yellow_trapezoid]:
 [yes].
 3. [Cube Format Check] Each line should be formatted as "<cube_name> is on <panel_name>". Three cube lines in
 total: [yes].
 4. [Cube State Check] Repeat cubes' locations: [panel5, panel4, panel1]. Don't have two cubes on the same panel:
 [yes]. Line conclusion: [yes].
 5. [PICK & PLACE Rule Check]
 5.1 For Alice's action: [PICK yellow_trapezoid PLACE panel1], repeat <object>=[yellow_trapezoid],
 <target>=[panel1], state of <object> in the prediction: [yellow_trapezoid is on panel1], it should be '<object> is on
 <target>': [yes]. Line conclusion: [yes].
 5.2 For Bob's action: [WAIT], no object interaction to check. Line conclusion: [not applicable].
 5.3 For Chad's action: [PICK blue_square PLACE panel5], repeat <object>=[blue_square], <target>=[panel5], state
 of <object> in the prediction: [blue_square is on panel5], it should be '<object> is on <target>': [yes]. Line
 conclusion: [yes].
 [Conclusion] All checks are valid based on the provided [Action] and the resulting [Prediction]. The prediction is
 accurate.


                                                          47
