Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ROM M ODELS TO M ICROTHEORIES :
D ISTILLING A M ODEL’ S T OPICAL K NOWLEDGE
FOR G ROUNDED Q UESTION A NSWERING
                      ∗
 Nathaniel Weir† , Bhavana Dalvi Mishra♠ , Orion Weller† , Oyvind Tafjord♠ ,
 Samuel Hornstein# , Alexander Sabol# , Peter Jansen♠‡ ,
 Benjamin Van Durme† , Peter Clark♠
 †
   Johns Hopkins University ♠ Allen Institute for AI
 #
    Thomas Jefferson University ‡ University of Arizona
 nweir@jhu.edu, peterc@allenai.org



                                                A BSTRACT
            Recent reasoning methods (e.g., chain-of-thought) help users understand how lan-
            guage models (LMs) answer a single question, but they do little to reveal the LM’s
            overall understanding, or “theory,” about the question’s topic, making it still hard
            to trust the model. Our goal is to materialize such theories - here called microthe-
            ories (a linguistic analog of logical microtheories (Blair et al., 1992)) - as a set of
            sentences encapsulating an LM’s core knowledge about a topic. These statements
            systematically work together to entail answers to a set of questions to both engen-
            der trust and improve performance. Our approach is to first populate a knowledge
            store with (model-generated) sentences that entail answers to training questions,
            and then distill those down to a core microtheory which is concise, general, and
            non-redundant. We show that, when added to a general corpus (e.g., Wikipedia),
            microtheories can supply critical information not necessarily present in the corpus,
            improving both a model’s ability to ground its answers to verifiable knowledge
            (i.e., show how answers are systematically entailed by documents in the corpus,
            grounding up to +8% more answers), and the accuracy of those grounded answers
            (up to +8% absolute). We also show that, in a human evaluation in the medical
            domain, our distilled microtheories contain a significantly higher concentration of
            topically critical facts than the non-distilled knowledge store. Finally, we show we
            can quantify the coverage of a microtheory for a topic (characterized by a dataset)
            using a notion of p-relevance. Together, these suggest that microtheories are an
            efficient distillation of an LM’s topic-relevant knowledge, that they can usefully
            augment existing corpora, and can provide both performance gains and an inter-
            pretable, verifiable window into the model’s knowledge of a topic.1

1       I NTRODUCTION
What do language models (LMs) know about the topics they converse about? Despite their success,
LMs are opaque - users do not have good visibility into the LM’s knowledge, creating challenges for
engendering trust in the model. Recent work has tried to address this for answers to a single question
by having the LM provide various explanations and chains of thought that support an answer, e.g.,
(Danilevsky et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022). However, such expositions only reveal snippets of the
LM’s latent knowledge and do little to convey the model’s overall understanding, or “theory”, about
the topic at hand, limiting a user’s confidence in the model’s behavior. Conversely, if we had a
method that could distill a model’s overall theories into an inspectable, verifiable form, this could
help users see how answers follow from those theories.
Our goal is to distill such theories - which we refer to as microtheories (Mts) (a linguistic analog
of logical microtheories (Blair et al., 1992)) - as a set of sentences encapsulating an LM’s core
knowledge about a topic. Our approach uses a question-driven methodology, where a set of questions
characterizes a topic (i.e., a topic is defined as a distribution over questions). We first prompt the
    ∗
        Work done in part during internship at Allen Institute for AI
    1
        Code for this work can be found at https://github.com/nweir127/microtheories/.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Test            : The cart will accelerate at a       : The object drops       : The planet with more
                   Hypotheses         speed of 125 m/s until the          slower than it would       mass experiences a
                                   student stops applying the force             on Earth          stronger gravitational pull


                       : the car stops in        : A student pushes        : An astronaut on                 : Two planets
                     a shorter distance         a 12kg shopping           the International                 with different
                       than the truck          cart with a force of                                       masses orbit a
                                                                        Space Station drops a
                                                 15 newtons (N)              1 kg object                  star at the same
                                                                                                              distance

                           : A car and a truck
                    traveling at the same speed
                        approach a stop sign
                                                            Newton's 2nd law of          The force of gravity between
                                                            motion states that the      two objects increases with the
                                                          force equals mass times             mass of the objects
                                                               its acceleration              and decreases with the
                            Training
                                                       Microtheory                       distance between the objects
                           Questions                                    ...     ...



Figure 1: Given a set of topical training questions, we construct a microtheory, a set of statements articulating
a model’s core, reusable knowledge about that topic. These help prove (entail) answers to test questions.
LM to enumerate facts that entail answers to training questions, then identify the core, abstractable
pieces of knowledge frequently reused for many questions in that set, then distill them down to a
core microtheory that is concise, general, and non-redundant. The microtheory is intended to contain
the core principles about the topic (e.g., Newton’s laws of motion, for physics), extracted from the
LM, that can help derive corpus-grounded answers to topical questions.
To answer questions with the help of a microtheory, we use the well-known process of textual entail-
ment (Dagan et al., 2005; Lai et al., 2017). Textual entailment is a linguistic inference process that
identifies when one (or more) statement(s) “reasonably implies” another (Magnini, 2015), producing
a (potentially multistep) entailment tree, analogous to a proof tree (Dalvi et al., 2021). While entail-
ment lacks a fully formal definition (modern entailment engines are instead trained on examples), it
provides a well-defined mechanism for deciding if, and how, an answer systematically follows from
a set of statements. This allows us to both use and evaluate microtheories for question-answering.
We evaluate our microtheory approach in two domains using two existing datasets: K-12 science,
using the ARC dataset (Clark et al., 2018), and medicine, using the MedQA dataset (Jin et al., 2021).
We cluster each dataset into topics, construct microtheories on a training split of each topic, and test
on the remainder. We find that when added to a general corpus (here, Wikipedia), microtheories
can supply critical, topical information not necessarily present in the corpus, improving both the
model’s ability to ground its answers (i.e., show how those answers are entailed by the corpus,
fully grounding up to +8% more answers), and the accuracy of those grounded answers (up to
+8% absolute). We also show that, in a human evaluation in the medical domain, our distilled
microtheories contain a significantly higher concentration of topically critical facts than in the non-
distilled knowledge store. Finally, we propose a metric, p-relevance, to quantify the completeness of
a microtheory. By correlating p-relevance with training set size, we can predict how many training
questions will be needed to generate a Mt relevant to some p percent of test questions. In summary,
our contributions are:
• A method for distilling microtheories from a model, given a QA dataset, that articulates the
model’s core knowledge about the dataset topic. This is the first method to try to distill a model’s
overall understanding of a topic in this way.
• Evaluations that show microtheories can improve both a model’s ability to ground its answers to
verifiable facts in a corpus, and the accuracy of those answers.
• A human evaluation in the medical domain, showing our method distills out topically critical facts
from the general pool.
• A new metric, p-relevance, to quantify the completeness of a microtheory for a dataset.
Together, these suggest that microtheries are an efficient distillation of an LM’s topic-relevant knowl-
edge, that they can usefully augment existing corpora, and can provide both performance gains and
an interpretable, verifiable window into the model’s knowledge of a topic.
2    R ELATED W ORK
The notion of a microtheory - a small, coherent, topical representation of knowledge - arose in
formal logic to help organize a large, logical KB into useful, topical subsets, each sharing the same
underlying assumptions (context) (Lenat et al., 1990; Blair et al., 1992). A logical microtheory


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


aimed to model a specific aspect of reality as a self-contained, logical system, akin to a piece of
“computational clockwork” (Clark et al., 2004). Our work here can be seen as a modern approach
to this, similarly aiming to capture an understanding of a topic but where the units of knowledge are
in NL and reasoning is via textual entailment.
It has long been recognized that LMs contain substantial knowledge, and can even be viewed as a
new kind of “knowledge base” (Petroni et al., 2019; Bosselut et al., 2019). Some work has sought
to materialize some of the model’s factual knowledge either as knowledge graph triples (Alivanistos
et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2022), or NL statements, e.g., BeliefBank (Kassner et al., 2021). Other work
has generated “belief graphs” showing how model-believed facts entail answers (Kassner et al.,
2023; Tafjord et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2022). However, while providing some visibility, these meth-
ods only provide disconnected slices of the model’s latent knowledge, at best related to a single
question. Our work takes this further, aiming to extract a model’s overall understanding of a topic.
One notable manual attempt at a topical, linguistic microtheory is WorldTree, a corpus of several
thousand statements (aiming to) cover all the knowledge required for a syllabus in elementary sci-
ence (Xie et al., 2020), constructed at significant expense. Our goal with microtheories can be seen
as automating such a construction process, and extracting such topical knowledge from language
models directly (we later compare our Mts against WorldTree in §5.1 and §5.2).
More broadly, there has been substantial work in generating explanations with language models, to
help users see the rationale behind a model’s answers (Wiegreffe & Marasovic, 2021; Danilevsky
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022). However, much of this work is again question-centric, and sometimes
lacks a clear definition of whether an explanation adequately “supports” an answer. To more clearly
define the relationship between supporting evidence and an answer, and for linguistic reasoning in
general, there has been a resurgence of interest in textual entailment as a linguistic inference pro-
cess, with numerous, high-quality, multi-step entailment engines becoming available, e.g., SCSearch
(Bostrom et al., 2022), NLProofS (Yang et al., 2022), Entailer (Tafjord et al., 2022), IRGR (Ribeiro
et al., 2022), TreeWise (Weir et al., 2024), and MetGen (Hong et al., 2022). In our work, we leverage
this development to clearly define whether a microtheory supports an answer or not.
Finally, our work is distinct from work on library learning, which seeks to induce generalizations
over data, e.g., (Muggleton, 1991; Wang et al., 2023). Rather, our goal here is to articulate general-
izations that the LM appears to have already formed.
3    A PPROACH
3.1 BACKGROUND : T EXTUAL E NTAILMENT
To make meaningful claims about microtheories, we need a clear definition of what it means for
an answer to follow from a microtheory (or a corpus in general). For this, we use the well-known
notion of textual entailment in NLP: a linguistic inference process that identifies whether one or more
statements “reasonably imply” another (Dagan et al., 2005). Modern entailment engines perform a
soft version of theorem proving by searching for entailment trees, analogous to proof trees, showing
how a query hypothesis H follows from statements in a theory T , where both elements are stated
in NL. Here, H is a sentence (commonly a declarative answer to a question Q), T = [t1 , . . . tn ] is a
corpus of text passages, e.g. sentences or documents, and an entailment tree T is a tree whose root is
H, whose leaves L = [l1 , . . . , ll ] are a subset of texts in T , and whose individual steps have the form
[p1 , . . . pj ] |=Q hk ; j ∈ {1, . . . , |T | − 1}, where |=Q denotes atomic textual entailment given the
context of question Q (|=Q is typically learned from examples). Multiple alternative trees Ti may
be found supporting the same hypothesis H, analogous to finding multiple proofs for a hypothesis
in formal logic. For large T s, the search space can be very big. To handle this, entailment engines
such as IRGR (Ribeiro et al., 2022) or T REE W ISE (Weir et al., 2024) use iterative text retrieval to
look up relevant statements and use them for grounding and decomposing hypotheses.
Definitions: If a tree Ti shows how H is entailed from a set of corpus texts Li , we say H is
grounded in the corpus. We also say the leaf statements Li provide an argumentative basis for
accepting H. If there are multiple trees with different leafsets, we say that L1 , L2 , . . . constitute
alternative bases for supporting H.
3.2 C ONSTRUCTING M ICROTHEORIES
We now describe a method to automatically construct a microtheory, namely a list of model-
generated NL assertions that are “most important” for entailing answers to questions about a given
topic, characterized by a set of training questions. Microtheories are intended to capture the
core knowledge about the topic, and we evaluate different operationalizations of “most important”


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


shortly. First, for a given training set [Q1 , . . . Qd ], we extract from an LM, via prompting, sets of
facts that it would use to support the correct answer to each question (§3.2.1). Then, to reduce redun-
dancies and promote generalizability, we apply a series of optimizations to distill the core kernels of
knowledge by identfying entailment relations (§3.2.2). Finally, we propose (and later evaluate) three
alternative ways of optimizing the microtheory contents given a particular size budget (§3.2.3).
3.2.1    R AW FACT P OOL E XTRACTION
We first prompt an LM to regurgitate facts on a question-by-question basis in order to populate an
initial factpool F. We use a few-shot learning prompt that cues the LM to perform a version of
‘chain-of-thought’ reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) catered towards extracting facts. Each example in
the prompt contains a question Qe , answer options to Qe in the form of hypotheses h1 , . . . hn , a
list of supporting statements for Qe (a question-specific ‘theory’), and a list of entailment steps that
compose a subset of statements into complex inferences that answer the question by supporting the
correct h. Prompting details for this GenFacts() method can be found in §C. As training exam-
ples, we use EntailmentBank (Dalvi et al., 2021), a dataset of science questions paired with lists of
supporting facts that combine into an entailment tree for the correct answers. We define F as:
                                   d
                                   [
                             F=        KeepIfGeneric(GenFacts(Qi , [h1 , . . . , hn ]))                    (1)
                                   1

Because the LLM often generates context-specific sentences via GenFacts() that we wouldn’t want
to keep in our microtheory, e.g. about specific entities in the question (e.g. “the man is running”),
we create a filter (KeepIfGeneric() in (1)) that prompts the LLM to classify each sentence as generic
or context-specific and keeps only the generics.
3.2.2    SBERT AND E NTAILMENT- BASED C ONDENSATION
As fact lists are extracted independently for each question, there is substantial redundancy within the
unified pool. We use a pair of techniques to remove statements and produce condensed pool C ⊆ F:
Soft Deduplication. We identify paraphrases using a Sentence Transformer (SBERT; Reimers
& Gurevych, 2019) trained to maximize the embedding cosine similarity between same-meaning
facts. We perform a linear pass of F and remove every fact fi for which ∃fj ∈ F, j >
i, cos(SBERT(fi ), SBERT(fj )) > t for some threshold t.
Entailment Condensation. We perform a second pass through F to find pairs fi , fj s.t. fi |= fj ,
and remove fj . We use a fine-tuned neural cross-encoder to predict |=. As it would be infeasible to
check all |F|2 pairs of facts, we leverage SBERT to find the most promising candidates. We check
for entailment between any two facts fi , fj iff cos(SBERT(fi ), SBERT(fj )) > u, u < t.2
3.2.3    E NGINE U SAGE - BASED O PTIMIZATION
After removing duplicates and entailments, we still see facts that serve the same functional roles in
many questions but imply slightly different things, e.g. for physics:
    (A) The force required to cause a given acceleration is determined by the mass of an object
    (B) The force acting on an object equals mass times acceleration
While this might be acceptable for a knowledge store with infinite storage, we instead seek a more
concise representation without redundancies. Towards this goal, we consider three alternative ap-
proaches, illustrated in Figure 2, to identify some n most effective statements to retain in the Mt.
We will refer to the resulting sets as n-Mts.3 Under this budget, we would not want to retain both
(A) and (B) in the n-Mt if it meant discarding some (C) that is important to other questions.
1. Top-n Most Used Facts (Mtusage ). We seek the set of facts that best “covers” the argumentative
bases for a given dataset of hypotheses. One intuitive way to choose these facts is to feed them to an
entailment engine and see which ones are used most frequently to explain hypotheses in the dataset.
We refer to this approach as the usage n-Mt. Using questions Q1 . . . Qd and hypotheses h1 . . . hd :
                                                 d
                                               X X
                    n-Mtusage = arg max                 δ(fi ∈ LEAVES(ENGINE(hj , C; Qj )))                (2)
                                M⊆C,|M|=n f ∈M j=1
                                               i


    2
      We use all-mpnet-base-v2 for SBERT(·), sileod/deberta-v3-large-tasksource-nli
for |=, and set t = .9 and u = .3.
    3
      n is a hyperparameter; below, we observe that n represents a trade-off between concision and performance.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               : Water will boil at             : It takes less heat                : Clothes          : Water molecules in the air
                            less than 100°C on              energy to turn water into           dry quicker on        forming dew on grass is an
                             top of a mountain.              gas at high altitudes.               a hot day.           example of condensation.


                                                                         OR                           OR
                                                                                                                                   OR


                      : Water boils                     : Air pressure                    : Evaporation and        : Boiling and evaporation       : Condensation
                   at 100°C at sea                    decreases with                    boiling imply liquid     are the two main forms of      is the opposite of
                        level.                            altitude.                      turning into gas.           liquid vaporization.          evaporation.

                                                                                                                 Distilled Microtheories
                               : The boiling point            : Increasing temperature
                             of water decreases         increases the rate of evaporation
                            at lower air pressure            and approaches boiling.


Figure 2: Comparison of distillation techniques for extracting n-Mts from a larger fact pool C based on their
entailments (Ls of different training hypotheses (hs)). The usage approach prioritizes facts based on the number
of hypotheses for which they are used. This risks keeping facts that serve the same role in explaining the same hs
(e.g., f5 and f5∗ are both kept, even though only one is needed to explain h2 , h3 , and h4 ). The question coverage
(QC) approach maximizes the number of hs for which the n-Mt contains all of a supporting argument’s leaves
(here h2 , h3 , and h4 ). This risks failing to cover some hs at all (e.g. h1 ). Partial coverage (PC) maximizes
the total fraction of the argument covered for all questions (preferring the most covered argument for each h, if
there is more than one). In this example, coverage = .66+1+1+.5 = 3.16 (of a possible 4).
where ENGINE returns a (possibly empty) set of entailment trees proving hj from fact pool C, and
LEAVES refers to the set of all facts used at least once in any of those trees. This objective does not
address the functional redundancy issue for fact pairs such as (A) and (B). If (A) and (B) serve the
same role in entailing hypotheses, then both facts will be used for a similar number of questions; if
one is in the top-n most used facts, the other will likely also be.
2. Maximum Question Coverage (MtQC ). We use an objective function minimizing the facts in
a theory while maximizing the number of train hypotheses “covered.” For each question Qj with
bases Lj = L1j , L2j , . . . (returned by L EAF S ETS), we try to fully cover at least one Lkj for as
many questions as possible using ≤ n facts. We use a linear program described in §A.1.
                                                          d
                                                          X
                 n-MtQC = arg max                                δ(∃Lkj ∈ L EAF S ETS(ENGINE(hj , C; Qj )); Lkj ⊆ M)                                                 (3)
                                 M⊆C,|M|=n j=1

3. Maximum Partial Coverage (MtPC ). Equation (3) poses question coverage as a binary variable:
for each Qi , either an entire basis is kept, or Qi is not covered. We consider a variant that loosens
this constraint, modeling the partial coverage of questions.4 We use an objective function that
maximizes the per-question partial basis coverage (LP described in §A.2). Given each question Qi
associated with bases L1i , L2i , . . . , we try to best cover some L∗ki .
                                                                              d
                                                                              X                                                    |M ∩ Lkj |
                               n-MtPC = arg max                                                   arg max                                                            (4)
                                                      M⊆C,|M|=n j=1 Lkj ∈L EAF S ETS(ENGINE(hj ,C;Qj ))                              |Lkj |

4       E XPERIMENTS : C ONSTRUCTING M ICROTHEORIES
We apply our method to construct microtheories for two domains: ARC (Clark et al., 2018), com-
prising grade-school science questions, and MedQA (Jin et al., 2021), containing USMLE medical
school exam questions. Our goal is to extract generalizable knowledge statements using training
questions that can be readily applied to solve test questions. This requires train/test splits that are
about the same topics. To do this, we create mini-splits of each dataset containing topically similar
questions with 6-900 training questions using a hierarchical topic clustering algorithm we describe
in §B. For ARC, we make a split with 9 topic clusters including “Genetics and Evolution”, “Force,
Mass, Acceleration and Gravity”, and “Plant Growth and Reproduction.” For MedQA, we make
a split with 4 clusters including “The Effects of Smoking on Health” and “Kidney Function and
Disorders.” (See Figure 3 for details).
4.1       M ICROTHERY C ONSTRUCTION D ETAILS
To generate the initial fact pools (§3.2.1), we use GPT-4 (gpt4-0613). For entailment reasoning,
we use T REE W ISE (Weir et al., 2024), a recent, off-the-shelf, search-based SOTA entailment engine
    4
        For 3 questions, it might be better to cover 70%, 70%, & 70% of a basis for each than 100%, 100%, & 0%.


                                                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       ARC
                          ARC            MedQA                       5000
                                                                     1000


                                                           # Facts
    Dataset Details
    # Questions        854/127/249      641/94/186
                                                                      100
    # Topic Clusters        9               4
                                                                       10
    Ext. Corpus         Wikipedia     Wiki+Textbooks
                                                                        1
                                                                                      MedQA
    Training Extraction Results                                      5000
    |F |                                                             1000


                                                           # Facts
                         20,561          16,722
    |C|                   8,722          10,908                       100
    # Qs with Proof     744 (89%)       562 (88%)                      10
    Min #Fs to Cover       800             890                          1
    Fact/Q Ratio          1.08            1.58                              0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
                                                                                 # Questions per Fact
Figure 3: (Upper) Dataset details for the two domains.     Figure 4: Histogram of training question per fact
(Lower) Results of microtheory extraction from training    in C and 650-850 training questions. ARC facts
data. The last two rows result from the “min-fact” LP.     are used more frequently than MedQA.

that contains fine-tuned models to verify individual entailment steps (we use its tuned ChatGPT).
To demonstrate our work is not closed-model dependent, we show MedQA results using Mixtral-
8x22B-Instruct-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2024) in §G. We construct n-Mts for n=25 to 1000 using the
usage, question coverage and partial coverage methods described in §3.2. Details are found in §D.
Figure 3 displays statistics about the number of questions and size of the resulting fact pools created
during extraction. It shows that the redundancy reduction techniques in §3.2.2 remove around 55%
of ARC facts and 25% of MedQA. Figure 4 shows histograms for how frequently each fact in C
was used in the 650-850 questions. In both datasets, a substantial fraction of facts (5000/8000) are
never used in a proof. A few dozen facts from the ARC pool are used in more than 10 questions;
fewer from the MedQA pool are used this frequently, suggesting that MedQA questions target more
diverse pieces of knowledge than ARC, though a handful of MedQA facts are used in ≥30 questions.
To investigate this difference further we implemented a “min-fact” linear program that found the
smallest set of facts that fully covers a basis for every hypothesis the prover was able to ground.
Figure 3 shows that the 744 ARC training questions provable from C required a minimum of 800
facts for “full coverage,” a ratio of 1.08 facts per question, while MedQA required nearly twice
that rate. This highlights that the total amount of knowledge statements required to answer MedQA
questions is substantially higher, which is unsurprising given the domains – grade school- versus
medical school-level topics. We refer readers to §E for illustrations of the fact selection processes
by MtPC and MtQC , examples of microtheory fact lists, and further qualitative analysis.
4.2     C OVERAGE OF T RAINING H YPOTHESES
How well do the usage-based optimization methods cover argumentative bases for the training hy-
potheses? Figure 5 shows the fraction of full and partial coverage by each Mt approach.5 First, as
expected, coverage increases with the size of the Mt. Second, we see that our third optimization
method, partial coverage (PC), performs best here, with MtPC (orange bars) consistently obtaining
a higher coverage than either MtQC or Mtusage (green, blue). Finally, we observe full coverage is
generally lower on MedQA than ARC, suggesting that the MedQA domain contains fewer reusable
principles and more idiosyncratic facts than ARC. We later explore this conjecture further §5.3.
5      E VALUATION
Our goal is that microtheories contain the core, reusable principles that underlie a topic. Note that
a microtheory (or any theory, for that matter) cannot contain all the knowledge required to answer
all topical questions, given that an infinite long-tail of idiosyncratic facts is also required in addition
to core principles. For example, to determine that a dropped pencil (say) will fall to the ground
requires not just general knowledge of gravity, but also the idiosyncratic fact that a pencil is a
denser-than-air object. To supply such facts, we assess our microtheories when combined with a
large, general corpus (Wikipedia and textbooks, see §5.1), treating each source as a flat retrieval
index over knowledge statements. We evaluate along three dimensions:
1. Grounding (§5.1): For the correct answers to the test questions, do microtheories improve the
number of answers that can be fully grounded in the (combined) corpus? If so, this would suggest
   5
     We define fractional coverage of a question Qj as in §3.2.3: the highest fraction of leaves amongst all
argumentative bases Lkj found by the engine for the question.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               ARC Training Coverage Rate (%)                           ARC Grounding Rate (%) of Test Hypotheses
 100                                                      100            n=100       n=500       n=1000             92
                Mtusage       Full Coverage
                                                                   84
                MtQC          Partial Coverage
  75            MtPC                                       75

  50                                                       50

  25                                                       25

      0                                                       0
           10MedQA
                25 Training
                     50 100     200 Rate
                            Coverage 500(%)
                                          1000                     Cp Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC C WT F
 100                 Fact Budget                                        MedQA Grounding Rate (%) of Test Hypotheses

                                                           100            n=100        n=500         n=1000
  75
                                                                   80                                               80
                                                              75
  50
                                                              50
  25
                                                              25
   0
          10     25       50 100 200 500 1000                  0
                                                                   Cp Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F
                          Fact Budget
Figure 5: Rate at which different microtheory ap-        Figure 6: % of test hypotheses fully groundable after
proaches entail training hypotheses. Lighter bars        adding various microtheories (n-sized Random, Usage,
are the sum of fractional coverages for questions        QC, & PC Mts) to a base Corpus. We show the fraction
not fully covered by the Mt. Total coverage for          of leaves grounded in the Mt (solid) and the base cor-
ARC questions is generally higher than MedQA.            pus (striped). We see optimized Mts outperform the
The 1000-MtP C s effectively fully cover the train-      random baseline (Rd), and trends show the tradeoff of
ing hypotheses for which a basis was found in both       conciseness vs. performance. F provides up to +8%
domains; since some hypotheses did not have a ba-        grounding over using just the corpus and exceeds the
sis found, 100% coverage is impossible.                  benefit of adding the handcrafted WorldTree corpus.
that microtheories are supplying important, topical information not necessarily present in the origi-
nal corpus. We also measure what proportion of those groundings are supplied by the microtheory
vs. the original corpus, and the impact of Mt size.
2. Question Answering (§5.2): Using the entailment engine to answer the questions (i.e., selecting
the entailed answer option, or the option with the highest-scoring entailment tree if more than one),
do microtheories improve QA accuracy? If so, this suggests Mts supply important information to
help a downstream task. We evaluate this in our primary (science) domain, ARC.
3. Relevance (§5.3): To complement our empirical evaluations, we also perform a rigorous, (hu-
man) expert evaluation of microtheory statements to assess, from a human perspective, whether they
appear to be critical, core domain principles (rather than idiosyncractic facts).
5.1       G ROUNDING
We first evaluate, for the correct answers to test questions, whether microtheories improve the num-
ber of answers that can be fully grounded by the entailment engine (i.e., can be “proved” via entail-
ment) when added to a base, general corpus. For our primary domain (ARC), we use Wikipedia as
our base corpus, and for MedQA, we use a combination of Wikipedia and the set of medical text-
books released by Jin et al. (2021). These corpora are vastly larger than the size of the microtheories.
Baselines. We compare the n-Mt methods against a baseline that samples n random facts from F.
We also compare against using the entire pool F. For ARC, we also compare against the WorldTree
resource, the version of which we use has 12,657 facts. We also consider using only the WorldTree
facts that its annotators labeled as “core” for at least one question in their dataset (69% of facts).
Test Grounding Results. Figure 6 shows the hypothesis grounding rates when various microthe-
ories are added to the respective base corpora (Wikipedia, MedQA textbooks). A hypothesis is
considered “grounded” if the engine found at least one entailment tree for it rooted fully in the Mt,
corpus, and/or context. Each bar is broken down into the portions of trees grounded to the Mt (solid)
vs. the base corpus (striped).6 In both domains, comparing the first bar (Cp, base corpus only)
and last bar (F, using the full fact pool as a microtheory), we see grounding rates are substantially
   6
       If the prover finds multiple trees, we take the one with the highest fraction of microtheory-rooted leaves.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


higher, suggesting that microtheories can improve the the model’s ability to ground its answers
to verifiable knowledge. This capability is important, as it allows models to show how answers
systematically follow from inspectable sources.
For ARC, the engine grounds up to 8% more hypotheses (92% vs. 84%), and uses facts from F at
a rate of 75% (solid part of the right-hand bar, i.e., 3/4 of the required entailment knowledge comes
from the Mt). In MedQA, the hypotheses are grounded at a similar rate, but 45% of the knowledge
comes from the Mt instead of the corpus. For ARC, we see a clear trend that as microtheory size
(budget) increases, the engine can ground more answers (overall bar heights), and ground to more
of the Mt knowledge (solid bars). For MedQA, the pattern is weaker: while larger Mts provide more
grounding knowledge (solid bars), there is no clear trend in overall grounding rates, suggesting that
in this domain, there may be fewer core, general principles vs. a large number of idiosyncratic facts.
We examine this conjecture further in §5.3.
For ARC, we compare against a notable, manual attempt at a microtheory called WorldTree, a corpus
of several thousand statements (aiming to) cover all the knowledge required for the ARC syllabus
(Xie et al., 2020), constructed at significant expense (Figure 6, bar labeled WT). We see that the
n=1000 Mts result in similar rates of overall grounding and grounding to the Mt yet were built
automatically and are less than 10% the size of WorldTree. Thus, our approach can be seen as
automating this previously expensive process of constructing such resources.
5.2      Q UESTION A NSWERING                                     QA Performance (%) by Theory and Budget
Figure 7 shows the results of running                   85
multiple-choice question answering on the                           n=100      n=500          n=1000
                                                        80
9 ARC topics. For each question, the an-
swer option that the entailment engine can              75
ground in (“prove from”) the corpus is se-
lected, or the option with the highest scor-            70
ing entailment tree is selected if multiple
                                                        65
options are entailed. Using only Wikipedia
as the knowledge source (Corpus, leftmost               60
bar) achieves 69.2% QA accuracy. Adding                          Cp Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC WT F
100 or 500 facts with any approach gener-
                                                       Figure 7: Question Answering performance on ARC topical
ally does not improve on this and can de-              test questions using Wikipedia plus various Mts (Random,
crease it using 100 random facts.7 When                Usage, QC, PC) as knowledge sources. F adds nearly 10%
adding 1000-fact theories, all distillation            over using only the base Corpus of Wikipedia despite be-
methods add 4 points in QA (73%). Adding               ing a tiny fraction of its size. This exceeds the benefits of
the entire fact pool F further improves per-           the handwritten WorldTree corpus. (n=1000)-Mts improve
formance by 5 points (78%). These results              QA by 4%. This suggests that they contain important task
suggest the following:                                 information that is either not in Wikipedia or is hard to find.

• Adding Mts to Wikipedia shows a benefit to QA, despite their being orders of magnitude smaller.
• Mt size correlates with QA accuracy. For the ARC subset considered, one needs to retain at least
500 facts to see a noticeable improvement in QA accuracy.
• The question-driven Mt extraction method can provide performance gains on par with a clean,
hand-annotated corpus (WorldTree)
• When extracting core facts from F, the choice of optimization method doesn’t have a noticeable
effect on QA, though each method outperforms random selection.
5.3      R ELEVANCE
Finally, to complement our empirical investigation, we perform two subjective assessments of the
contents of the microtheories, the first using (expert) human experts and the second using an LLM-
as-judge. This provides an orthogonal evaluation of whether our microtheory-building process is
indeed extracting the more important, central facts about the topic. We are particularly interested
in whether, and by how much, our microtheory condensation and optimization methods (§3.2.3) are
selecting important facts from the general fact pool F.



   7
       This decrease results from the irrelevant facts distracting the entailment search, hurting the grounding rate.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3.1    E XPERT R ELEVANCE A NNOTATIONS
First, we collect human judgments of the relevance of Mt facts. We use the MedQA medi-
cal domain due to easy access to domain experts. We asked experts how useful they would
find the Mt facts when studying for and taking USMLE tests. We recruited two senior med-
ical students to annotate the general relevance of facts from different MedQA microtheories.
We worked with the annotators to develop a 5-              Average MedQA Fact Relevance by Budget
point rubric for scoring how essential a fact is
                                                      5.0
to the core content that appears on the USMLE.                          Mtrandom       Mtusage      MtPC
Annotation details and the full rubric are in §J.     4.5
Average relevance ratings are shown in Figure 8.
Both optimization approaches outperform a ran-        4.0
dom baseline by at least half a grade point; MtPC
is 0.6-1.2 higher, and never drops below a score      3.5
of 4. (The annotation rubric score defines a score
of 4 as containing relevant exam content, though      3.0
either too general or unspecific to sufficiently
                                                             10    25     50 100 200 500 1000
answer an exam question.) In contrast, a ran-
                                                                              Budget
domly selected fact from the full pool frequently
scores below 3.5, often containing context or       Figure  8:  Average  expert-annotated    task relevance
background information less directly useful for     score for microtheory facts. PC facts are  more relevant
                                                    than random and usage until the 1000-fact budget.
answering exam questions. This suggests that
the Mt extraction methods successfully distill out the most topically relevant facts from the general
knowledge pool, successfully selecting the information most likely to support exam performance.
5.3.2    AUTOMATIC P ER -Q UESTION R ELEVANCE
As well as evaluating the Mt as a whole, we also explore whether Mts are relevant on a per-question
basis, to see how often the Mt has something useful to contribute when answering a new question.
We ran a study to assess this, using an LLM as a judge. Although necessarily approximate using
an LLM as the scorer, it provides further insights into our Mts. First, we say a Mt is relevant if it
contains at least one fact that is relevant for getting the question right, i.e., differentiating the correct
answer from any incorrect options. To determine if a fact is relevant, we use an existing scoring
rubric developed by Jansen et al. (2021) for rating a fact’s relevance to a question on a 0-5 scale,
and here ask gpt-4o-2024-08-06 to make that judgment (see §K for the rubric and the full
prompt). We then measure the rate at which at least one 5-rated fact is in the Mt.8 This provides a
soft indicator that the Mt contains information that would be core to a basis for the correct answer.
Figure 9 shows the change in per-question relevance rate as we increase n for MtPC . Our main
observations are that MtPC is substantially more relevant than Mtrandom (see Figure 23 for other
methods) and that the ARC Mts contain 5/5 relevant facts at a much higher rate than MedQA.
For example, the 100-MtPC obtains a 72.3% relevance rate for ARC, while for MedQA, this rate
drops to 30.1%. Similarly, the 1000-MtPC has around 90% relevance for ARC but only 70%
for MedQA. Even looking at the entire fact pool F , it is only 93% relevant for MedQA (right-
hand bar in Figure 9), while nearly 100% relevant for ARC. This suggests that it is easier to find
highly reusable, general principles in ARC’s domain (science), e.g., basic laws of electricity, than
in MedQA (medicine). Discussions with our medical experts reinforce this: while there are also
general principles in medicine, e.g., “The body strives to maintain a stable internal environment,”
these are fewer and far between, and the USMLE questions instead often probe a student’s long-tail
knowledge of highly specific medical facts (e.g., symptoms of Hippel-Lindau disease). This sug-
gests that some domains may be more amenable to distilling into microthoeries than others, and
explains the more limited gains seen earlier with MedQA compared with ARC.
6    H OW C OMPLETE ARE M ICROTHEORIES ?
How many training questions do we need to construct a “complete” microtheory? This is an impor-
tant, practical concern for anyone wanting to extract microtheories for a new domain. In one sense,
a microtheory is never complete, as there will always be topical questions that touch areas uncov-
ered in training. However, we can make progress on this question in a different way. First, given a
   8
     For practical reasons, we only assess the top 270 facts retrieved from the Mt by the entailment engine (for
Mts larger than 270). The engine uses an SBERT retrieval encoder fine-tuned on science QA support facts.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Per-Question Relevance (%) by Budget
100                                                                       # Questions Required for p-Relevance
              Mtrandom                ARC
 75           MtPC                                                       100 p = 90
              F                                                                                                           ARC
 50                                                                       80
                                                                                                                          Social IQa
 25                                                                      60                                               MedQA


                                                                     p
    0                                                                    40
             50          100    200         500     1000    20561
                                                                         20


                                                                                                     1657



                                                                                                               8953
100


                                                                                                     940
              Mtrandom             MedQA
 75           MtPC                                                        0
              F                                                               10         100      1000       10000
 50
                                                                                      # Training Questions
 25
                                                       Figure 10: Number of training questions (x-axis)
    0
        50      100    200        500   1000  16722
                                                       needed to create an F that is relevant to test questions
                         Fact Budget                   p% of the time (y-axis). While datasets like ARC and
Figure 9: Per-question relevance rate for n-MTPC s for Social IQa (Sap et al., 2019) need 900-1600 questions
varying ns. The rate is much higher in the ARC do- for 90-relevance, but MedQA needs far more (8900).
main than MedQA; at 1000 facts, the Mt is at all rele-
vant to only 2/3 of MedQA questions but 90% of ARC.
distribution over topical questions, we say that a microtheory is relevant to a question if it contains
at least one fact that is core to the (correct) answer according to the method described in §5.3.2. We
then say a microtheory is partially (p = e.g., 90%) complete if it is relevant to an arbitrary sampled
question with probability p. Finally, we can predict this p-relevance by generating and extrapolat-
ing from microtheory learning curves such as in Figure 10.9 For example, to obtain an Mt with a
p-relevance of 90%, we will likely need 940 training questions for ARC, but 8953 training questions
for MedQA.10 Conversely, given a training set of size n, we can predict the likely p-relevance of
the Mt from the curve. Thus we would expect 100 questions to provide enough knowledge to be
(p=60)-relevant for ARC but only 30-relevant for MedQA.
p-relevance gives practitioners a way of predicting whether Mts will be helpful for their new dataset:
determining how much data they would need to collect for a new domain for the Mt to be fre-
quently useful for the topic. If this number is too high, then Mts might not be a viable solution
for the domain – this is likely the case for many datasets for which there is less of a shared body
of knowledge that is reapplied to many questions, e.g. HotPotQA (Yang et al., 2018) and Natural
Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), where each question asks about a unique Wikipedia factoid.
The number of training questions also has a large effect on the amount of compute used to construct
a microtheory, since calling the entailment engine to collect usage statistics and distill the most gen-
eralizable facts requires many LLM calls per question. The smaller the training set necessary to
obtain high p values, the less LLM calls; running the engine on 8953 MedQA questions to obtain
90-relevance would be making 100,000s of LLM calls. Future work might explore which kinds of
QA datasets are realistically conducive to Mts.
7           C ONCLUSION
While LLMs have strong reasoning abilities, it is often unclear how their beliefs recurringly interact
to answer questions on a topic, a significant barrier for understanding and deploying models. To
address this, we have presented a method for materializing a model’s latent, topical knowledge into
a microtheory, a linguistic analog of logical microtheories, articulating the model’s core, reusable
knowledge about the topic. In contrast to explanation methods that show snippets of knowledge
supporting individual answers, ours is the first method that attempts to distill a model’s overall un-
derstanding of a topic. Our evaluations suggest that, when added to a general corpus, microtheories
can significantly improve a model’s ability to ground its answers, i.e., show how they are systemat-
ically entailed by corpus documents, as well as improving the accuracy of those grounded answers.
In addition, human and LLM-as-judge assessments of the microtheories suggest they contain a high
proportion of critical, topical facts, and that our construction process successfully identifies many of
those important facts from a general pool. Together, these suggest that microtheries are an efficient
distillation of model’s topic-relevant knowledge, and can provide both performance gains and, for
the first time, an interpretable window into a model’s topical knowledge.

                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                              Vmax ·x
      We fit (R2 = 1.00) a modified Hill equation with an additional scaling parameter: y = K
        9
                                                                                               n +xn · s.
   10
      Unlike in Figure 9, we use the original train/test sets here. We compute the per-question relevance of F
prior to any reductions, thus posing an upper bound on the relevance of any Mt distilled from the larger pool.


                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Dimitrios Alivanistos, Selene B’aez Santamar’ia, Michael Cochez, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Emile van
  Krieken, and Thiviyan Thanapalasingam. Prompting as probing: Using language models for
  knowledge base construction. In LM-KBC@ISWC, 2022.

Paul Blair, RV Guha, and Wanda Pratt. Microtheories: An ontological engineer’s guide. Austin, TX:
  MCC Technical Report. CYC-050-92, 1992.

Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chaitanya Malaviya, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
  Yejin Choi. COMET: Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construc-
  tion. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4762–4779, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1470. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1470.

Kaj Bostrom, Zayne Sprague, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Greg Durrett. Natural language deduction
  through search over statement compositions. ArXiv, abs/2201.06028, 2022.

Peter Clark, John Thompson, and Bruce Porter. Knowledge Patterns, pp. 191–207. Springer
  Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. ISBN 978-3-540-24750-0. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-540-24750-0 10. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24750-0_
  10.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The pascal recognising textual entail-
  ment challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges Workshop, 2005. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8587959.

Bhavana Dalvi, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Zhengnan Xie, Hannah Smith, Leighanna Pi-
  patanangkura, and Peter Clark. Explaining answers with entailment trees. In Marie-Francine
  Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7358–7370, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.585. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.585.

Marina Danilevsky, Kun Qian, Ranit Aharonov, Yannis Katsis, Ban Kawas, and Prithviraj Sen.
 A survey of the state of explainable AI for natural language processing. In Kam-Fai Wong,
 Kevin Knight, and Hua Wu (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th International Joint Conference
 on Natural Language Processing, pp. 447–459, Suzhou, China, December 2020. Association
 for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.
 46.

Shibo Hao, Bowen Tan, Kaiwen Tang, Hengzhe Zhang, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Bertnet:
  Harvesting knowledge graphs from pretrained language models. ArXiv, abs/2206.14268, 2022.

Ruixin Hong, Hongming Zhang, Xintong Yu, and Changshui Zhang. Metgen: A module-based
  entailment tree generation framework for answer explanation. ArXiv, abs/2205.02593, 2022.

Peter Jansen, Kelly J. Smith, Dan Moreno, and Huitzilin Ortiz. On the challenges of evaluat-
  ing compositional explanations in multi-hop inference: Relevance, completeness, and expert
  ratings. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 7529–7542, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.596. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.596.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
  ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al.
  Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.

Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What dis-
  ease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.

Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
  and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations.
  In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1266–1279, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
  Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  emnlp-main.82. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.82.

Nora Kassner, Oyvind Tafjord, Hinrich Schütze, and Peter Clark. BeliefBank: Adding memory
  to a pre-trained language model for a systematic notion of belief. In Marie-Francine Moens,
  Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
  ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8849–8861, Online and
  Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.697. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.697.

Nora Kassner, Oyvind Tafjord, Ashish Sabharwal, Kyle Richardson, Hinrich Schuetze, and Pe-
  ter Clark. Language models with rationality. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 14190–14201, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.877. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  emnlp-main.877.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466, 2019. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00276. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1026.

Alice Lai, Yonatan Bisk, and Julia Hockenmaier. Natural language inference from multiple
  premises. In Greg Kondrak and Taro Watanabe (eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
  tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 100–
  109, Taipei, Taiwan, November 2017. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/I17-1011.

Douglas B. Lenat, R. V. Guha, Karen Pittman, Dexter Pratt, and Mary Shepherd. Cyc: toward
  programs with common sense. Commun. ACM, 33(8):30–49, aug 1990. ISSN 0001-0782. doi:
  10.1145/79173.79176. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/79173.79176.

Bernardo Magnini. Book reviews: Recognizing textual entailment: Models and applications by Ido
  Dagan, Dan Roth, mark sammons and fabio massimo zanzotto. Computational Linguistics, 41(1):
  157–159, March 2015. doi: 10.1162/COLI a 00213. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  J15-1008.

Stephen Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. New generation computing, 1991.

Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent
  Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
  ural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
  cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/D19-1250.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
  networks. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th In-
  ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3982–
  3992, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D19-1410. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.

Danilo Neves Ribeiro, Shen Wang, Xiaofei Ma, Rui Dong, Xiaokai Wei, Henry Zhu, Xinchi Chen,
  Zhiheng Huang, Peng Xu, Andrew O. Arnold, and Dan Roth. Entailment tree explanations via
  iterative retrieval-generation reasoner. In NAACL-HLT, 2022.

Stephen E Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline M Hancock-Beaulieu, Mike Gatford,
  et al. Okapi at trec-3. Nist Special Publication Sp, 109:109, 1995.

Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social IQa: Com-
 monsense reasoning about social interactions. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xi-
 aojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
 guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
 (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4463–4473, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
 putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1454. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 D19-1454.

Oyvind Tafjord, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, and Peter Clark. Entailer: Answering questions with faithful
  and truthful chains of reasoning. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2078–2093, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.134. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.emnlp-main.134.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi (Jim)
  Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language
  models. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Nathaniel Weir, Kate Sanders, Orion Weller, Shreya Sharma, Dongwei Jiang, Zhengping Zhang,
  Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Jansen, Peter Clark, et al. Enhancing systematic de-
  compositional natural language inference using informal logic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14798,
  2024.

Sarah Wiegreffe and Ana Marasovic. Teach me to explain: A review of datasets for explainable
  natural language processing. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=ogNcxJn32BZ.

Zhengnan Xie, Sebastian Thiem, Jaycie Martin, Elizabeth Wainwright, Steven Marmorstein, and
  Peter Jansen. WorldTree v2: A corpus of science-domain structured explanations and inference
  patterns supporting multi-hop inference. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache,
  Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Mae-
  gaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 5456–5473, Mar-
  seille, France, May 2020. European Language Resources Association. ISBN 979-10-95546-34-4.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.671.

Kaiyu Yang, Jia Deng, and Danqi Chen. Generating natural language proofs with verifier-guided
  search. ArXiv, abs/2205.12443, 2022.

Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2369–
  2380, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1259. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1259.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     U SAGE O PTIMIZATION D ETAILS
A.1   n-M T QC L INEAR P ROGRAM
We set the objective function to achieve the following goals, ordered by precedence:
       • Maximize the coverage of questions by at least one proof tree.
       • Maximize the number of proof trees covered by the selected facts.
       • Minimize the number of facts included in the new theory.
We define the objective as
                                                              
                                    |C|      d        |Li |
                                   X         X        X
                              min      xi −   ωzi +       ykj                                   (5)
                                      i=1        j=1                k=1

Where xi is a binary variable indicating whether fact i is included in the Mt, ykj is a binary variable
indicating whether basis Lkj for question j is covered by the selected facts, and zj is a binary
variable indicator whether question qj has at least one basis fully covered. We set ω to be sufficiently
high to dwarf the other terms, using them only for breaking ties.
We impose the following constraints:
       • At most n facts are kept.
                                                     |C|
                                                     X
                                                              xi ≤ n                                (6)
                                                     i=1

       • Each Lkj is “covered” iff all its facts are kept.
                                                     |Lkj |
                                                       X
                                            ∀Lkj ,            xi ≥ yj · |Lkj |                      (7)
                                                        i=1

       • Each question is “covered” if at least one of its bases is “covered”
                                                           |Lj |
                                                           X
                                                ∀Lj ,              yj ≥ zk                          (8)
                                                           j=1

A.2   n-M T PC ILP I MPLEMENTATION
We set the objective function to achieve the following goals, ordered by precedence:
       • Maximize the partial coverage of each question by the selected facts.
       • Minimize the number of facts included in the new theory.
We define the objective as
                                                          
                                            |C|      d
                                           X         X
                                      min      xi −   ωpj                                         (9)
                                               i=1            j=1

Where xi is a binary variable indicating whether fact i is included in the Mt, pj is a continuous
variable indicating the maximal partial coverage of question j by the selected facts, and ykj is a
continuous variable indicating the coverage of basis Lkj for question j by the selected facts. zkj
is a binary indicator of whether a given Lkj is the highest coverage of question j attained by the
solution.
We impose the following constraints:
       • At most n facts are kept using Equation 6.
       • Each Lkj is “covered” by the proportion of its facts that are kept.
                                                          1 X
                                      ∀Lkj , ykj =                  xi                             (10)
                                                       |Lkj |
                                                                       i∈Lkj



                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            • Two constraints that enforce pj equals the highest parital coverage for question j using the
              Big M method: The maximal partial coverage of each question is at least as large as the
              coverage of each of its bases.
                                         ∀Lj , pj ≥ ykj − M (1 − zkj ) ∀k                             (11)
              and the maximal partial coverage of each question does not exceed the coverage of each of
              its bases.
                                             ∀Lj , pj ≤ ykj + M zkj ∀k                                (12)
            • Exactly one zkj is active per question.
                                                               |Lj |
                                                               X
                                                      ∀Lj ,            zkj = 1                       (13)
                                                               k=1

B         Q UESTION /T OPIC C LUSTERING A LGORITHM
To create our topic-specific mini-splits of ARC and MedQA, we use a hierarchical clustering al-
gorithm that gathers questions targeting similar knowledge by iteratively prompting an LLM to
‘caption’ questions with core targeted knowledge sentences and then clustering them using SBERT.
Algorithm 1 depicts our implementation of the question clustering algorithm used to extract subsets
of a broader QA dataset that target similar underlying core knowledge. For the embedding cluster-
ing algorithm we use the SentenceTransformer-based community detection algorithm that clusters
sentences greedily according to some minimum cosine similarity threshold, which we set to 0.6.

Algorithm 1 Two-Step Clustering Algorithm for Question Grouping by Core Topic
 1: procedure T WO S TEP C LUSTERING(Q) a Hierarchically clustered questions with topic and hy-
    pertopic labels:
 2:     core f acts = []
 3:     forall qi ∈ Q do
 4:        core f act = LLM.E XTRACT C ORE FACT(qi )
 5:        core f acts += core f act
 6:     end for
 7:     clusters = SBERT.C LUSTER(core f acts)
 8:     topic labels = []
 9:     forall cj ∈ clusters do
10:        topic label = LLM.G ENERATE T OPIC L ABEL(cj )
11:        topic labels += topic label
12:     end for
13:     topic clusters = SBERT.C LUSTER(topic labels)
14:     hypertopic labels = []
15:     forall tck ∈ topic clusters do
16:        hypertopic label = LLM.G ENERATE H YPERTOPIC L ABEL(tck )
17:        hypertopic labels += hypertopic label
18:     end for
19:     Assign topic labels and hypertopic labels to corresponding questions in Q
20:     return Q with hierarchical topic and hypertopic labels


C         FACT E XTRACTION P ROMPTING D ETAILS
The LLM prompt to generate relevant facts for a given Qi is a few-shot learning prompt using
exemplars dynamically retrieved11 from EntailmentBank. Each exemplar’s fact list comprises the
gold WorldTree (Xie et al., 2020) facts from the unstructured explanation graph, and its entailment
tree is the gold entailment tree that uses a subset of the facts. Thus, while Qi might not be in the same
ScienceQA domain as the exemplars, we cue the LM to generate WorldTree-like facts that should
serve similar roles as argumentative bases in entailment trees. We discard the model-generated
entailment tree and take the generated fact list as candidates to be added to the fact pool.
Figure 11 shows an example dynamically constructed in-context learning prompt for fact extraction.
Figure 12 shows an example output from Mixtral-8x22b-Instruct-V0.1 for a MedQA question.
    11
         We use BM25 (Robertson et al., 1995) for retrieval using the question text as the query.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


You are an expert theory generation system that lists facts about a problem area that will help solve a
      reasoning question. Given a question, you generate QUERY statements for each of the possible answers to
      the question. The queries should be complete statements that exactly match the answer choices as closely
       as possible.

Then, you generate a theory comprising simple FACTS about the world. These should be statements that you
      believe to be logical and true about the world that will help you prove the queries. A FACT is either a
      generic statement about the world ("birds can fly") or a specific statement about the context that helps
       support the proof of the query ("Tweety is a bird").

For a QUERY, you generate at least 6 statements.

Once you generate the theory, you show how one of the QUERYs logically follows from the context. The selected
      QUERY corresponds to the answer choice that you believe is correct. You can only choose one QUERY as
      correct.

To show your reasoning, you generate a PROOF of your chosen QUERY hypothesis. Your PROOF is an "entailment
      tree" that composes the FACTS of your theory in order to show how the query is compositionally entailed
      by them. Each step in the tree is a composition of two or more premises into a new conclusion, which
      should be used as a premise in future steps. The last step compositionally proves the hypothesis. When
      you reuse the new conclusion in a later step, you refer to it by its id. Each step is separated by a
      newline.

###
QUESTION: Which of the following actions is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
      sample? (A) heating the sample on a hot plate (B) scratching the sample with a nail (C) hitting the
      sample with a hammer (D) shining a bright light on the sample

QUERIES:
(QUERY A) Heating the sample on a hot plate is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
      sample.
(QUERY B) Scratching the sample with a nail is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
      sample.
(QUERY C) Hitting the sample with a hammer is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
      sample.
(QUERY D) Shining a bright light on the sample is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
       sample.

THEORY:
(FACT 1) a mineral is a kind of material
(FACT 2) hardness is a measure of a mineral ’s ability to resist scratching
(FACT 3) an example of breaking something down is scratching something
(FACT 4) a material that is soft can be broken down by a material that is hard
(FACT 5) testing often requires measuring
(FACT 6) a nail is a kind of object
(FACT 7) hardness is a property of a material / an object and includes ordered values of malleable / rigid
(FACT 8) hardness can be used to identify minerals
(FACT 9) a mineral is a kind of solid / natural material
(FACT 10) nails are often made of iron
(FACT 11) scraping an object may cause small particles to break off of that object
(FACT 12) if a mineral can be scratched by a fingernail then that mineral is soft
(FACT 13) hardness is a kind of physical property
(FACT 14) hardness is an intensive property
(FACT 15) soft is a kind of hardness
(FACT 16) experimentation requires measuring
(FACT 17) an event is a kind of action
(FACT 18) if a material scratches easily then that material has low hardness
(FACT 19) a mineral is a kind of object
(FACT 20) mineral nutrient is a kind of nutrient
(FACT 21) objects are made of materials / substances / matter
(FACT 22) rock is made of minerals
(FACT 23) a process is made of a series of actions
(FACT 24) if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material
(FACT 25) testing / identifying the streak of a mineral requires the powdered form of that mineral

PROOF of Scratching the sample with a nail is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral
      sample.:
(STEP 1) a material that is soft can be broken down by a material that is hard & an example of breaking
      something down is scratching something -> int1: a material that is soft can be scratched by a material
      that is hard
(STEP 2) int1 & a mineral is a kind of material -> int2: if one mineral can scratch another mineral then that
      other mineral is softer than that one mineral
(STEP 3) hardness is a measure of a mineral ’s ability to resist scratching & int2 -> hypothesis: Scratching
      the sample with a nail is most likely part of a test to find the hardness of a mineral sample.

ANSWER: B

###
QUESTION: {question}

QUERIES:
{queries}

THEORY:



Figure 11: TheoryCoT in-context learning prompt for extracting WorldTree-like facts from an LLM for a given
question.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


###
QUESTION: A 47-year-old woman with chronic epigastric pain comes to the physician because of a 1-month history
       of intermittent, loose, foul-smelling stools. She has also had a 6-kg (13-lb) weight loss. She has
      consumed 9-10 alcoholic beverages daily for the past 25 years. Seven years ago, she traveled to Mexico
      on vacation; she has not been outside the large metropolitan area in which she resides since then. She
      appears malnourished. The stool is pale and loose; fecal fat content is elevated. An immunoglobulin A
      serum anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody assay is negative. Further evaluation is most likely to show
       which of the following? (A) Trophozoites on stool microscopy, (B) Pancreatic calcifications, (C)
      Villous atrophy of duodenal mucosa, (D) Positive lactulose breath test

QUERIES:
(QUERY A) Further evaluation is most likely to show trophozoites on stool microscopy.
(QUERY B) Further evaluation is most likely to show pancreatic calcifications.
(QUERY C) Further evaluation is most likely to show villous atrophy of duodenal mucosa.
(QUERY D) Further evaluation is most likely to show a positive lactulose breath test.

THEORY:
(FACT 1) Chronic epigastric pain can be a symptom of various gastrointestinal disorders.
(FACT 2) Intermittent, loose, foul-smelling stools can be a sign of malabsorption.
(FACT 3) Significant weight loss can be a sign of malnutrition or malabsorption.
(FACT 4) Long-term, heavy alcohol consumption can lead to pancreatitis and malabsorption.
(FACT 5) Travel to certain regions can expose individuals to parasites that cause gastrointestinal issues.
(FACT 6) A negative immunoglobulin A serum anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody assay rules out celiac
      disease.
(FACT 7) Malabsorption can lead to elevated fecal fat content.
(FACT 8) Pale and loose stools can be a sign of malabsorption.
(FACT 9) Pancreatic calcifications can be a sign of chronic pancreatitis.
(FACT 10) Villous atrophy of duodenal mucosa can be a sign of celiac disease or other gastrointestinal
      disorders.
(FACT 11) A positive lactulose breath test can indicate small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).

PROOF of Further evaluation is most likely to show pancreatic calcifications.:
(STEP 1) Long-term, heavy alcohol consumption can lead to pancreatitis and malabsorption & Significant weight
      loss can be a sign of malnutrition or malabsorption -> int1: The patient’s long-term, heavy alcohol
      consumption may have led to pancreatitis and malabsorption, causing significant weight loss.
(STEP 2) int1 & Intermittent, loose, foul-smelling stools can be a sign of malabsorption -> int2: The patient’
      s intermittent, loose, foul-smelling stools are likely due to malabsorption caused by pancreatitis.
(STEP 3) int2 & Pancreatic calcifications can be a sign of chronic pancreatitis -> hypothesis: Further
      evaluation is most likely to show pancreatic calcifications.



Figure 12: Example TheoryCoT output for a MedQA question. The generated proof steps are thrown out and
the generic facts are added to the fact pool F. Context-specific facts are discarded.
D         E NTAILMENT E NGINE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
To collect training proofs, we explore up to depth 2 for ARC hypotheses (these are easier to prove)
and up to 40 expansions for MedQA.
D.1 R ETAINING I NFERENCES
When collecting the bases Lij , we want the entailment engine to best identify which facts are most
commonly reused across questions. Since the engine has the potential to miss certain combinations,
we add a mechanism to encourage reusing inferences from earlier training questions Q1 . . . Qi−1
when finding bases for Qi . After each call to ENGINE(hi , C; Qi )), we take all intermediate sub-
hypotheses grounded by the engine to facts in C in the process of proving hi , some Si , and add them
to the fact pool for all future questions j > i. Whenever the engine uses any subhypothesis s ∈ Si ,
we replace it with all the ways the engine grounded s using bases in C. E.g., if the engine returns
basis [f1 , s] and s was itself previously grounded by the sets [f2 , f3 ], [f2 , f4 ], we replace [f1 , s] with
[f1 , f2 , f3 ] and [f1 , f2 , f4 ].12
E         Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES AND A NALYSIS
Figure 13 and Figure 14 list the top-10 most frequent facts used for training questions, as well as a
sample of 10 from the long tail of facts used for only one question. We also show which of these
facts are retained in the partial coverage 100-MtP C . The top ARC facts are core pieces of knowledge
very similar to those that appear in the hand-crafted WorldTree corpus; many of the facts in MedQA
are about chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), reflecting that the Smoking topic is the
largest in the training set and that COPD is a common medical condition associated with smoking.
Figure 15 depicts a subgraph of a much larger network of entailments connecting statements in C
to 18 of the training hypotheses. It shows which of these statements were retained by the partial
coverage Mt for their support of multiple related hypotheses. The subgraph illustrates 4 cliques; one
for hypotheses about the gravitational force between opbjects, and 3 about the force, acceleration and
mass of objects in motion. The core statements retained in the Mt are mainly versions of Newton’s
second law of physics, F = m · a and Newton’s Law of universal gravitation. While a singular fact
    12
         To limit combinatorial explosions, we produce a maximum of 1000 bases per question via this “unfolding”.


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Fact                                                                                                                           # Qs    MtPC

   any feature which is determined by genes that can be transmitted from parent to offspring during reproduction is               23      Yes
   considered an inherited trait
   the earth turns on its axis from west to east once every 24 hours                                                              22      Yes
   sedimentary rocks are most often formed by the compaction and cementation of sediment, which is material trans-                20      Yes
   ported and deposited by wind, water, or ice
   the tilt of earth’s axis is the reason for the changing amount of sunlight that each hemisphere receives, which in turn        20      Yes
   is the driver for seasons
   genes are the instructions for physical traits that pass from parents to offspring                                             20      Yes
   Though Earth’s revolution around the Sun does affect the duration of daylight and darkness, the basic existence of             19      Yes
   the two phenomena is due to Earth’s rotation on its axis
   inheriting means receiving genetic information and traits from a parent or parents                                             19      No
   Physical traits of an organism, such as fur color, eye color, and size, can be genetically passed from parents to              19      Yes
   offspring
   The rotation of the Earth regulates the daily cycle of day and night, not the seasonal cycle                                   19      Yes
   the rotation of the Earth on its axis is the movement of the Earth around a central point, once every 24 hours                 18      No

   Whales utilize ocean currents and temperature gradients to guide their migration routes                                         1       No
   Mutations can be caused by various factors such as exposure to radiation, certain chemicals, or errors during DNA               1       No
   replication
   a tree requires sunlight to grow                                                                                                1       No
   lava beds are igneous rock, formed from cooled lava                                                                             1       No
   wilting is a survival mechanism, limiting water loss by reducing the surface area exposed to the sun                            1       No
   Mendel’s experiments with pea plants were focused on heredity                                                                   1       No


Figure 13: Top-10 most used and random 10 least used (at least once) facts in the ARC microtheory. The
rightmost column depicts whether the fact is retained in the “partial coverage” microtheory (MtPC ) that reduces
redundancy while maximizing training coverage.
    Fact                                                                                                              # Questions        MtPC

    The severe smoker with an estimated 40 pack-year history has a high risk for chronic obstructive pul-                    45          Yes
    monary disease (COPD) and lung cancer
    The man’s history of long-term smoking puts him at increased risk for cardiovascular and lung diseases,                  34          Yes
    including pulmonary embolism
    a heavy smoker with a 25-pack-years history is at a high risk for lung diseases                                          32          No
    Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is generally seen with a history of smoking and presents                    31          Yes
    with symptoms such as shortness of breath, progressive dyspnea, cough, and sputum production
    a 50 pack-year smoking history contributes to a multitude of health risks, including lung cancer                         27          No
    findings such as blood and protein in the urine, as well as high serum urea nitrogen and creatinine levels,              25          Yes
    indicate kidney damage
    A 40 pack-year smoking history, hypertension and diabetes make one more likely to have COPD                              25          No
    a man with a 50 pack-year smoking history has a very high risk of developing health issues related to                    25          No
    smoking
    long-term exposure to lung irritants, particularly tobacco smoke, is the primary risk factor for developing              24          No
    chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
    A patient’s history of smoking cigarettes daily for 25 years can have a significant impact on their respira-             22          No
    tory function, leading to problems such as shortness of breath, especially after a surgical procedure

    A rapidly enlarging scalp lesion in a child, especially if blanching with pressure, is suggestive of a vascular          1           No
    lesion such as a strawberry hemangioma
    losing a job due to issues such as tardiness is likely due to some negative circumstance impacting the                   1           No
    individual’s life, such as alcohol abuse
    Bloody diarrhea can be a symptom of amoebic dysentery caused by amoebic infection                                        1           No
    fever is a common symptom in vasculitis because of the inflammation                                                      1           No
    Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is characterized by cognitive changes, gait problems, and urinary incon-                   1           No
    tinence
    Blood pressure of 197/124 mm Hg is considered dangerously high and needs to be lowered immediately                       1           No
    Creatinine phosphokinase is an enzyme found in the heart, brain, skeletal muscle and other tissues, its                  1           No
    levels increase when muscle or heart cells are injured
    the liver breaks down bilirubin so it can be removed from the body in the stool                                          1           No
    Smoking and unprotected sex increase the risk of various infections, including urinary tract infections                  1           No
    Regular kneeling can put excessive pressure on prepatellar bursa, potentially causing inflammation and                   1           No
    pain


Figure 14: Top-10 most used and random 10 least used (at least once) facts in the MedQA microtheory. The
rightmost column depicts whether the fact is retained in the “partial coverage” microtheory (MtPC ) that reduces
redundancy while maximizing training coverage.
describing the law might theoretically serve the same purpose in proving all these hypotheses, We



                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


observe that the entailment engine prefers to use separate facts representing different interpretations
of the law (e.g. how to calculate net force, vs how to calculate the force required to move an object).
This may also be a result of imposing a depth-2 limit of the training proof search. It would perhaps
require more “legwork” by the entailment engine to construct a chain of more than 2 entailments
from a single statement, e.g. just ‘force equals mass times acceleration,’ to each hypothesis.


                                                                                                 Moving the objects to one
      gravity affects objects                                                                    meter apart will increase
         in multiple ways
      depending on their state
                                        Gravitational force                                        the gravitational force
     of motion their mass and
                                      depends on the distance                                     between the two objects
                                       between two objects
     their distance from other                                                                   that are two meters apart
               masses
                                                                                                     The force of gravity does
                                                                     A school bus is heavier         not depend on the density           an object exerts
                                                                       than a skateboard a                                              gravitational force
                                                                       bowling ball and a
                                                                                                      or volume of the object                                                                      The gravitational force
                                                                                                          but on the mass
                                                                           refrigerator                                                   the amount of
                                                                                                                                                                                                    exerted by an object
                                                                                                                                        gravitational force                                         depends on its mass
                                                                     In an idealized scenario                                         depends on the mass of
                                                                     where objects are equal           The force of gravity                 the object
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      as the mass of a planet        Planets possess and can
                                                                      distant the object with          between two objects
                                                                      the greatest mass will         increases as the mass of                                         When placed at equal                                            increases the gravity of            be affected by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        that planet increases          gravitational forces
                                                                         have the greatest           the objects increases and                                         distances apart the
                                     the force of gravity                gravitational pull          decreases as the distance
                                                                                                                                                                      greatest gravitational
                                     between two objects
                                                                                                        between the objects                                                                                                                                            To reduce the
                                                                                                             increases             Doubling the distance                attraction will be
                                   increases as the mass of
                                                                       The force of gravity                                                                                                                                                                           gravitational pull
                                                                       between two objects
                                                                                                                                  between two objects and           between two school buses
                                  the objects increases and          decreases as the distance       the mass of a school bus
                                                                                                                                                                                                        gravitational pull                                        between two objects that
                                                                       between the objects              is more than that of a     halving their mass will                                             decreases as distance                                        are at rest and are 10
                                  decreases as the distance                                                                                                                                                  increases
                                                                             increases                 skateboard refrigerator    reduce the gravitational                                                                                                        meter apart they should
                                     between the objects                                                   or bowling ball        force between them the                Two objects are at rest       the objects are currently                                  be moved 15 meters apart
                                           increases                Less mass means a weaker                                                                                                                                                                                                      The magnitude of the
                                                                        gravitational force          In this specific scenario
                                                                                                                                            most                        and are 10 meter apart             10 meter apart
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Distances in space can        gravitational force
                                                                                                     the distance between the
                                                                                                          objects is equal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     affect the forces between     between two planets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               objects
                                                                                                        therefore the mass
                                                                                                                                                                          the strength of this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 depends on the distance
                                                                  mass is a fundamental              determines gravitational                                                                                                                                                                      between the planets
                                                                                                              attraction                                               force is dependent on the
                                                                 property of matter which                                                                               mass of the objects and
                                                                   affects gravitational                                                                                   the distance apart                                     Mass and distance apart
                                                                   attraction and inertia                                                                                                                                         are the two factors that
                                                                                                                                                                       gravity is a fundamental                                        determine the
                                                                                                                                                                         force that all objects
                                                                        Size mass and the                                                                                with mass influence                                      gravitational attraction
                                                                       distance from the sun          More mass and more                                                                                                           between two objects
                                                                      determines the planet's         acceleration results in                                           greater mass requires
                                                                      gravitational attraction             more force                 the mass of an object             more force to achieve a                                                                   The mass would most
                                                                                                                                          influences its                  given acceleration                                                                      affect the acceleration
                                                                                                                                           acceleration                                                 the characteristic in                                           of an object
                                                                                                                                                                                                        question is 'affecting
                                                                 The amount of friction is               mass affects the                                                                                   acceleration'
        Without the precise                                      an additional information            gravitational attraction
                                                                                                                                       the characteristic in    Distance from the Sun and
                                                                                                                                         question is mass
          friction value the                                        needed to precisely
                                                                                                       between two objects                                           mass are the two
     acceleration measurement
                                                                   calculate the block's                                                                            characteristics that
         will not accurately                                                                          distance from the Sun
      reflect the force applied                                            mass                       affects the gravitational                                       affect a planet's
             on the object                                                                             attraction between the                                     gravitational attraction
                                      A 20-N force acts on a          Here force (F) is 20-N
                                                                                                          Sun and a planet                                               to the Sun
                                        5-kg object at rest            and mass (m) is 5-kg                                                                                                                                           Gravitational force is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         force that can be
     Net force can be                                                                                                                                                                                                                  affected by distance
                                                                       In a force equation
    calculated using the                                             (F=ma) if the force and                                      On a frictionless surface
                                                                                                     Changing the force will
 formula F=ma where F is                                                 mass are known              proportionally change the       a 20-N force will
  the force m is the mass                Net force can be
                                                                       acceleration can be            acceleration if the mass    accelerate a 5-kg object
                                                                            calculated
  and a is the acceleration             calculated using the
                                                                                                         remains constant            at rest at 4 m/s^2
                                          formula F=ma                                                                                                          A 20 newton force would
                                                                    when the acting force on        A net force of 10 newtons
                                                                    an object is constant the                                                                      cause this object to
                                                                                                    causes an acceleration of
     An object accelerates at
                                       When a force of 10           mass and the acceleration          3 meters per second                                        accelerate at 6 meters
                                     newtons (F) is applied to            are inversely
      3 meters per second^2
                                      an object it accelerates       proportional when the
                                                                                                      squared according to                                            per second^2
      when a 10-newton (N)                                                                            Newton's second law
                                      at 3 meters per second           mass increases the
       force is applied to it
                                            squared (a)              acceleration decreases
                                                                         and vice versa           The rate of acceleration
 the second law of motion             an object is under the                                            of an object is
    states that the force              influence of forces
                                                                                                 determined by the mass of
   acting on an object is                                                                         the object and the forces
  equal to the mass of that                                                                          acting on the object
       object times its                                              A 1500 kg car increases
                                                                      its speed by 2 m/s for
        acceleration                                                  each second of travel
                                                                                                     The net force acting on
                                                                                                     an object is equal to its
                                                                                                         mass times its
                                                                     force equals mass times          acceleration (F=ma)                                           The net force acting on
                                                                            acceleration                                                                               the car is 3000 N
         4 times increase
      indicates multiplication                                                                        The mass of the car is
                by 4                                               If the force on the                    1500 kg and its
                                                                                                      acceleration is 2 m/s^2     The cart will accelerate
                                                                  object were increased
                                                                                                                                  at a speed of 125 m/s^2
                                                                      four times the
                                                                                                                                   until the student stops
                                                                   acceleration would
                                                                                                                                     applying the force
       A student pushes a                                            increase 4 times
    shopping cart filled with                                                                      Increasing the mass of
                                      the mass of the cart is
     groceries The cart has a                 12 kg                                              the box would most likely
    mass of 12 kilograms (kg)                                                                     require additional force
     The student pushes the                                          the force applied on the
      cart with a force of 15                                               cart is 15 N             to produce the same
           newtons (N)                                                                                      results
                                                                    Vehicles with larger mass
                                                                     require greater force to        The car and the truck are
                                                                               stop                   travelling at the same
                                       When the mass of an                                                     speed
                                          object increases it
                                     becomes harder to change
                                                                                                                                                                                                   The statement that best
                                                                      A car and a truck are          A car has less mass than
                                       its speed and direction        traveling at the same                                          A truck is more massive                                         explains why the car
                                                                                                              a truck
                                                                        rate of speed The                                                   than a car                                                 stops in a shorter
 Greater force is required                An object's mass           vehicles approach a stop                                                                                                      distance than the truck
                                     irrespective of speed can                 sign                                                    Objects with a larger
   to stop an object with               affect the amount of                                                                                                                                        is that the truck has a
                                                                                                                                       mass require greater
  greater mass given that             force needed to change         a car has a smaller mass                                              force to stop                                            larger mass requiring
   the speed is the same                its speed or direction              than a truck             The speed doesn't affect                                                                         more force to stop
                                                                                                       the amount of force
                                                                                                     needed to stop an object


Figure 15: Subgraph showing some of the statements from the 200-MtPC ARC microtheory ( orange ) and
their influence on proving training hypotheses ( green ) in different question contexts ( yellow ). The partial
coverage (PC) algorithm selects facts from C that provide coverage for multiple questions. Facts from C that
are specific to only one or two questions ( maroon ) are not selected. Each dot (·) represents an entailment;
inferences ( grey and green ) can be supported by alternative entailments in the form of multiple entering
edges. In this instance, the PC algorithm shows to retain 5 facts mostly related to Newton’s second law, which
is core to multiple subtopics in grade school physics tests (motion, friction, gravitational attraction). Only the
 orange nodes are retained in the microtheory for test time inference; all other statements are discarded.


Figure 16 shows a similar subgraph for the MedQA microtheory, this time illustrating the facts
retained by the full question coverage 100-MtQC . Hypotheses are fully thus grounded to Mt state-
ments and the context passages of their respective questions. This graph also illustrates the effect of
retaining inferences during the serial computation of the Lkj leaf sets.


                                                                                                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                A 12-year-old boy                                                                                                                             RBC casts would be the
                                                             presents to your office                                                                                                                           additional finding you
                                                            with facial swelling and                                                                The patient's urinalysis                                   would expect to see on        The patient has a high
                                                              dark urine He has no                                                                shows 12-15 RBC/hpf which                                        the urinalysis            blood glucose level and
                                                             other complaints other                                                                  could indicate bleeding                                                                    hemoglobin A1c
                                                               than a sore throat 3                                                                      in the kidneys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                A 56-year-old African
                                                            weeks ago that resolved                                                                                                                          American woman comes to          Further evaluation of
                                                                after 6 days He is                                                                  The patient's urinalysis                                  the physician because of         this patient is most
                                                             otherwise healthy lives      The patient's urinalysis                                shows RBC casts which are                                      frequent urination For     likely to show red blood
                                                            at home with his mother       shows 12-15 RBC/hpf                                         a specific sign of                                      the past year she has had              cell casts
                                                            and 2 cats has no recent                                                                 glomerular damage                                        to urinate multiple times                                                                The most likely cause of
                                                             history of travel and no                                                                                           The presence of red blood                                                                                                    this patient's
                                                                                                                                                                                  cell casts in the urine     every hour She has been
                                                           sick contacts On physical                                                                                                                              thirstier and hungrier                                                                proteinuria is increased
                                                                 examination his                                                                                                 is a sign of glomerular                                                                                                 glomerular filtration
                                                                                                                                                                                          injury                 than usual She has not
                                                               temperature is 99°F                                                                  Heavy proteinuria is a                                          had any pain with
                                                           (372°C) blood pressure is                                                              sign of kidney damage and                                   urination She has no time    Diabetes can cause damage
                                                             130/85 mmHg pulse is                                                                                                                                                                                           Diabetes mellitus can
                                                                                                                                                       can be caused by                                         to exercise because she     to the glomeruli leading
                                                             80/min respirations are                                                                                                                                                                                         cause damage to the
                                                                                                                                                      conditions such as                                        works as an accountant       to increased glomerular
                                                          19/min and pulse oximetry                                                                                                                                                                                        kidneys leading to these
                                                                                                                                                       diabetes mellitus                                       Her diet mostly consists            filtration and
                                                               is 99% on room air                                                                                                                                                                                               elevated levels                                        The most likely
                                                                                                                                                     amyloidosis or severe                                              of pizza and                 proteinuria
                                                              Cardiopulmonary and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   underlying cause of this
                                                                                                                                                         hypertension                                          cheeseburgers Her vital
                                                            abdominal examinations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   patient's symptoms is
                                                                                         The presence of RBCs in                                                                                               signs are within normal
                                                          are unremarkable There is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Diabetes mellitus
                                                                                           urine can be a sign of                                  Severe hypertension can                                            limits Physical                                      The patient's laboratory
                                                               mild periorbital and                                                                                                                              examination shows no
                                                                                          bleeding in the kidneys                                    cause damage to the                                                                        A urea nitrogen              studies show elevated
                                                            pedal edema Urinalysis                                                                                                                             abnormalities Today her
                                                                                                                                                    kidneys leading to high                                                                concentration of 42 mg/dL           urea nitrogen and
                                                          shows 12-15 RBC/hpf 2-5                                                                                                                                blood glucose level is
                                                                                                                                                       urea nitrogen and                                                                        and a creatinine            creatinine levels which
                                                            WBC/hpf and 30 mg/dL        RBC casts are formed when                                                                                                  200 mg/dL and her
                                                                                                                                                     creatinine levels and                                                                 concentration of 23 mg/dL       indicate kidney damage
                                                                      protein            RBCs leak into the urine                                                                                              hemoglobin A1c is 74%
                                                                                                                                                          proteinuria                                                                        are both elevated and
                                                                                         from damaged glomeruli                                                                                                     Urinalysis shows        indicate kidney damage
                                                         The presence of RBC casts                                                                                                                                  microalbuminuria                                         The patient's elevated
                                                            in the urine indicates        The patient's urinalysis                                 Severe hypertension can            The patient's                                                                         levels of creatinine and
                                                                                                                                                      cause damage to the         hypertension could be                                      Decreased urine output       blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
                                                             that the bleeding is           shows RBC casts
                                                                                                                                                   kidneys over time leading      causing damage to the                                      increased creatinine and           in the blood are
                                                          coming from the kidney
                                                                                                                                                     to symptoms such as                 kidneys                                               decreased creatinine           indicative of kidney
                                                                                                                                                    fatigue decreased urine                                                                   clearance are signs of                 damage
                                                         RBC casts are formed when                                                                   output and proteinuria                                                                       kidney injury
                                                          RBCs leak into the urine                                                                                              Kidney damage can cause
                                                          from damaged glomeruli                                                                                                       proteinuria                                                                        Acute tubular necrosis is
                                                                                                                                                    Proteinuria is a marker                                                                Symptoms of Acute tubular      characterized by oliguria
                                                           suggesting the presence
                                                                                                                                                    of kidney damage and a                                                                  necrosis include oliguria        anuria and elevated
                                                            of glomerular disease                                                                                                These are indicative of
                                                                                                                                                          risk factor for                                                                    (decreased urine output)      levels of creatinine and
                                                                                                                                                     cardiovascular disease             diabetes                                             anuria (no urine output)        urea nitrogen in the                                                                                           Muddy brown casts are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The patient's symptoms of
                                                          The presence of blood in                                                                                                                                                            and elevated levels of                blood                                                                                                   most likely associated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    decreased urinary output
                                                           urine with dysmorphic                                                                                                   The patient's high                                       creatinine and blood urea                                                                                                                         with this patient's
                                                                                                                                                   Proteinuria can be caused                                                                                                                                                         low urine output despite
                                                           features and RBC casts                                                                                               hemoglobin A1c indicates                                      nitrogen (BUN) in the                                                                                                                               condition
                                                                                                                                                       by various kidney                                                                                                   Elevated creatinine and                                        aggressive fluid      The patient's symptoms
                                                            suggests a glomerular                                                                                                  poorly controlled                                                  blood
                                                                                                                                                       diseases including                                                                                                 BUN levels are common in                                       resuscitation and        and laboratory results
                                                                    disease                                                                                                             diabetes
                                                                                                                                                    glomerulonephritis focal                                                                                               Acute tubular necrosis                                        elevated levels of     are consistent with Acute
                                                                                             The patient's urine                                                                                                                           Two days after undergoing                                                                creatinine and blood urea        tubular necrosis
                                                                                                                      A significant amount of              segmental
                                                                                           microscopy reveals 15
                                                                                                                        red blood cells in the     glomerulosclerosis lipoid        Poorly controlled                                      emergent laparotomy with                                                                   nitrogen (BUN) in the
                              RBC casts are a sign of                                     RBC/HPF indicating the                                                                                                                                                          Acute Tubular Necrosis is
                                                                                                                      urine indicates hematuria   nephrosis and membranous         diabetes can lead to                                      splenectomy for a grade                                                                blood are consistent with
                               glomerular bleeding                                         presence of red blood                                                                                                                                                            often associated with
                                                                                                                                                          nephropathy                kidney damage                                              IV splenic laceration                                                                 Acute tubular necrosis
 Red blood cell casts are                                                                 cells in the urine which                                                                                                                                                         decreased urinary output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sustained in a motor
   a sign of glomerular         Damage to the renal                                        is a sign of hematuria        The patient's urine                                                                                                      vehicle collision a
   bleeding and are not      glomeruli can cause RBCs                                                                 microscopy reveals 15 red   The man's high hemoglobin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            54-year-old man develops
 typically associated with      to leak into the urine                                                                   blood cells per high      A1c indicates that he has
                                                                                            The patient's urine                                                                                                                              decreased urinary output
       kidney stones                                                                                                         power field               poorly controlled
                                                                                          microscopy reveals 45                                                                                                                             His urine output is < 350
                                                                                                                                                      diabetes which is a
                              RBC casts are a specific                                        RBC/hpf without                                                                                                                              mL/day despite aggressive
                                                                                                                                                   common cause of kidney
                             sign of glomerular damage                                      dysmorphic features       The presence of red blood                                                                                                   fluid resuscitation                                                                   The most likely
                                                                                                                                                           damage
                                                                                          indicating the presence       cells in the urine is a                                  The patient's urinalysis     The patient's urinalysis          During the emergent                                                                underlying cause of these
                                                                                          of red blood cells in the       sign of hematuria                                     shows 3+ blood indicating    shows 3+ blood indicating        laparotomy he required                                                               findings is Acute Tubular
                                                                                          urine which is a sign of                                                                significant hematuria             hematuria                   three units of packed                                                                       Necrosis
                                                                                                                                                    Nephrotic syndrome is                                                                       RBCs He has type 2
                                                            Nephrotic syndrome is                hematuria
                                                                                                                                                   characterized by damage                                                                   diabetes mellitus and is
                                                          often caused by damage to                                                                     to the glomeruli                                                                        on an insulin sliding     The patient has decreased
                                                             the glomeruli the tiny        Nephrotic syndrome is                                    resulting in high levels                                                                 scale His vital signs are         urinary output
                                                              blood vessels in the        caused by damage to the                                    of protein in the urine                                                                    within normal limits
                                                           kidneys that filter waste             glomeruli                                         and low levels of serum                                                                      Physical examination
                                                            and excess fluids from                                                                           albumin                                                                         shows a healing surgical
                                                                   the blood                                                                                                     The patient's laboratory                                       incision in the upper
                                                                                                                                                                                 results show low serum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               abdomen and multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                 albumin and high urine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             large ecchymoses of the
                                                                                                                                                                                          protein                                              superior right and left
                                                                                                                                                   Proteinuria is a symptom
                                                                                                                                                    of nephrotic syndrome                                                                        abdominal wall His
                                                                                                                                                       which is a type of                                                                         hematocrit is 28%
                                                                                                                                                     inflammatory process                                                                           platelet count is
                                                                                                                                                                                 The patient's laboratory                                       400000/mm3 serum
                                                                                           These findings are                                                                   findings show proteinuria
                                                                                         consistent with nephrotic                                  The patient's symptoms                                                                     creatinine is 39 mg/dL
                                                                                                 syndrome                                           and laboratory findings                                                                  and serum urea nitrogen
                                                                                                                                                       are consistent with      Bloody urine also known                                    concentration is 29 mg/dL
                                                                                                                                                   nephrotic syndrome which       as hematuria can be a       Bloody urine also known        Urinalysis shows brown
                                                                                              The patient has                                                                    sign of various medical        as hematuria can be a                granular casts
                                                                                                proteinuria                                               is a condition
                                                                                                                                                      characterized by high        conditions including        sign of various medical
                                                               The high serum           hypoalbuminemia and edema                                                                urinary tract infections        conditions including
                                                                                                                                                     levels of protein in the                                                                  Prednisolone is a
                                                           cholesterol concentration                                                                 urine and low levels of      kidney stones bladder            kidney diseases          medication used to treat
                                                          (290 mg/dL) is a common          Nephrotic syndrome is                                         serum albumin          cancer or kidney disease                                       inflammatory and
                                                             finding in nephrotic             characterized by                                                                                                                               autoimmune disorders
                                                              syndrome which is                 proteinuria                                                                     Renal cell carcinoma is a                                     specifically reducing
                                                               characterized by         hypoalbuminemia and edema                                  The patient's symptoms
                                                                                                                                                                                  type of kidney cancer       renal cell carcinoma is a        inflammation and
                                                                  proteinuria                                                                       and laboratory findings
                                                                                                                                                                                 that can cause blood in        type of kidney cancer       suppressing the immune
                                                         hypoalbuminemia and edema                                                                   including proteinuria
                                                                                              The patient has                                                                      the urine but it is not    that can cause hematuria              response
                                                                                                                                                   edema and RBC casts in                                                                                                                               The best initial therapy
                                                                                           proteinuria and edema                                       the urinalysis are       typically associated with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for this patient’s
                                                                                             which are signs of                                    consistent with nephrotic        HHT or nosebleeds         renal cell carcinoma is a    The patient's symptoms of                                   condition is Prednisolone
                                                                                            nephrotic syndrome                                             syndrome                                             type of kidney disease      painless swelling in both
                                                                                                                                                                                 The patient is a smoker                                    legs and around his eyes
                                                                                          Nephrotic syndrome is                                                                    which is a risk factor     smoking is a risk factor      as well as his laboratory
                                                                                             characterized by                                                                    for renal cell carcinoma     for renal cell carcinoma       findings of low serum
                                                                                          proteinuria edema and                                    Subepithelial deposits on                                                                   albumin high serum
                                                                                              hyperlipidemia                                         renal biopsy can be a                                                                       triglycerides and         The patient's urinalysis
                                                                                                                                                                                 The patient's symptoms
                                                                                                                                                     sign of membranous                                                                           cholesterol and          shows blood in the urine
                                                                                                                                                                                 and laboratory findings
                                                                                                                                                     nephropathy a kidney                                                                     proteinuria suggest an     which is a common symptom
                                                                                                                                                                                   are consistent with
                                                                                                                                                      disease that can be                                                                     inflammatory process          of renal cell carcinoma
                                                                                                                                                                                   nephrotic syndrome                                                                                                                              The most likely diagnosis
                                                                                                                                                     caused by hepatitis B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The patient's smoking                                   is Renal Cell Carcinoma

                                                                                                                                                   Subepithelial deposits on                                                                                                habit increases his risk
                                                                                                                                                  renal biopsy are a common     Subepithelial deposits on                                     Further evaluation is           for kidney disease
                                                                                                                                                    finding in membranous         renal biopsy can be a                                        most likely to show           including renal cell
                                                                                                                                                     nephropathy a type of        sign of membranous                                        subepithelial deposits on              carcinoma
                                                                                                                                                         kidney disease               nephropathy                                                 renal biopsy


Figure 16: Subgraph showing some of the statements from the 100-MtQC MedQA microtheory ( orange ) and
their influence on proving training hypotheses ( green ) in different question contexts ( yellow ) related to clin-
ical cases. Unlike the PC approach, the question coverage (QC) approach ensures full grounding of each train-
ing hypothesis using facts from the microthery. As MedQA hypotheses often require many entailment hops,
the inference retention mechanism described in §D.1 helps prove hypotheses using inferences ( light orange )
grounded from previous questions, some of which are omitted for space.


F                     R ETRIEVAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
The Wikipedia corpus used in §4 is structured as a flat index (i.e., a very long list) of paragraph
chunks– specifically, the 2021-01- 20 version of Wikipedia with 100 word chunks. For similar-
ity, we split the textbooks into 100 word chunks as well. We retrieve paragraphs using two-phase
retrieval; we use BM25 (Robertson et al., 1995) for first stage retrieval and rerank using Sentence-
Transformer’s ms-marco-MiniLM-L-12-v2 (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019).
When we retrieve facts from both the Microtheory and Wikipedia (or Wikipedia+Textbooks), we
append the sets in that order. When we retrieve from Wikipedia+Textbooks, we interleave the results
one-by-one to give equal precedence to the two sources. These design choices were chosen based
on empirical performance.
G                        M IXTRAL R ESULTS ON M ED QA
To demonstrate our work is not closed-model dependent, this section replicates the MedQA exper-
iments from the paper using Mixtral-8x22B-Instruct-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2024) as the source of the
microtheories instead of GPT-4. Figure 17, Figure 18, Figure 19, and Figure 20 each show Mixtral
results analogous to an experimental result from the main paper using GPT-4. We have commented
on the similarities and differences with the original result in the caption of each figure.
H                        A DDITIONAL FACT U SAGE M ETRICS
In addition to the grounding rate (§5.1), human-annotated relevance rate (§5.3.1), and automated
relevance rate (§5.3.2), this section shows a pair of additional metrics for our considered microthe-
ories: (1) the fraction of all facts in a microtheory used by the entailment engine for at least one


                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                                                                                     ARC
                                                                         5000
                                                                         1000


                                                               # Facts
                                                                          100
           Mixtral-8x22b Results         MedQA                             10
           Dataset Details                                                  1
           # Questions                  641/94/186                                               MedQA
           # Topic Clusters                  4                           5000
                                                                         1000


                                                               # Facts
           Ext. Corpus                Wiki+Textbooks
                                                                          100
           Training Extraction Results                                     10
           |F|                          11,082                              1
           |C|                           8,183                                   0        5     10      15     20
           # Qs with Proof             476 (74%)                                          # Questions per Fact
           Min #Fs to Cover               918
           Fact/Q Ratio                   1.91                 Figure 18: Histogram of training question per
                                                               fact in C and 650 MedQA training questions us-
Figure 17: Results of microtheory extraction from train-       ing Mixtral-8x22b as the underlying LLM. While
ing data using Mixtral-8x22b as the underlying LLM. The        multiple GPT-4 generated facts are used for 25 or
last two rows result from the “min-fact” LP. Compared          more training questions, no Mixtral-generated fact
with GPT-4, Mixtral generates 5000 fewer unique facts          is used more than 22 times.
(11K vs 16K) and finds proofs for 14% fewer questions.
                                                                          Average MedQA Fact Relevance by Budget
            MedQA Grounding Rate (%) of Test Hypotheses
                                                                 5.0
    100         n=100         n=500       n=1000                                            Microtheory Method
           81                                          85        4.5                      Mtrandom     Mtusage       MtPC

     75
                                                                 4.0
     50
                                                                 3.5
     25                                                          3.0
      0                                                          2.5
          Cp Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F                          10       25    50    100 200         500 1000
                                                                                                Budget
Figure 19: % of test hypotheses fully groundable after
                                                               Figure 20: Average expert-annotated task rel-
adding various Mixtral-generated microtheories (n-sized
                                                               evance score for Mixtral-generated microtheory
Random, Usage, QC, & PC Mts) to a base Corpus. We
                                                               facts.
show the fraction of leaves grounded in the Mt (solid) and
the base corpus (striped).
test question, and (2) the average number of test questions for which each fact in the microtheory is
used.
Figure 21 shows the fraction of microtheories used at least once at test time, and Figure 22 shows the
average number of questions for which any single Mt fact is used. In both cases, the Mtusage ,MtQC ,
and MtPC have higher usage than the random sample baseline, while the full fact pool F scores
very low, since most of the facts in the full pool are never used at test time. Expectedly, the Mtusage
approach scores highest on both metrics, given this is what it was optimized for; we sorted facts by
their usage counts at training time (the same metric measured in Figure 22) and took the top-n as the
Mt. We note that this does not directly correlate with Mt quality since, as we discussed in §3.2.3,
sorting only by per-fact usage fails to remove functional redundancies. The test grounding rates in
§5.1 should be considered a more encompassing metric.
I         E XTENDED R ELEVANCE R ATE R ESULTS
Figure 23 shows the rate at which the considered microtheory methods contain 5-rated relevant facts
for the test sets in the topic mini-splits of ARC and MedQA.
J         E XPERT R ELEVANCE A NNOTATION D ETAILS
We sampled 25 facts (fewer when necessary) from Mts with 70 budgets of size ranging from 10
to 1000. We evaluated the Mtusage , MtPC , and Mtrandom approaches. Both annotators rated each fact
independently and then reconciled the (rare) disagreements. We computed agreement metrics across
the full set of 31413 annotated facts, finding a Krippendorff α of .81, Cohen’s κ of .809, and raw
agreement rate of .863.

   13
      This number is not 7 × 3 × 25 because some Mts were smaller than 25 facts, the n-Mtusage s are all supersets
of each other, and many other samples contained high overlap due to the extraction algorithm behavior.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                            ARC Questions per Fact
                                     ARC Fraction Used At Least Once (%)
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                          n=100                   n=500                    n=1000
           1.00            n=100                   n=500                   n=1000
                                                                                                               3
           0.75
                                                                                                               2
           0.50

           0.25                                                                                                1

           0.00                                                                                                0
                          Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F                                                       Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F

                                   MedQA Fraction Used At Least Once (%)                                                                   MedQA Questions per Fact

           1.00                                                                                                1.5         n=100                  n=500                    n=1000
                           n=100                   n=500                   n=1000

           0.75
                                                                                                               1.0
           0.50
                                                                                                               0.5
           0.25

           0.00                                                                                                0.0
                          Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F                                                           Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC Rd Us QC PC F


Figure 21: Fraction of a microtheory used in an entail- Figure 22: Average number of test questions (out of
ment proof for at least one test question (out of 249 249 for ARC, 186 for MedQA) per fact in a microthe-
for ARC, 186 for MedQA). All distillation methods ory. Distilled microtheories are used in more questions
(n-sized Usage, QC, & PC Mts) are used substan- than the random baseline, with the average usage of
tially more frequently than the random sample base- Usage microtheory facts being (expectedly) highest.
line, with the Usage having the highest fraction. The
fraction used for the full raw fact pool F is very 5/5
                                                   low.Relevant 4/5 Relevant


                                                                                        ARC Relevance Rate by Theory
                 1.2
                         n=50                            n=100                          n=200                               n=500                          n=1000                        8722   20561
                                                                                                                                                                                         98.0   99.6
                 1.0                                                                                                                                                90.8          90.4
                                                                                                                                                   86.3    87.6            86.3
                                                                                                                                    79.1
                 0.8                                                                                               75.9
                                                                                72.3                                        73.1
Relevance Rate


                                                                                                                                           70.7
                                                                                                60.6
                                                 56.6                                                   56.6
                 0.6
                                                                 48.6                   47.0
                                 43.8                                    43.0
                                          36.1
                 0.4                                     33.7

                         21.3
                 0.2


                 0.0
                       Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage       MtQC    MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC    C      F
                                                                                                          Theory
                                                                                                5/5 Relevant               4/5 Relevant


                                                                                       MedQA Relevance Rate by Theory
                        n=50                            n=100                          n=200                               n=500                          n=1000                         8183   11082
                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         86.6   84.9

                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                  67.7
Relevance Rate


                                                                                                                                    59.1                            61.3
                                                                                                                                                   57.5    58.1            56.5
                 0.6
                                                                                                                                           46.8
                                                                                                                   43.5     43.0
                                                                                                39.2
                 0.4
                                                                         28.5                           30.1
                                                                 25.8           24.7    25.3
                                 20.4     18.8   20.4
                 0.2                                     14.0

                         3.2

                 0.0
                       Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage       MtQC    MtPC Mtrandom Mtusage   MtQC   MtPC    C      F
                                                                                                          Theory


Figure 23: Rate (%) of microtheories containing at least one fact with 5/5 and 4/5 relevance as determined by
GPT-4o. Numbers above each bar are the percentage of 5’s.
K                         AUTOMATIC R ELEVANCE A NNOTATION D ETAILS
The prompt used for scoring the relevance of facts to a given question is shown in Figure 26. The
original rubric by Jansen et al. (2021) contains 4 ordinal scores; we added a 5th to differentiate
between facts relevant to ruling out incorrect options (4) vs supporting correct options (5).

                                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 ‭#‬   ‭Indicators‬                                                                    ‭Exemplars‬
              ‭1‬                                                                      ‭1‬
 ‭5‬   ‭●‬      ‭Statement/fact that includes‬‭relevant associations‬‭*‬‭and‬‭IS‬         ‭Deletion of 11-p-15 can cause‬
              ‭ pecific, comprehensive, or pathognomonic enough to provide‬
              s                                                                        ‭ eckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, which includes‬
                                                                                       B
              ‭a clear answer to a test question.‬                                     ‭symptoms such as macroglossia, omphalocele,‬
                                                                                        ‭and hemihypertrophy‬
       ‭●‬    ‭2‬
                 ‭Statement/fact that provides‬‭core‬‭or‬‭comprehensive‬             ‭2‬
                                                                                        ‭Tachycardia (elevated heart rate) and tachypnea‬
              i‭nformation and/or associations about a‬‭topic domain‬‭B‬ ‭that are‬ (‭ elevated respiratory rate) are signs of cardiac or‬
               ‭fundamental‬‭to its understanding as a whole‬                         ‭pulmonary distress.‬

              ‭1‬                                                                      ‭1‬
 ‭4‬   ‭●‬      ‭Statement/fact that includes‬‭relevant associations‬‭but‬‭is NOT‬        ‭In autosomal recessive inheritance, both parents‬
              ‭ pecific, comprehensive, or pathognomonic enough to provide‬
              s                                                                        ‭ ust be carriers of the mutated gene for a child to‬
                                                                                       m
              ‭a clear answer to a test question‬                                      ‭inherit the disease‬
              ‭2‬
       ‭●‬        ‭Statement/fact that provides‬‭neither core‬‭nor‬                    ‭2‬
                                                                                         ‭Increased circulating estrogen can occur in men‬
               ‭ omprehensive‬‭information and/or associations about a‬‭topic‬
               c                                                                       ‭with liver disease, such as alcoholic cirrhosis‬
               ‭domain‬‭that are relevant but‬‭not‬‭fundamental‬‭to its‬
                                                                                       ‭3‬
                ‭understanding as a whole‬                                                 ‭Osteoporosis is a condition characterized by low‬
             ‭○‬ ‭Without knowing this statement/fact, it‬‭would‬‭be difficult to‬     ‭ one mass and deterioration of bone tissue,‬
                                                                                       b
                                                                                       ‭leading to increased bone fragility and risk of‬
                     ‭correctly answer a question on this topic‬                        ‭fractures.‬
              ‭3‬
       ‭●‬      ‭Definition that‬‭includes‬‭relevant associations, context, and/or‬
              ‭ ssumptions that are directly useful in answering a question‬
              a
              ‭correctly‬
              ‭1‬                                                                      ‭1‬
 ‭3‬   ‭●‬        ‭Statement/fact that is‬‭accurate‬‭and‬‭provides context or‬           ‭Symptoms of drug-induced fever include fever‬
               i‭nformation‬‭about a topic;‬‭does not‬‭provide information that‬       ‭and confusion‬
                ‭would directly result in getting a question right.‬                   ‭2‬
                                                                                         ‭A Physician Health Program is a program‬
             ‭○‬ ‭Without knowing this statement/fact, it‬‭would NOT‬‭be‬
                                                                                       ‭ esigned to help physicians with substance abuse‬
                                                                                       d
                     ‭difficult to correctly answer a question on this topic‬          ‭or mental health issues‬
       ‭●‬    ‭2‬
                 ‭Definition that‬‭lacks‬‭relevant associations, context, and/or‬
               ‭ ssumptions that are directly useful in answering a question‬
               a
               ‭correctly‬
             ‭○‬ ‭May include examples or additional details that do not‬
                   ‭directly facilitate a correct answer‬

 ‭2‬   ‭●‬    ‭1‬
                 ‭Statement/fact that is‬‭generic‬‭or‬‭common-sense;‬‭information‬ ‭1‬‭The spine is a part of the musculoskeletal system‬
              i‭s widely known and/or lacks details or relevance about a given‬ ‭2‬‭Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis is not‬
               ‭topic‬                                                              ‭typically used to diagnose genetic disorders‬
              ‭2‬
       ‭●‬      ‭Statement/fact that‬‭rarely‬‭helps in the specific context of‬        ‭3‬
                                                                                         ‭Decreased activity of epithelial Na+ channels in‬
              ‭ edical exams, offering‬‭little‬‭value in the diagnostic and/or‬
              m                                                                        ‭ rincipal cells can be caused by increased activity‬
                                                                                       p
              ‭question-answering process‬                                             ‭of luminal K+ channels in principal cells‬

       ‭●‬    ‭ tatement/fact that contains an‬‭element or component‬‭that is‬
              S
              ‭factually‬‭untrue‬‭or‬‭inaccurate‬
              ‭1‬                                                                      ‭1‬
 ‭1‬   ‭●‬       ‭Statement/fact that is‬‭useless‬‭,‬‭unclear‬‭, and/or completely‬      ‭The patient's BUN and creatinine levels are‬
              ‭irrelevant‬                                                             ‭slightly elevated.‬
                                                                                       ‭2‬
       ‭●‬    ‭2‬
                ‭Statement/fact that‬‭never‬‭helps‬‭in the specific context of‬          ‭The cause of erythema nodosum is often‬
                                                                                       ‭ nknown, or may be related to certain systemic‬
                                                                                       u
              ‭ edical exams, offering‬‭no‬‭value in the diagnostic and/or‬
              m
                                                                                       ‭diseases.‬
              ‭question-answering process‬
                                                                                       ‭3‬
                                                                                          ‭Bloody diarrhea can be a symptom of Giardia‬
       ‭●‬    ‭Statement/fact that is‬‭entirely‬‭factually‬‭untrue‬‭or inaccurate‬     ‭lamblia infection‬


*‭ ‬‭Relevant association‬‭: A significant connection or correlation between two or more related factors (e.g., diseases,‬
 ‭symptoms, or risk factors) that directly impacts the understanding, pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and/or‬
  ‭prevention of a medical condition.‬

*‭ *‬‭Topic domains‬‭: A core subject, discipline, or system in medicine that encompasses many which many questions‬
 ‭are derived from (e.g. cardiac system, renal system)‬



        Figure 24: Rubric used to collect expert relevance ratings for medical microtheory facts (1 of 2)


                                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


‭Questions to ask yourself when scoring‬‭:‬
    ‭●‬ ‭Would a medical student be in trouble if they didn’t know this fact the morning of the‬
                    ‭exam?‬ ‭(yes = 5)‬
     ‭●‬ ‭Can you imagine up (or remember) a question for which this statement would directly‬
                     ‭answer the question?‬‭(yes = 5)‬
      ‭●‬ ‭Would a topic domain (e.g., “cardiovascular system”) be hard to understand if you didn’t‬
                      ‭know this fact?‬‭(yes = 5)‬
       ‭●‬ ‭Could the information feasibly be important to understanding the correct answer or any‬
                       ‭of the key terms being tested by questions or correct answers (e.g., definitions, etc.) but‬
                        ‭not the concept being tested itself?‬‭(yes = 4)‬
        ‭●‬ ‭Does the statement add correct and relevant supporting details that give context or‬
                         ‭depth to an explanation, facilitating understanding of the concept?‬ ‭(yes = 4)‬
         ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement relevant to a correct explanation of a correct answer but generally not‬
                          ‭required for a complete and correct explanation?‬‭(yes‬‭= 3)‬
          ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement a semantic claim that correctly identifies a term that might be related to‬
                           ‭questions or correct answers but not required to produce the correct answer or explain‬
                            ‭it? (‬‭yes = 3‬‭)‬
           ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement partially incorrect or contains an element of untruth? (‬‭yes = 2‬‭)‬
            ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement “common knowledge”? (‬‭yes = 2‬‭)‬
             ‭●‬ ‭Does the statement have information that is too general or is only marginally related to a‬
                             ‭given topic? (‬‭yes = 2‬‭)‬
              ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement completely irrelevant to a correct and complete explanation of any‬
                              ‭feasible correct answer?‬‭(yes = 1)‬
               ‭●‬ ‭Is the statement completely incorrect?‬‭(yes = 1)‬


       Figure 25: Rubric used to collect expert relevance ratings for medical microtheory facts (2 of 2)


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


You are a scientific expert that helps other scientists determine whether various facts are relevant to
      explaining the correct answer to a question. Scientists give you a question and a list of facts that
      they believe are relevant to the question. Your job is to determine whether each fact is relevant to
      explaining the correct answer to the question using a provided rubric for scoring:

A fact has a score of 5 if it has the following indicators:
* core/critical fact/knowledge that explains why a correct answer is correct
* essential piece of information if explaining phenomenon in question to a toddler

A fact has a score of 4 if it has the following indicators:
* core/critical fact/knowledge that explains why an incorrect answer is incorrect

A fact has a score of 3 if it has the following indicators:
* moderately important fact necessary in a correct explanation but not being explicitly tested *underlying
      assumption necessary to understanding the terms used in the correct response and explanation
* defines terms used in the prompt and/or the correct answer
* semantic statements: correctly identify a term in the immediate question or correct answer
* common sense statement that is topically relevant but not necessary for differentiating correct from
      incorrect

A fact has a score of 2 if it has the following indicators:
* extra detail - explanations missing this fact are neither incorrect nor incomplete
* true relevant statement but not necessary for understanding phenomena in question

A fact has a score of 1 if it has the following indicators:
* irrelevant
* incorrect

You do NOT need to give a 5 for at least one fact. You should give a 5 only if the fact is absolutely
      necessary and core to correctly answer the immediate question (i.e. if someone does not know the fact,
      they cannot answer the question correctly).

Here are some of the questions that you ask yourself when considering a fact:
Does this statement directly answer the original question? (yes = 5)
* Is the information absolutely necessary to correctly answer the immediate question? (yes = 5)
* Is the information absolutely necessary to explain why another answer is incorrect for the immediate
      question? (yes = 4)
* Is the information important to understanding the correct answer or any of the key terms being tested by the
       immediate question or correct answer (e.g., definitions, etc.) but not the concept being tested itself?
       (yes = 3)
* Is the statement a semantic claim that correctly identifies a key term in the immediate question or correct
      answer in a way that is relevant to the phenomenon being tested? (yes = 3)
* Is the statement relevant to a correct explanation of the correct answer but not required for a complete and
       correct explanation? (yes = 2)
* Does the statement add correct and relevant supporting details that give context or depth to an explanation
      but are not required to make the explanation complete and correct? (yes = 2)
* Is the statement a semantic claim that correctly identifies a term that is related to the immediate question
       or correct answer but not required to produce the correct answer or explain it? (yes = 2)
* Is the statement completely irrelevant to a correct and complete explanation of the correct answer? (yes =
      1)
* Is the statement incorrect? (yes = 1)



Figure 26: Prompt used to score the question relevance of retrieved microtheory statements. Instructions are
based on the rubric from Jansen et al. (2021).


                                                      26
