Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DUET:  D ECENTRALIZED B ILEVEL O PTIMIZATION
WITHOUT L OWER -L EVEL S TRONG C ONVEXITY

 Zhen Qin† , Zhuqing Liu‡ , Songtao Lu◦∗, Yingbin Liang† , Jia Liu†
 †
   Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University
 ‡
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas
 ◦
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong



                                                   A BSTRACT
             Decentralized bilevel optimization (DBO) provides a powerful framework for
             multi-agent systems to solve local bilevel tasks in a decentralized fashion without
             the need for a central server. However, most existing DBO methods rely on
             lower-level strong convexity (LLSC) to guarantee unique solutions and a well-
             defined hypergradient for stationarity measure, hindering their applicability in many
             practical scenarios not satisfying LLSC. To overcome this limitation, we introduce
             a new single-loop DBO algorithm called diminishing quadratically-regularized
             bilevel decentralized optimization (DUET), which eliminates the need for LLSC by
             introducing a diminishing quadratic regularization to the lower-level (LL) objective.
                                                                                           11
             We show that DUET achieves an iteration complexity of O(1/T 1−5p− 4 τ ) for
             approximate KKT-stationary point convergence under relaxed assumptions, where
             p and τ are control parameters for LL learning rate and averaging, respectively.
             In addition, our DUET algorithm incorporates gradient tracking to address data
             heterogeneity, a key challenge in DBO settings. To the best of our knowledge, this
             is the first work to tackle DBO without LLSC under decentralized settings with
             data heterogeneity. Numerical experiments validate the theoretical findings and
             demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, Decentralized Bilevel Optimization (DBO) over networks has gained significant
attention. Consider a DBO problem, where the agents form a peer-to-peer network represented
by an undirected connected graph G = (N , L). Here N and L are the sets of agents (nodes) and
edges, respectively, with |N | = m. Each agent i can share information with neighboring agents
Ni ≜ {i′ ∈ N : (i, i′ ) ∈ L} and has access to a local dataset of size n. The goal is for all agents to
collaboratively solve the following decentralized bilevel optimization problem:
                                         m
                                      1 X
                        min                 fi (xi , yi )                                                 (1)
                  xi ∈Rp1 ,yi ∈S(xi ) m
                                        i=1
                        s.t. S(xi ) := arg minp gi (xi , yi ), ∀i; xi = xi′ , if (i, i′ ) ∈ L,            (2)
                                             yi ∈R 2

where xi ∈ Rp1 and yi ∈ Rp2 are parameters to be trained for the   PUL   and LL subproblems at agent
                                                                 1   m
i, respectively. In this paper, we assume that the UL objective m    i=1 fi (xi , yi ) is non-convex and
the LL objectives gi (xi , yi ), ∀i, are convex but not strongly convex (i.e., not LLSC), respectively.
In the absence of LLSC, the LL solution could be a set-valued map S(xi ) (i.e., non-unique optimal
solutions to the LL problem). The consensus constraints xi = xi′ in (2) ensure that the local copies
at neighboring agents i and i′ are equal to each other, hence a “consensus” among the agents. The LL
variable yi is influenced by the UL variable xi chosen from the feasible set X (i.e., xi ∈ X).
DBO provides an effective framework for solving multi-agent, nested optimization problems, where
each agent solves a local bilevel task while coordinating with others in a network without relying
on a central server. This approach proves particularly beneficial in scenarios such as multi-agent
    ∗
        This work was completed while S. Lu was a senior research scientist at IBM Research in the U.S.


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pretraining-finetuning (Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Poon & Peyré, 2021; Liu & Liu, 2021; Hashemi et al.,
2024) for Large Language Models (LLMs), which faces significant challenges in private finetuning
data environments, thereby making collaboration critical for successful fine-tuning. This framework is
also useful in multi-agent meta learning (Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Liu & Liu, 2021), and reinforcement
learning (Zhang et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022), where decentralization reduces communication costs
and enhances privacy. DBO problems share the same structure as their centralized counterpart and
involve an upper-level (UL) objective function dependent on the optimal parameter values of a
lower-level (LL) objective. Even in the centralized case, bilevel optimization is inherently challenging
without lower-level strong convexity (LLSC). Several algorithmic approaches have been proposed for
centralized bilevel optimization without LLSC. These include using the sequential averaging method
(SAM) (Sabach & Shtern, 2017; Liu et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2020), penalty methods (Lu & Mei, 2023),
and employing the value function approach (Yao et al., 2024).
Despite the progress in LLSC-less centralized bilevel optimization, designing efficient algorithms for
LLSC-less DBO turns out to be far from a simple extension of the centralized counterpart. Instead,
LLSC-less DBO is a new area with a collection of new challenging and important problems, which
warrant drastically different algorithmic designs. To date, LLSC-less DBO remains under-explored
and this gap in the literature is largely due to the fact that most of the algorithmic ideas for centralized
bilevel optimization cannot be directly applied to DBO. The first key reason is that, instead of solving
a single LL problem, DBO involves multiple LL tasks across different agents, making centralized
techniques inapplicable. Another major challenge is the data heterogeneity across agents, where
each agent works with its own distinct dataset. This further complicates coordination among agents,
making it difficult for centralized bilevel optimization approaches to be effective in DBO.
To solve DBO problems without LLSC, a natural starting point is to leverage the decentralized
network-consensus approach (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009), where agents collaboratively solve a global
learning task to reach a consensus. However, two fundamental challenges arise when applying
network-consensus methods to DBO: (1) Most existing DBO methods (see, e.g., (Chen et al., 2022;
2023; Lu et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022b; Qiu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b),) heavily
rely on the assumption of LLSC to guarantee a well-defined Hessian inverse in the upper-level (UL)
hypergradient evaluation and the uniqueness of the LL solution, both of which may break down in
the absence of LLSC. Excerbating the situation is the fact that the norm of the UL hypergradient
is the most widely used stationarity measure for bilevel optimization. Without a well-defined UL
hypergradient in the absence of LLSC, it is not even clear what should be used as a stationarity
measure in DBO; (2) Without LLSC, the lack of uniqueness in LL solutions complicates coordination
in decentralized network-consensus approaches, where agents must exchange their updates without a
central server. Aggregating information from agents becomes more difficult, as the LL solution may
shift randomly, resulting in oscillations and poor convergence in DBO.
These challenges motivate us to design new efficient network-consensus-based algorithms for DBO
without LLSC. Toward this end, we propose a novel approach called diminishing quadratically-
regularized bilevel decentralized optimization (DUET). To our knowledge, none of the existing
works has considered solving LLSC-less DBO problems, particularly in decentralized environments
with data heterogeneity. Our major contributions are summarized as follows:
 • New Single-Loop Algorithm for LLSC-less DBO: We propose DUET, a single-loop algorithm
   that integrates gradient tracking and consensus updates to avoid the computational complexity
   of conventional double-loop structure in bilevel optimization, while ensuring convergence in
   decentralized settings with data heterogeneity. To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm with
   provable convergence for DBO without LLSC.
 • New Stationarity Measure for LLSC-less DBO Convergence: We propose to use the approxi-
   mate KKT stationarity as the convergence measure of DBO solution quality in our algorithm and
   provide a detailed convergence rate analysis based on this new measure. We establish state-of-the-
                                                       11                   11
   art finite-time convergence rates of O(1/T 1−3p− 4 τ ) and O(1/T 1−5p− 4 τ ) corresponding to
   the dual variables being bounded and unbounded, respectively. Here, τ and p control the LL learn-
   ing rate and averaging, respectively. Moreover, we note that this new approximate KKT-based
   stationarity measure is general for all DBO problems, which could be of independent theoretical
   interests. Most notably, the convergence of our DUET algorithms is proved by establishing a new
   descent lemma for the Lyapunov function (cf. Lemma 1), which resolves the difficulty resulting
   from the inapplicability of using the standard descent lemma in the absence of LLSC.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    • New Augmented LL Objective: We propose a new augmented LL objective function that
      allows us to relax several restrictive assumptions made in existing works on LLSC-less bilevel
      optimization. Notably, our approach does not require strong convexity for the UL objective at
      each agent, Lipschitz continuity of second-order derivatives, or a bounded dataset.
    • Handling Decentralization with Data Heterogeneity: Without gradient heterogeneity assump-
      tions, our algorithm overcomes the challenges of consensus errors in DBO with data heterogeneity,
      ensuring agents can synchronize their updates effectively without relying on LLSC.


2      R ELATED WORK

In this section, we provide an overview of two closely related lines of works: 1) DBO and 2)
centralized bilevel optimization without LLSC, thus putting our work into comparative perspectives.
1) Decentralized Bilevel Optimization (DBO): Numerous studies have focused on solving decen-
tralized bilevel optimization problems on graphs with LLSC.
One line of work focuses on achieving consensus only for the UL variables, where algorithms are
often designed with the hypergradient norm as a stationarity measure. Liu et al. (2022b) introduced a
local full-gradient-based algorithm with variance reduction and gradient tracking to achieve O(n/ϵ)
sample complexity and O(1/ϵ) communication complexity, where n is the size of the dataset at each
agent. Furthermore, momentum information is leveraged (Gao et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2023) to enable
single-loop algorithmic architecture by slightly trading off convergence rate performance. To address
data heterogeneity, Niu et al. (2023) introduced a single-loop algorithm for nonconvex-strongly-
convex bilevel optimization that handles heterogeneity without requiring bounded hypergradients.
In collaborative learning, Zhang et al. (2023) proposed COBO, an SGD-based algorithm that scales
with clients and outperforms federated learning baselines in heterogeneous settings. Another line of
works enforce consensus on the LL variables refer to Appendix B.
Despite these advancements, all aforementioned DBO methods assume LLSC. In contrast, our work
departs from this assumption, addressing decentralized bilevel optimization without LLSC under
non-i.i.d. data, thus filling a critical gap in the literature.
2) Centralized Bilevel Optimization without LLSC: In recent years, centralized bilevel optimization
without LLSC has also received increasing attention. For example, Chen et al. (2024a) employed an ϵ-
stationary point for the hyper-objective as a convergence metric to quantify algorithmic and proposed
a first-order bilevel algorithm with a convergence rate of O(ℓκ3 /ϵ2 ), where ℓ is a Lipschitz constant
and κ is the condition number, though it required PL conditions for LL objectives. Liu et al. (2022a)
presents a first-order algorithm for non-convex bilevel optimization that avoids Hessian computations,
ensures practical efficiency with non-asymptotic convergence guarantees, and introduces a modified
KKT condition with a stationarity measure to address bilevel problem challenges. Lu & Mei (2023)
reformulated the LL convex bilevel problem as a constrained min-max problem and used the classic
penalty method, achieving a convergence rate of O(1/ϵ4 ) to find ϵ-KKT points. Jiang et al. (2023)
tackled a “simple bilevel” problem and proposed a double-loop algorithm utilizing the condition
gradient method to approximate nonlinear LL convex functions with linear inequality constraints,
achieving a convergence rate of O(1/ϵ2 ). The stochastic variant in Cao et al. (2023) extends this
method to both stochastic and finite-sum settings, with rates matching the standard conditional
gradient method. More recently, Yao et al. (2024) introduced a value-function-based proximal
Lagrangian approach for constrained LL convex bilevel problems, achieving a convergence rate
of O(1/T (1−2p)/2 ), where p controls the penalty parameter decay. Additional related works are
discussed in Appendix B.
The most related work on centralized LLSC-less bilevel optimization is in Liu et al. (2023a), which
reformulated the LL convex bilevel problem as a constrained problem using first-order stationarity
condition. By employing the KKT condition as the stationarity measure, they proposed a single-loop
method that averages the UL and LL objectives, achieving a convergence rate of O 1/T 1−3p−3τ ,
where p and τ control the decreasing LL learning rate and the averaging parameter. While both our
work and Liu et al. (2023a) reformulate the bilevel problem as constrained optimization and use
aggregation function for solving LL problem, our work differs from Liu et al. (2023a) in the following
key aspects: 1) Liu et al. (2023a) required strong convexity of the UL objectives, which limits their
approach’s applicability in real-world scenarios where UL objectives are often nonconvex. In contrast,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Algorithm                Setting            Lower Level       Upper Level      Het. Data
       FOPM (Lu & Mei, 2023)          Centralized            Convex           Nonconvex         NA
      CG-BiO (Jiang et al., 2023)     Centralized            Convex           Nonconvex         NA
       F2 BA (Chen et al., 2024a)     Centralized        Nonconvex, PL        Nonconvex         NA
       SBCGF (Cao et al., 2023)       Centralized            Convex           Nonconvex         NA
      LV-HBA (Yao et al., 2024)       Centralized            Convex           Nonconvex         NA
     sl-BAMM (Liu et al., 2023a)      Centralized            Convex        Strongly Convex      NA
    INTERACT (Liu et al., 2022b)     Decentralized       Strongly Convex      Nonconvex         i.i.d
     DIAMOND (Qiu et al., 2023)      Decentralized       Strongly Convex      Nonconvex         i.i.d
     Prometheus(Liu et al., 2023b)   Decentralized       Strongly Convex      Nonconvex         i.i.d
      SLDBO (Dong et al., 2024)      Decentralized       Strongly Convex      Nonconvex       non-i.i.d
        LoPA (Niu et al., 2023)      Decentralized       Strongly Convex      Nonconvex       non-i.i.d
            DUET (Ours)              Decentralized           Convex           Nonconvex       non-i.i.d

                          Table 1: Summary of bilevel optimization algorithms.

our method can be applied to non-convex UL objective by employing a different aggregation function
that sequentially averages the LL objective with a diminishing quadratic regularizer. 2) Although
both approaches employ the KKT condition as the stationarity measure, our measure applies to the
decentralized setting by accounting for consensus errors and aggregating the stationarity measure
across subproblems from agents with non-i.i.d. data distributions. In contrast, the KKT-based
stationarity measure in Liu et al. (2023a) cannot handle data hetergeneity.
In summary, while the aforementioned existing works addressed centralized bilevel optimization
without LLSC, they cannot be generalized to address the decentralized setting with heterogeneous
data challenges in a straightforward fashion. In contrast, our work tackles LLSC-less DBO and
relaxes several assumptions typically made in the bilevel optimization literature. For easy reference,
we summarize the most relevant bilevel optimization algorithms in Table 1.

3      T HE D IMINISHING Q UADRATICALLY- REGULARIZED B ILEVEL
       O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHM (DUET)
1) Problem Reformulation for a New Stationarity Convergence Metric: In the LLSC DBO
literature, the uniqueness of the LL solution yi∗ (xi ) ensures that the hypergradient norm of each
agent’s UL objective Φi (xi ) = fi (xi , yi∗ (xP
                                               i )) is well-defined. Consequently, the hypergradient norm
                                            1     m     i
of the overall UL objective Φ (xi ) = m           i=1 Φ (xi ) is also well-defined. This norm has been
widely used as a measure for stationarity in previous works (e.g., Ghadimi & Wang (2018); Liu
et al. (2022b; 2023b); Dong et al. (2024); Lu & Mei (2023)). However, in the absence of LLSC, the
Hessian matrix of the LL problem is not full-rank and thus not invertible. In decentralized settings,
this problem is further exacerbated by the inconsistent updates across agents, which leads to the
conventional hypergradient-norm-based stationarity measure being ill-defined. This motivates us to
develop a new stationarity measure that handles both the absence of LLSC and the consensus errors
among agents at the same time.
Toward this end, inspired by Wolfe-duality, we first reformulate the LLSC-less DBO problem into an
equivalent constrained optimization problem. Instead of directly solving for yi∗ (xi ), we replace the
LL problem by introducing the LL-stationary condition (i.e., ∇y g(x, y) = 0) as constraints:
                        m
                     1 X
         min               fi (xi , yi ) s.t. ∇y gi (xi , yi ) = 0, ∀i; xi = xi′ , if (i, i′ ) ∈ L. (3)
    xi ∈Rp1 ,yi ∈Rp2 m
                       i=1
The reformulation in Problem (3) is equivalent to the original Problem (1) because the LL-stationarity
is both necessary and sufficient for the LL-optimality when the LL problem gi (xi , yi ) is convex in
yi for any fixed xi , which is satisfied in our problem setting. Our key rationale behind converting the
original bilevel optimization problem in (1) into an equivalent conventional constrained optimization
problem in (3) is to facilitate the use of the KKT conditions, for which the KKT stationary condition
can naturally serve as a new stationarity measure, hence resolving the conundrum of lacking a
well-defined hypergradient norm as the stationarity measure in the absence of LLSC.
We now state the KKTPconditions for Problem Pm (3),⊤for which the Lagrangian function can be written
                  1   m
as L(x, y, v) := m    i=1 f i (x i , yi ) −  i=1 vi ∇y gi (xi , yi ), where vi , ∀i, are dual variables


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


associated with the constraints. Then, a KKT solution (x∗i , yi∗ , vi∗ ), if exists, satisfies the following:

          ∇x fi (x∗i , yi∗ ) − ∇2xy gi (x∗i , yi∗ ) vi∗ = 0, ∀i,
      1
                                                                      (Stationarity of Problem (3))
      m
      
        1          ∗     ∗       2        ∗     ∗     ∗
      
        m ∇y fi (xi , yi ) − ∇yy gi (xi , yi ) vi = 0, ∀i,            (Stationarity of Problem (3))
                  ∗     ∗
       −∇ g (x , y ) = 0, ∀i,                                         (Primal Feasibility of Problem (3))
       ∗ y i∗ i i
      
      
       xi − xi′ = 0, ∀(i, i′ ) ∈ L.                                   (Primal Feasibility of Problem (3))

Note that the dual feasibility and complementary slackness conditions in this KKT system are implied
by the primal feasibility condition and hence can be omitted. For convenience, we define the KKT
stationarity residual for a primal-dual pair (xi , yi , vi ) as KKT(xi , yi , vi ) := ∥∇L(xi , yi , vi )∥2 ,
which will be used as a part of our stationarity convergence metric defined later. Note that when
LLSC holds, it is not difficult to show that the ∇Φ(x̄) = 0 if and only if KKT(xi , yi , vi ) = 0 for
some y, v ∈ Rp2 . This fact will serve as a “bridge” to connect the above KKT staionarity and the
hypgradients induced by the diminishing µt -quadratic regularization described next.
2) The Diminishing µt -Quadratic Regularization: To address the challenge of lacking LLSC
in our algorithm design, our basic idea is to augment the LL objective function by introducing
a quadratic regularizer that is controlled by a sequence of diminishing regularization parameters,
thereby reviving the LLSC in each iteration. These regularization parameters are carefully selected to
ensure that the augmented problems converge to the original problem, thereby leading to a solution
to Problem (3). Specifically, at iteration t we define the augmented LL objective function as follows:

                       ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ) := µt hi (xi,t , yi,t ) + (1 − µt )gi (xi,t , yi,t ),               (4)

                                     2               2
where hi (xi,t , yi,t ) = 21 ∥xi,t ∥ + 12 ∥yi,t ∥ . Here, the norm ∥ · ∥ represents the ℓ2 norm. xi,t
and yi,t are the variables corresponding to agent i at iteration t. Here {µt }∞             t=0 , where µt > 0, ∀t,
is the diminishing sequence of regularization parameters, which ensures that ψµi t (x, ·) is strongly
convex for any x. This augmentation also leverages the connection between the KKT condition
and the norm of the µt -induced hypergradient, allowing us to replace the LL objective gi (xi,t , yi,t )
by ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ), facilitating the solution to Problem (3). Thanks to the strong convexity of the
quadratic regularizor, ψµi t (xi,t , ·) has a unique minimizer for any given x-variable, which is denoted
     ∗
as yi,µ  t
           (xi ).
                                                                          1
                                                                            Pm       i                  i
Next, we define the approximate UL objective as Φµt (xt ) = m                   i=1 Φµt (xi,t ), where Φµt (xi,t ) ≜
            ∗
fi (xi,t , yi,µt (xi,t )). Similar to conventional bilevel optimizaiton with LLSC, for differentiable
Φiµt (xi,t ), the hypergradient ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) can be derived by the chain rule, the implicit func-
                                                                                                      ∗

tion theorem, and the augmented LL function as: ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) = ∇x fi xi,t , yi,µ                       t
                                                                                                          (xi,t ) −
                     ∗              ∗                    ∗

∇2xy ψµi t xi,t , yi,µ   t
                           (xi,t ) vi,µt
                                         (xi,t ), where vi,µt
                                                              (xi,t ) ∈ Rp2 is the solution of the linear system:
  ∗                    2     i          ∗           −1                ∗
vi,µt (xi,t ) := [∇yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,µt (xi,t ))] ∇y fi (xi,t , yi,µ    t
                                                                          (xi,t )).
After introducing the regularization in (4), we can now adopt the approximate KKT condi-
tion by replacing the LL objective with ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ), and thus consider KKT(xt , yt , vt ) :=
∥∇L(xt , yt , vt )∥2 ≤ ϵ at time t. Here xt := [x⊤              ⊤ ⊤
                                                 1,t , . . . , xm,t ] , and similarly for yt and vt .

3) Consensus Mechanism: To address the consensus constraint xi = xi′ , (i, i′ ) ∈ L in Problem (3),
we adopt the network consensus approach (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009), where a consensus weight
matrix M ∈ Rm×m is used to mix and aggregate information at each iteration. The element [M]ij
represents the weight assigned for the information from the j-th agent at the i-th agent. Each agent
uses the weights in its corresponding row in the M ∈ Rm×m to aggregate the information from
its neighbors. For consensus to bePreached asymptotically,       the matrix M should satisfy certain
                                         m           Pm
properties: (1) Doubly Stochastic: i=1 [M]ij = j=1 [M]ij = 1; (2) Symmetric: [M]ij = [M]ji
for all i, j ∈ N ; and (3) Sparsity Pattern Adhering to the Network Topology: [M]ij > 0 if (i, j) ∈ N
and [M]ij = 0 otherwise for all i, j ∈ L. These properties ensure that the eigenvalues of M are real
and fall within the interval (−1, 1], thus being sortable. Then, we order the eigenvalues of M as:
−1 < λm (M) ≤ · · · ≤ λ2 (M) < λ1 (M) = 1. The second-largest eigenvalue in magnitude of M,
denoted as λ ≜ max{|λ2 (M)|, |λm (M)|}, will play an important role in our step size selection and
thus convergence rate in our proposed DUET algorithm.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4) The Proposed Algorithm: Algorithm 1 The DUET Algorithm at Each Agent i.
With the preliminaries in 1)–3),
we are now ready to present            Set parameter pair (xi,0 , yi,0 , vi,0 ) = (x0 , y0 , v0 ).
our diminishing quadratically-         for t = 1, · · · , T do
regularized bilevel decentralized         Update local models (xi,t+1 , yi,t+1 , vi,t+1 ) as in Eqs. (5);
optimization (DUET) method.               Compute the (di,t       i,t  i,t
                                                             x , dy , dv ) local estimator as in Eq. (6);
This method is specifically de-           Track global gradients (hx , hi,t
                                                                       i,t       i,t
                                                                            y , hv ) as in Eq. (7);
signed to address the challenges       end for
of bilevel optimization without
LLSC in decentralized environments with data heterogeneity. Our DUET method draws inspiration
from the centralized SOBA approach (Dagréou et al., 2022), which features a single-loop structure
that is easier to implement and reduces the computational complexity compared to traditional double-
loop methods. However, fundamentally different from SOBA, DUET builds on the augmented LL
objective function in (4), enabling us to address DBO problems without LLSC. The procedure of our
algorithm DUET can be organized into three key steps:
• Step 1 (Update Local Models): In each iteration t, each agent i updates its local variables as:
             X
   xi,t+1 =      [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −αt hi,t                          i,t                           i,t
                                    x ; yi,t+1 = Pryt [yi,t −βt hy ]; vi,t+1 = Prvt [vi,t +ηt hv ], (5)
              i′ ∈Ni
  where αt , βt and ηt are step-sizes for updating xi , yi and vi variables, respectively, and Pr [·]
                                                                                              q
  denotes a projection operator defined as Pr [q] := arg min∥q′ ∥≤r ∥q ′ − q∥ = min{q, r ∥q∥     }, where
                         t       t
  r > 0 is the radius. rv and ry are projection parameters of yi and vi variables, respectively (to
  be defined in the next subsection). First, the UL variable xi,t+1 is updated by aggregating the
  UL information from its neighbors and adjusting based on the local gradient hi,t     x , which induces
  consensus among the agents in the network. The LL variable yi,t+1 is updated through a projected
  local gradient descent step, reflecting the agent’s progress in solving its local optimization problem.
  Finally, the dual variable vi,t+1 is updated using a projected gradient ascent step to ensure that the
  necessary optimality conditions of the LL problem are maintained. We also employ the projection
  steps of yi,t and vi,t is to ensure that the sequences {yi,t } and {vi,t } are bounded with radii rvt
  and ryt respectively. Later we will show that, based on increasing rvt and ryt with respect to t, the
  boundedness of yi,t - and vi,t -variables results in the boundedness of xi,t -variables, hence ensuring
  convergence.
• Step 2 (Local Gradient Estimate): In the local gradient estimator step, each agent i computes its
  local gradients to update its variables:
                         i,t           i
                        dy = ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) ,
                           d = ∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2yy ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t ,
                             i,t                                                                       (6)
                         vi,t
                           dx = ∇x fi (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2xy ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t )vi,t .
  We update yi,t using the gradient of the augmented LL objective ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ), while the gradients
  for vi,t and xi,t are derived using the KKT conditions. This ensures that the LL solution meets
  optimality constraints and that the UL problem is solved efficiently.
• Step 3 (Gradient Tracking in Upper-Level Parameters): In this step, each agent i updates its tracked
  gradient hi,t
             x by averaging the gradients from neighboring agents and correcting the local estimates:
                        X             ′
                hi,t
                 x =        [M]ii′ hix ,t−1 + di,t  i,t−1
                                               x − dx     ; hi,t
                                                              y = dy ;
                                                                        i,t
                                                                                hi,t
                                                                                 v = dv .
                                                                                          i,t
                                                                                                        (7)
                       i′ ∈Ni
   The purpose of gradient tracking for the UL variables is to further reduce consensus error and
   accelerate convergence even under non-i.i.d data distributions. On the other hand, since the LL
   variables yi,t and vi,t are updated locally without consensus requirements, gradient tracking is not
   needed for the LL variables.
To conclude the discussion of the DUET’s algorithmic design, we summarize the per-agent algorithm
of DUET in Algorithm 1.

4    T HEORETICAL C ONVERGENCE R ATE A NALYSIS
In this section, we will establish the theoretical convergence rate for the proposed DUET algorithm.
Before we state our main convergence result, we first present several needed assumptions as follows.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 1 (Boundedness and Smoothness of the UL Objectives). The UL objectives fi satisfies:
(a) For any i ∈ [m], the UL objective fi (xi , ·) has a uniform lower bound denoted by fi 0 ; and (b)
For any i ∈ [m], the UL objective fi is twice differentiable and Lipschitz continuous with a Lipschitz
constant of Lfi 0 . The first-order derivatives ∇x fi (·, yi ), ∇x fi (xi , ·), ∇y fi (·, yi ), ∇y fi (xi , ·) are
Lipschitz continuous with respective Lipschitz constants Lfi x1 ,Lfi x2 , Lfi y1 , Lfi y2 .
Assumption 2 (Convexity and Smoothness of the LL Objectives). The LL objective gi satisfies: (a) for
any i ∈ [m] and any xi , the LL objective gi (x, ·) is convex; and (b) for any i ∈ [m], the LL objective
gi is twice differentiable and the derivatives ∇y gi and ∇2xy gi ,∇2yy gi are Lipschitz continuous in
(xi , yi ) with respective Lipschitz constants Lgi y1 ,Lgi y2 and Lgi xy1 ,Lgi xy2 , Lgi yy1 ,Lgi yy2 .

The smoothness and boundedness assumptions in Assumptions 1 and 2 are standard in the literature
of bilevel optimization (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Ji et al., 2021; ji & Liang, 2023; Dagréou et al.,
2022; Ji et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024; He et al., 2024). Unlike many works, however, we do not
assume LLSC, which significantly complicates the theoretical analysis. Under the above assumptions,
the augmented LL objective ψµi t (xi , ·) is σψµt - strongly convex with σψµt = µt σhi = µt , where
σhi = 1 by the definition of function hi . Hence, ψµi t (xi , ·) has a unique minimizer, denoted by
  ∗
yi,µt
      (xi ). To this end, we introduce the following convergence metric to help us approach the KKT
condition as the µt -regularized problem converges to the original problem as µt shrinks to zero.
Specifically, for each {xt , yt , vt } at time t, we define
        Π(xt , yt , vt ) := E∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 + E∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + E∥yt∗ −yt ∥2 + E∥vt∗ −vt ∥2 ,               (8)
                            |   {z        } |       {z        } |      {z    } |      {z    }
                                Stationarity      Consensus Error         Lower−Level     Dual Multiplier
                                   Error                                     Error            Error
                       1
                         Pm                       ⊤         ⊤ ⊤      ∗        ∗⊤            ∗⊤ ⊤
where x̄t ≜ m              i=1 xi,t , yt ≜ [y1,t , . . . , ym,t ] , yµt ≜ [y1,µt , . . . , ym,µt ] , vt ≜
   ⊤             ⊤ ⊤          ∗         ∗⊤           ∗⊤ ⊤
[v1,t , . . . , vm,t ] , and vµt ≜ [v1,µt , . . . , vm,µt ] . ⊗ is the Kronecker product. Note that the
first term in (8) quantifies the convergence of x̄t to a stationary point of the global objective. The
second term measures the consensus error among local copies of the UL variables. The third and
fourth terms quantify the optimality gap in the LL problem’s primal variable yt and dual variable vt ,
respectively, across all agents. Thus, Π(xt , yt , vt ) ≤ ϵ for a small ϵ-value implies that the algorithm
achieves three goals simultaneously: i) approximate KKT stationarity convergence of Problem (3), ii)
consensus of UL xt -variables, and iii) optimal solutions to the LL yt -variables and dual vt -variables.
With Assumptions 1 and 2, we also define the following parameters that will be used in our algorithm:
                           Lf                                                    2
                 rvt := σψ i0 , B1 := Lfi 0 + (Lψi y1 rvt ), λ1 := 1−λ      4       16
                                                                     λ + 1−λ + (1−λ)3 ,
                          µt
                q                  Pm                       Lψ
          rxt := 2λ1 B12 mβ̄ µ̄ + 2 i=1 ∥xi,0 ∥2 , ryt := σψ y1 rxt + σψ1 ∥∇y ψµt (0, 0)∥,                    (9)
                                                                     µt              µt

where xi,0 , i ∈ [m], are the initial points, constants Lfi 0 , Lψi y1 , and parameter σψµt are as defined
in Assumptions 1 and 2, and λ is the second largest eigenvalue in magnitude of the network graph. β̄
and µ̄ are the initial LL learning rate and averaging control parameter, respectively. Both β̄ and µ̄ are
constants. With the above notations, we are now ready to state the main convergence rate result of
DUET as follows:
Theorem 1 (Convergence Analysis for DUET). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, choose µt = µ̄(t+1)−p .
Choose the step-sizes as βt ∈ [β̄(t + 1)−τ /4 , 1/Lfi y2 + Lgy2 ] with 0 < p < 1/6, 0 < τ < 2/33 and
ηt = (t + 1)−τ /2 βt µt , and αt = (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt µt 5 . It then holds that
                                                                           11

                            min0≤t≤T Π(xt , yt , vt ) = O 1/T 1−5p− 4 τ .
                                                                                                 11
Further, if vi,t is bounded, it holds that min0≤t≤T KKT(xt , yt , vt ) = O(1/T 1−5p− 4 τ + 1/T 2p ).
The following result immediately follows from Theorem 1:
Corollary 2. Let p = 17 and τ → 0. Then, DUET converges to a KKT point of Problem (3) at rate of
       2
O(1/T 7 ), which implies that the number of communication rounds required to reach ϵ-accuracy for
                            7
our DUET method is O(1/ϵ 2 ).
Moreover, if the problem instance satisfies the stronger condition that ∥vµ∗ t (xi,t ) ∥ is bounded, we
can further improve the convergence result of DUET in Theorem 1 as follows:


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3 (Convergence Analysis for DUET with Boundedness Assumption). Under Assumptions 1
and 2, choose µt = µ̄(t + 1)−p . Choose step-sizes as βt ∈ [β̄(t + 1)−τ /4 , 1/Lfi y2 + Lgy2 ] with
0 < p < 1/4, 0 < τ < 1/11 and ηt = (t + 1)−τ /2 βt , and αt = (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt µt 3 . If vµ∗ t (xi,t )
is bounded, it then holds that:
                                                                  11

                           min0≤t≤T Π(xt , yt , vt ) = O 1/T 1−3p− 4 τ .
                                                                                                       11
Further, if vi,t is bounded, it holds that min0≤t≤T KKT(xt , yt , vt ) = O(1/T 1−3p− 4 τ + 1/T 2p ).

Similar to Theorem 1, the following result immediately follows from Theorem 3:
                                                                                                            2
Corollary 4. Let p = 15 and τ → 0. Then, DUET converges to a KKT point at a rate of O(1/T 5 ),
which implies that the number of communication rounds required to reach ϵ-accuracy for our
                       5
DUET method is O(1/ϵ 2 ).

Due to space limitation, we relegate the proofs of Theorems 1 and 3 to the Appendix. In here, several
important remarks for the proofs of Theorems 1 and 3 are in order:
 • It is worth noting that, compared to existing works on decentralized bilevel optimization, the
   major challenge in proving the convergence results in Theorems 1 and 3 stems from the absence
   of LLSC, which breaks the standard descent lemma for the LL variable yi in convergence analysis.
   To address this challenge, leveraging our augmented LL objective, we establish a new descent
   lemma for the implied UL objective function at time t, expressed in terms of x̄t , as follows:
   Lemma 1 (A New Descent Lemma of the Implied UL Objective). Under Assumptions 1 and 2
   and letting µt+1 ≤ µt ≤ 21 for all t, the sequence {xi,t , yi,t , vi,t } generated by DUET satisfy:
           Φµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t )
                                                                        m
                                           α2 LΦµ

             αt                2       αt                    αt LΦµt 1 X
          ≤−     ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −          − t 2 t ∥h̄tx ∥2 +               ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥2
              2                        2    2σψµ              rσψ2 µ m i=1
                                                              t                       t
                       m
                 2αt r X                                           2                           2
             +                Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2              yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
                  m    i=1
                           m                                                 m
                 αt rL2ψy1 X                              2              1 X i,t
                                                                                                   2
             +                     vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )       + 2αt r         d − h̄tx
                   m         i=1
                                                                         m i=1 x

               1
                   m  2                                yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                              ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )
                                                                           t    t+1
                   X
             +
               m i=1                         σhi                             µt
                  m          ∗             2              2
               1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥    µt − µt+1
             +                                               ,
               m i=1         σh2 i                 µt

   where CΦ1 and CΦ2 are problem-dependent constants provided in Lemma 12 in the Appendix.
   Lemma 1 characterizes the expected per-iterate descent of the implied UL objective value, which
   depends on i) the consensus error of the UL parameters ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥2 , ii) the approximation
   error of the LL optimal parameter ∥yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) ∥2 , iii) the approximation error of the dual
   parameter ∥vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) ∥2 , and iv) the diminishing speed of the augmented LL objective
   regularization parameter µt .
 • The second challenge comes from the fact that DUET employs a decentralized consensus update
   mechanism for the UL model parameters as shown in (5), which inherently leads to consensus
   errors. Thanks to our algorithmic design in DUET, the graph topology of the underlying network
   does not theoretically affect the convergence rate order of DUET (i.e., the T -dependence in
   the Big-O convergence rate result in Theorem 1). Also, we achieve the µt -convergence rate,
   which depends on the decay rate τ of the step-size for LL yi -variables and the decay rate p of
   regularization parameter µt . This is a new result compared to those obtained from LLSC.
 • We note that the augmented LL objective (4) for each agent also allows us to relax many restrictive
   assumptions made in traditional bilevel optimization methods (e.g., Liu et al. (2023a), etc.): i) we
   do not require strong convexity for the UL objective at every agent; ii) we relax the requirement of


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    the derivatives ∇2xy fi , ∇2yy fi being Lipschitz continuous with respect to xi and yi , respectively;
    and (iii) we also relax the requirement of a bounded dataset of (xi , yi ). These relaxations make
    our approach more flexible and practical in decentralized settings with data heterogeneity.

Discussions: As mentioned earlier, in this paper, we have tried to avoid imposing any extra restrictive
assumptions in the absence of LLSC. However, it is interesting and insightful to compare the
performance of our DUET algorithm with those who do make extra assumptions. For example,
it turns out that the sl-BAMM method (Liu et al., 2023a), which assumes a UL strongly convex
(ULSC) objective, can be generalized to the decentralized setting as a baseline for comparisons
in our experiments. We name this extension as decentralized sl-BAMM with gradient tracking
(DSGT). DSGT adopts the same single-loop framework as DUET but utilizes a different augmented
LL objective function, which follows Liu et al. (2023a) to aggregate the UL and LL objectives for
every agent as follows: ψµi t (xi,t , yi,t ) := µt fi (xi,t , yi,t ) + (1 − µt )gi (xi,t , yi,t ). For DSGT, we
make the following extra ULSC assumption for every agent:
Assumption 3 (ULSC Assumption for DSGT). (a) For any i ∈ [m] and fixed xi , UL objective
fi (xi , ·) is σfi -strongly convex. (b) For any i ∈ [m], the derivatives ∇2xy fi , ∇2yy fi are Lipschitz
continuous in (xi , yi ) with respective Lipschitz constants Lfi xy1 ,Lfi xy2 , Lfi yy1 ,Lfi yy2 .

With Assumption 3, we can show the following convergence result for sl-BAMM (the proof of
Theorem 5 is similar to the proofs of Theorem 1 and 3 and hence omitted for brevity.)
Theorem 5 (Convergence Analysis for DSGT). Under Assumptions 1 and 3, choose µt =
µ̄(t + 1)−p . Choose the step-sizes as βt ∈ [β̄(t + 1)−τ /4 , 1/Lfi y2 + Lgy2 ] with p ∈ (0, 1/6),
τ ∈ (0, 2/33) and ηt = (t + 1)−τ /2 βt µt , and αt = (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt µt 5 . It then holds
                                              11
that min0≤t≤T Π(xt , yt , vt ) = O(1/T 1−5p− 4 τ ). Further, if vi,t is bounded, it holds that
                                            11
min0≤t≤T KKT(xt , yt , vt ) = O(1/T 1−5p− 4 τ + 1/T 2p ).

We also notice a recent work called LV-HBA (Yao et al., 2024), which considers a more generic
case where the lower-level problem includes equality or inequality constraints g(x, y), and pro-
poses a value function-based proximal Lagrangian method to enforce the constraints with a
provable rate of O(1/K (1−2p)/2 ). However, this convergence rate and our convergence rate
are not comparable due to different stationary measure. Our stationary measure is define in
Eq (8). In contrast, the stationary measure Rk of LV-HBA is defined as following: Rk :=
dist (0, (∇F (x, y), 0) + ck ((∇f (x, y), 0) − ∇vγ,r (x, y, z)) + NC×Z (x, y, z)) , where F (x, y) is
the UL objective, f (x, y) is the LL objective and vγ,r (x, y, z) is truncated proximal Lagrangian
value function. ck is penalty parameter. NΩ (s) denotes the normal cone to Ω at s.

5    N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to verify our theoretical results for DUET. Due to
the lack of existing algorithms for solving decentralized bilevel optimization problems without LLSC
assumption, we compare the convergence performance of DUET and DSGT.
1) A Pedagogical Example: We first verify the convergence results under the ULSC and non-
LLSC cases using five-agent communication networks, with the network edge connection probability
pc = 0.5. The decentralized bilevel optimization problem is defined as the following: minx∈Rn 12 ∥x−
y2∗ ∥2 + 21 ∥y1∗ − e∥2 s.t y∗ = (y1∗ , y2∗ ) ∈ arg min(y1 ,y2 )∈R2n 12 ∥y1 ∥2 + x⊤ y2 , where e denotes
the all-one vector with dimensionality being clear from the context. As shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b),
the gradients of x, y, reach zero when using our DUET algorithm, suggesting they can converge to
the global optimal solution without the LLSC assumption. Note that we use “GT=1” and “GT=0” to
denote the adoption of gradient tracking in the algorithm or otherwise, respectively. As shown in
Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), the gradients of x, y converge more rapidly when gradient tracking is adopted.
However, as observed in Fig. 1(d), DSGT tends to select an LL solution y ∈ S(x) that also yields a
good value for the UL objective function (i.e., fi (x, ·)), which is due to the ULSC assumption. In
contrast, as shown in Fig. 1(c), DUET tends to choose an LL solution y ∈ S(x) that has a good LL
objective value, which is more relevant in DBO problems.
2) Decentralized Meta-learning Problems with Real-World Data: Next, we evaluate our
DUET algorithm on decentralized meta-learning problems with heterogeneous datasets. Following


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



     160
                             DUET, GT=1                                                        DUET, GT=1                                                         40             DUET, GT=1     0.1                                                 60            DUET, GT=1        6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UL objective function value
                                                                                                                                         LL objective function value
     140                                                                                                       0.4
                             DUET, GT=0     1                                    8             DUET, GT=0                                                                        DUET, GT=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50            DUET, GT=0        5
     120                     DSGT, GT=1                                                        DSGT, GT=1      0.2                                                               DSGT, GT=1                                                                       DSGT, GT=1
                             DSGT, GT=0                                                        DSGT, GT=0                                                         30             DSGT, GT=0     0.0                                                               DSGT, GT=0        4
     100                                                                         6                             0.0                                                                                                                                  40
                                            0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       35
                                             4     5   6   7                                                      4    5     6      7                                                             5        6        7                                                                      6        7
||dx||


                                                                   ||dy||
      80                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                                30
      60
                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
      40                                                                         2                                                                                10
      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
       0                                                                         0                                                                                     0
                         0        2          4         6                                 0           2            4         6                                                0        2           4            6                                             0         2            4          6
                                       Time(s)                                                            Time(s)                                                                         Time(s)                                                                            Time(s)
         (a) The gradient of x.                                                  (b) The gradient of y.                                                     (c) LL objective value.                                                         (d) UL objective value.
Figure 1: The gradients of the variables x and y, and the objective values of the UL and LL problems.

                     0.9                                                     0.6                                                                                         0.9                                                             0.6
                     0.8                                                     0.5                                                                                         0.8                                                             0.5
                     0.7                                                                                                                                                 0.7
         Test Accuracy


                                                                 Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Test Accuracy
                     0.6                                                     0.4                                                                                         0.6                                                             0.4
                     0.5                    0.90                                                                                                                         0.5      DUET, p=0.3 0.90                                       0.3                  DUET, p=0.3
                                                                             0.3                           0.575                                                                  DUET, p=0.5                                                                 DUET, p=0.5 0.575
                     0.4                    0.85                                              DUET, GT = 1 0.550                                                         0.4      DUET, p=0.7 0.85                                                            DUET, p=0.7
                                                                             0.2                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                     0.3       DUET, GT = 1 0.80                                              DUET, GT = 0                                                               0.3      DSGT, p=0.3                                                                 DSGT, p=0.3 0.550
                               DSGT, GT = 1                                                   DSGT, GT = 1 0.525                                                         0.2      DSGT, p=0.5 0.80                                       0.1                  DSGT, p=0.5
                     0.2       DSGD                                          0.1              DSGT, GT = 0                                                                        DSGT, p=0.7                                                                 DSGT, p=0.7
                                                   850 900 950                                                   185019001950                                                                        185019001950                                                                185019001950
                     0.1 0       200     400   600    800 1000                       0       250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                                        0.1 0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                                    0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
                                          Epochs                                                         Epochs                                                                               Epochs                                                                       Epochs

                                      (a) i.i.d.                                             (b) non-i.i.d.                                                                           (a) i.i.d.                                                                 (b) non.i.i.d.
     Figure 2: Test accuracy on the meta-learning Figure 3: Test accuracy on random graphs and
     problem with a 5-agent network on MNIST.     the meta-learning problem on MNIST.

the experimental settings in Qiu et al. (2023), we use the MNIST dataset to train m personalized
classifiers. In this setup, x represents the common parameters shared across all agents, while θ
corresponds to task-specific parameters for each agent. The cross-entropy loss is employed as the
main objective function for fi . To prevent overfitting on local samples, we incorporate a quadratic
regularization term in the UL objective function fi , affecting the parameters θ. We set m = 5 and allo-
cate 12,000 samples to each node in a communication network generated by the random Erdős–Rényi
graphs. In the scenario with i.i.d. data, all agents have access to the same global dataset. We compare
our proposed algorithms with the baseline DSGD. In Fig. 2(a), the DUET algorithm demonstrates
superior performance by achieving the highest testing accuracy, along with fast convergence. Notably,
its testing accuracy is 6% higher than that of the standard baseline based on decentralized stochastic
gradient descent. This performance highlights the advantages of DUET in collaborative training
across multiple learners and in tailored adaptation at each node.
In contrast, in the non-i.i.d. data scenario, we adopt a data partitioning strategy, where each agent
accesses data consisting of 95% from two specific labels and 5% randomly selected from other
labels. This strategy ensures significantly diverse label distributions and high data heterogeneity
across nodes. In the non-i.i.d. data scenario, we compare DUET and DSGT by focusing on their
configurations with gradient tracking (GT=1) and without gradient tracking (GT=0). This ablation
study examines the benefits of incorporating gradient tracking. As shown in Fig. 2(b), both testing
accuracy is higher for all algorithms that include gradient tracking. Specifically, the DUET and
DSGT algorithms with gradient tracking significantly outperform their counterparts without gradient
tracking, illustrating the effectiveness of gradient tracking in enhancing model performance in
environments with heterogeneous data. We further evaluate the impact of edge connection probability
pc on the performance of DUET and DSGT in both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. settings with a five-agent
network. Using pc ∈ {0.3, 0.5, 0.7} and the same learning rates as before (Fig. 3), we observe only a
slight improvement in convergence with higher pc , indicating that our DUET algorithm is robust to
different edge connection probabilities and adaptable to various network configurations. To further
validate our algorithm, additional experiments on decentralized hyperparameter optimization and
decentralized meta learning are presented in Appendix E.3 and E.2.

6                        C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we explored decentralized bilevel optimization (DBO) problems that do not require
lower-level strong convexity (LLSC). To address this challenge, we proposed a single-loop DBO
algorithm called quadratically regularized bilevel optimization (DUET) and established its theoretical
convergence rate performance. Additionally, we adopted a single-loop structure in DUET to more
effectively manage the challenges posed by nested structures, and we incorporated gradient tracking
to tackle data heterogeneity. We also conducted numerical experiments to validate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our proposed DUET algorithm.


                                                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been supported in part by NSF grants CAREER CNS-2110259, CNS-2112471,
ExpandAI-2324052 RINGS-2148253, ECCS-2413528, DARPA Young Faculty Award D24AP00265,
ONR grant N00014-24-1-2729, and AFRL grant PGSC-SC-111374-19s.

R EFERENCES
Jincheng Cao, Ruichen Jiang, Nazanin Abolfazli, Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani, and Aryan Mokhtari.
   Projection-free methods for stochastic simple bilevel optimization with convex lower-level problem.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07536, 2023.
Jincheng Cao, Ruichen Jiang, Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani, and Aryan Mokhtari. An accelerated
   gradient method for convex smooth simple bilevel optimization. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=aFOdln7jBV.
Lesi Chen, Jing Xu, and Jingzhao Zhang. On finding small hyper-gradients in bilevel optimization:
  Hardness results and improved analysis. In Shipra Agrawal and Aaron Roth (eds.), Proceedings of
  Thirty Seventh Conference on Learning Theory, volume 247 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 947–980. PMLR, 30 Jun–03 Jul 2024a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v247/chen24a.html.
Pengyu Chen, Xu Shi, Rujun Jiang, and Jiulin Wang. Penalty-based methods for simple bilevel
  optimization under hölderian error bounds. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  oQ1Zj9iH88.
X. Chen, M. Huang, S. Ma, and K. Balasubramanian. Decentralized stochastic bilevel optimization
  with improved per-iteration complexity. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 202, pp. 4641–4671. PMLR, 2023.
Xuxing Chen, Minhui Huang, and Shiqian Ma. Decentralized bilevel optimization. Optimization
 Letters, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249626492.
M. Dagréou, P. Ablin, S. Vaiter, and T. Moreau. A framework for bilevel optimization that enables
 stochastic and global variance reduction algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, volume 35, pp. 26698–26710. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Youran Dong, Shiqian Ma, Junfeng Yang, and Chao Yin. A single-loop algorithm for decentralized
  bilevel optimization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08945.
Hongchang Gao, Bin Gu, and My T Thai. On the convergence of distributed stochastic bilevel
  optimization algorithms over a network. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 9238–9281. PMLR, 2023.
Saeed Ghadimi and Mengdi Wang. Approximation methods for bilevel programming. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.02246, 2018.
Diba Hashemi, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Cobo: Collaborative learning via bilevel optimization.
  In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=SjQ1iIqpfU.
Yutong He, Jie Hu, Xinmeng Huang, Songtao Lu, Bin Wang, and Kun Yuan. Distributed bilevel
  optimization with communication compression. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine
  Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 17877–17920. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v235/he24d.html.
Kaiyi ji and Yingbin Liang. Lower bounds and accelerated algorithms for bilevel optimization. Jour-
  nal of Machine Learning Research, 24(22):1–56, 2023. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/
  v24/21-0949.html.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaiyi Ji, Junjie Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Bilevel optimization: Convergence analysis and enhanced
  design. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4882–
  4892. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ji21c.
  html.
Kaiyi Ji, Mingrui Liu, Yingbin Liang, and Lei Ying. Will bilevel optimizers benefit from loops.
  In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
Ruichen Jiang, Nazanin Abolfazli, Aryan Mokhtari, and Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani. A conditional
  gradient-based method for simple bilevel optimization with convex lower-level problem. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 10305–10323,
  2023.
Boao Kong, Shuchen Zhu, Songtao Lu, Xinmeng Huang, and Kun Yuan. Decentralized bilevel
  optimization over graphs: Loopless algorithmic update and transient iteration complexity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.03167, 2024.
Junyi Li, Bin Gu, and Heng Huang. Improved bilevel model: Fast and optimal algorithm with
  theoretical guarantee, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00690.
Bo Liu, Mao Ye, Stephen Wright, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu. Bome! bilevel optimization made
  easy: A simple first-order approach. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
 17248–17262, 2022a.
Risheng Liu, Yaohua Liu, Wei Yao, Shangzhi Zeng, and Jin Zhang. Averaged method of multipliers
  for bi-level optimization without lower-level strong convexity. In Proceedings of International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21839–21866, 2023a.
Y. Liu and R. Liu. Boml: A modularized bilevel optimization library in python for meta-learning. In
   2021 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia & Expo Workshops (ICMEW), pp. 1–2. IEEE,
   2021.
Zhuqing Liu, Xin Zhang, Prashant Khanduri, Songtao Lu, and Jia Liu. Interact: Achieving low sample
  and communication complexities in decentralized bilevel learning over networks. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-Third International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol
  Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing, pp. 61–70, 2022b.
Zhuqing Liu, Xin Zhang, Prashant Khanduri, Songtao Lu, and Jia Liu. Prometheus: Taming sample
  and communication complexities in constrained decentralized stochastic bilevel learning. In
  Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22420–22453, 2023b.
Songtao Lu, Siliang Zeng, Xiaodong Cui, Mark Squillante, Lior Horesh, Brian Kingsbury, Jia Liu,
  and Mingyi Hong. A stochastic linearized augmented lagrangian method for decentralized bilevel
  optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Zhaosong Lu and Sanyou Mei. First-order penalty methods for bilevel optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.01716, 2023.
Roey Merchav and Shoham Sabach. Convex bi-level optimization problems with nonsmooth outer
  objective function. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 33(4):3114–3142, 2023. doi: 10.1137/
  22M1533608. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/22M1533608.
Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization.
  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48–61, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2008.2009515.
Yurii Nesterov. Lectures on Convex Optimization, volume 137. Springer, 2018.
Youcheng Niu, Jinming Xu, Ying Sun, Yan Huang, and Li Chai. Distributed stochastic bilevel
  optimization: Improved complexity and heterogeneity analysis, 2023.
Clarice Poon and Gabriel Peyré. Smooth bilevel programming for sparse regularization. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1543–1555, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peiwen Qiu, Yining Li, Zhuqing Liu, Prashant Khanduri, Jia Liu, Ness B Shroff, Elizabeth Ser-
  ena Bentley, and Kurt Turck. Diamond: Taming sample and communication complexities in
  decentralized bilevel optimization. In IEEE INFOCOM 2023-IEEE Conference on Computer
  Communications, pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2023.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Chelsea Finn, Sham M Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning with implicit
  gradients. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Shoham Sabach and Shimrit Shtern. A first order method for solving convex bilevel optimization
  problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 27(2):640–660, 2017.
Sepideh Samadi, Daniel Burbano, and Farzad Yousefian. Achieving optimal complexity guaran-
  tees for a class of bilevel convex optimization problems. 2024 American Control Conference
  (ACC), pp. 2206–2211, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  264305773.
Shuoguang Yang, Xuezhou Zhang, and Mengdi Wang. Decentralized gossip-based stochastic bilevel
  optimization over communication networks. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:238–252, 2022.
Wei Yao, Chengming Yu, Shangzhi Zeng, and Jin Zhang. Constrained bi-level optimization: Proximal
 lagrangian value function approach and hessian-free algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16164,
 2024.
Haifeng Zhang, Weizhe Chen, Zeren Huang, Minne Li, Yaodong Yang, Weinan Zhang, and Jun
 Wang. Bi-level actor-critic for multi-agent coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7325–7332, 2020.
Yihan Zhang, My T Thai, Jie Wu, and Hongchang Gao. On the communication complexity of
  decentralized bilevel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11342, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    N OTATION
We summarize our notation in the following table.

       Notation          Definition
            N            Set of nodes.
            L            Set of edges.
            m            Number of agents.
             i           i-th agent.
            T            Total iteration numbers.
             t           t-th iteration.
            α            Step size for updating x.
            β            Step size for updating y.
             η           Step size for updating v.
             p           Averaging control parameter.
            τ            Learning rate control parameter for updating y.
            µ            Regularization parameter for the LL objective.
          Lfi 0          Lipschitz constant of the UL objective fi , see Assumption 1.
      Lfi x1 , Lfi x2    Lipschitz constants for ∇x fi (·, yi ) and ∇x fi (xi , ·), see Assumption 1.
      Lfi y1 , Lfi y2    Lipschitz constants for ∇y fi (·, yi ) and ∇y fi (xi , ·), see Assumption 1.
           fi 0          Uniform lower bound of the UL objective fi , see Assumption 1.
      Lgi y1 , Lgi y2    Lipschitz constants for ∇y gi , see Assumption 2.
     Lgi xy1 , Lgi xy2   Lipschitz constants for ∇2xy gi , see Assumption 2.
     Lgi yy1 , Lgi yy2   Lipschitz constants for ∇2yy gi , see Assumption 2.
          σψµt           Strongly convex constant of the augmented LL objective ψµi t (xi , ·).
            gi           LL objective, convex and smooth, see Assumption 2.
            fi           UL objective, bounded and smooth, see Assumption 1.
           M             Consensus weight matrix M ∈ RN ×N for the decentralized network.
            λ            Second largest eigenvalue of the consensus matrix M .
           xi,t          UL variable for agent i at iteration t.
           yi,t          LL variable for agent i at iteration t.
           vi,t          Dual variable for agent i at iteration t.
           ∇L            Gradient of the Lagrangian function.
           ∇Φ            Gradient of the total UL objective.

                                        Table 2: Notation Table

Also, we formally define the communication complexity of a decentralized algorithm as follows:
Definition 1. (Communication Complexity) : The communication complexity is defined as the total
number of communication rounds needed to converge to an ϵ-stationary point. In each round, every
node can send and receive vector-valued information to and from its neighboring nodes.


B    E XPANDED RELATED WORK
1) Decentralized Bilevel Optimization (DBO): One line of works enforce consensus on the LL
variables. For example, Chen et al. (2022) employed hypergradient estimation with gradient track-
      √both deterministic and stochastic algorithms, achieving convergence rates of O(1/K) and
ing for
O(1/ K) for nonconvex UL and strongly-convex LL problems. However, enforcing LL consensus
adds a costly inner subroutine for decentralized Hessian inverse operation, significantly increasing
the communication costs. Lu et al. (2022) explored stochastic bilevel optimization algorithms with
primal-dual updates and demonstrated linear convergence speedup with respect to the number of
nodes in homogeneous data settings. However, this method does not extend to non-i.i.d. environments,
which are common in decentralized systems. For non-i.i.d. data, Yang et al. (2022) introduced a
gossip protocol-based decentralized bilevel algorithm that achieves linear speedup while accounting
for the communication graph’s spectral gap. Additionally, Dong et al. (2024) proposed a single-loop
algorithm that does not require gradient heterogeneity assumptions. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2023)


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


introduced decentralized stochastic bilevel gradient descent algorithms for heterogeneous settings,
illustrating how communication for hypergradient estimation affects convergence.
2) Centralized Bilevel Optimization without LLSC: Merchav & Sabach (2023) addressed convex
bilevel optimization problems with nonsmooth outer objectives, introducing a generalized sub-
gradient method to the bilevel setting and achieves sub-linear convergence rates for outer and inner
objectives under mild assumptions. They additionally improves to a linear rate for strongly convex
outer objectives while allowing for nonsmoothness. In contrast, our work specifically deals with
smooth UL objectives. Chen et al. (2024b) proposed a penalty-based algorithm that leverages
Hölderian error bounds to achieve convergence rates of O(1/ϵ2 ), assuming a convex UL objective.
Cao et al. (2024) introduced an accelerated gradient method specifically designed
                                                                              √ for bilevel problems
with a convex lower-level problem, achieving convergence rates of O(1/ ϵ) for smooth convex
objectives. Samadi et al. (2023) achieved optimal complexity guarantees for a class of convex bilevel
problems using advanced regularization techniques and strong convexity assumptions. While their
works (Merchav & Sabach, 2023; Chen et al., 2024b; Cao et al., 2024; Samadi et al., 2023) assume
UL convexity, our work focuses on non-convex UL objectives, broadening the applicability to more
general problem settings.

C    P ROOF OF M AIN RESULTS

Before diving into our theoretical analysis, we first introduce the following notations.
Let {at , bt , ct , dt }∞
                        t=1 be a sequence of decreasing positive constants. The general form of potential
function is given by
              Vt :=at f (x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t )) − f0 + dt ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + dt αt ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2


                    + bt ∥yt − yµ∗ t (xt )∥2 + ct ∥vt − vµ∗ t (xt )∥2 .
We also introduce the following notations:
                                         m
                                    1 X
                            x̄t =         xi,t ,           xt = [x⊤              ⊤ ⊤
                                                                  1,t , . . . , xm,t ] ,
                                    m i=1
                                   ⊤              ⊤ ⊤                      ⊤              ⊤ ⊤
                            yt = [y1,t , . . . , ym,t ] ,           vt = [v1,t , . . . , vm,t ] .

The proofs of the theorem involve four major steps, which include: (1) upper-bounding the descent
of the total UL objective; (2) controlling both LL solution and multiplier errors in the descent of the
total UL objective; (3) controlling both the consensus steps and the gradient tracking steps; and (4)
combining all results from the previous steps and choosing suitable coefficients {at , bt , ct , dt }∞
                                                                                                     t=1 for
the Lyapunov function to prove the convergence guarantee.
Step 1: Upper-bounding the descent of the total UL objective. We begin by analyzing the descent
of the total upper-level objective Φµt (x̄t ), which is the average of the individual UL objectives
Φiµt (x̄t ). Our goal is to establish an upper bound on the change in this objective between iterations
                                                                                      1
                                                                                        Pm      i
t and t + 1. The descent of the approximate overall UL objective is Φµt (x̄t ) = m        i=1 Φµt (x̄t ),
where Φiµt (x̄t ) = fi x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t ) .


Lemma 2. Suppose Assumptions holds. Let µt+1 ≤ µt ≤ 12 for all k. Then the sequence of
xi,t , yi,t , vi,t generated by our algorithm satisfy
           Φµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t )
                                                                    !                           m
           αt              2                 αt  α2 LΦµ                              αt LΦµt 1 X
        ≤−    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −                   − t 2 t                 ∥h̄tx ∥2 +                 ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥2
           2                                 2    2σψµ                                rσψ2 µ m i=1
                                                               t                          t
                     m
               2αt r X                                               2                            2
           +                 Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2                  yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
                m     i=1
                         m
               αt rL2ψy1 X                                 2
           +                        vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                  m         i=1


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              m               2
                   1 X i,t
           + 2αt r      d − h̄tx
                   m i=1 x
                                                                                               
                                            ∗
              1
                 m   2 ∇ y f i   x̄ t+1 , y µ t+1
                                                  (x̄ t+1 )        yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                       t    t+1 
                X
           +       
             m i=1                                σhi                                    µt
                    m                ∗             2                  2
                1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥             µt − µt+1
           +                                                              ,
                m i=1         σh2 i                          µt
where both CΦ1 and CΦ2 are constants given by
                    CΦ1 := L2ψy1 Lψyy2 + Lψy1 Lψyy1 + Lψxy2 σψµ + Lψxy1 σψ2 µ


                    CΦ2 := L2ψy1 Lfi y2 + Lψy1 Lfi y1 + Lfi x2 σψµ + Lfi x1 σψ2 µ .



Proof. We decompose the difference Φiµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − Φiµt (x̄t ) into two terms:
  Φiµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − Φiµt (x̄t )

 =fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) − fi x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t )


 =fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) − fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 ) + fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 ) − fi x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t ) .



By the smoothness of fi (x, ·) and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
               m
            1 Xh                                                            i
                    fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) − fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 )
            m i=1
                    m
                1 X hD                                                                   Ei
            ≤          ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) − yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 )
                m i=1
                          m
                  1 X Lfi y2 ∗
                +           ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 )∥2
                  m i=1 2
                    m
                1 Xh                                                                     i
            ≤         ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) · yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 ) − yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 )
                m i=1
                          m
                 1 X Lfi y2 ∗
                +           ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 )∥2
                m i=1 2
                                                                                       
                                           ∗
              1
                 m    2 ∇  f
                          y i   x̄ t+1 , y µt+1 (x̄ t+1 )  yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                               t    t+1
                X
            ≤                                                                          
              m i=1                             σhi                              µt
                          m              ∗             2                   2
                  1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥               µt − µt+1
                +                                                              ,                           (10)
                  m i=1         σh2 i                            µt
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                              2∥yµ (x)∥ |µ−µ′ |
where the last inequality follows from yµ∗ (x) − yµ∗ ′ (x) ≤                    σhi    · µ′ with µ′ = µt and
µ = µt+1 .
Next, let LΦµt := CΦ1 vµ∗ t (x̄t ) + CΦ2 , we have
                                                         m                    m
                                                      1 X i                1 X i
                     Φµt (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t ) =            Φµt (x̄t+1 ) −      Φ (x̄t )
                                                      m i=1                m i=1 µt
                           m
                        1 X
                              fi x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t (x̄t+1 ) − fi x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t )

                    =
                        m i=1


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         m                                              m
                      1 X                                1 X LΦµt                   2
                  ≤         ∇Φiµt (x̄t ) , x̄t+1 − x̄t +              ∥x̄t+1 − x̄t ∥ .                         (11)
                      m i=1                              m i=1 2σψ2 µ
                                                                              t

We apply the gradient descent update step
                                            x̄t+1 − x̄t = −αt h̄tx .                                           (12)

Incorporating (12) into (11), we get
             Φµt (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t )
                   *      m
                                              +
                      1 X                          α2 LΦµ     2
            ≤ − αt          ∇Φµt (x̄t ) , h̄x + t 2 t h̄tx
                                i           t
                     m i=1                          2σψµ
                                                       !t
                                                 2
                αt                2     αt     α LΦµ            αt
            =−      ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −          − t 2 t ∥h̄tx ∥2 + ∥∇Φµt (x̄t ) − h̄tx ∥2 .
                 2                       2      2σψµ            2
                                                               t

We could further get
           Φµt (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t )
                                                               !
           αt              2             αt  α2 LΦµ
        ≤−    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −               − t 2 t                ∥h̄tx ∥2
           2                             2    2σψµ
                                                           t

                                        m                m                                     2
           αt                1          X           1 X
         +     ∇Φµt (x̄t ) −       ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) +         ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − h̄tx
           2                 m i=1                 m i=1
                                                !
           αt              2    αt   αt2 LΦµt
        ≤−    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −      −              ∥h̄tx ∥2
           2                     2    2σψ2 µ
                                                           t

                                       m                     m     2                                   2
           αt                        1 X                  1 X
         +     ∇Φµt (x̄t ) −       ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) + αt r          ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − h̄tx
           r                 m i=1                        m i=1
                                                !                     m
           αt              2    αt   αt2 LΦµt       t 2   αt LΦµt 1 X                 2
        ≤−    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −      −              h̄x   +                ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥
           2                     2    2σψ2 µ               rσψ2 µ m i=1
                                                           t                      t

                         m                         2
                      1  X
            + αt r          ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − h̄tx       .
                      m i=1
Now, we consider the last term of this equation,
       m                         2        m                     m          m                               2
   1 X                                 1 X                   1 X i,t    1 X i,t
         ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − h̄tx        =       ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) −       dx +      d − h̄tx
   m i=1                               m i=1                 m i=1      m i=1 x
                                           m                     m                    2            m            2
                                        1 X                   1 X i,t                        1 X i,t
                                     ≤2       ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) −      d                      +2      d − h̄tx
                                        m i=1                 m i=1 x                        m i=1 x
                                          m                                               m            2
                                       2 X                        2    1 X i,t
                                     ≤       ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − di,t
                                                              x     +2      d − h̄tx                       .
                                       m i=1                           m i=1 x
                                                   Pr      2     Pr
The desired result follows from the inequality ( i=1 ai ) ≤ r i=1 a2i . By the definition of Φiµt (xi ),
we get ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) = ∇x fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ∇2xy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t ) , which implies

that
             ∥∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − di,t
                               x ∥
                                   2

           = ∇Φiµt (xi,t ) − ∇x fi (xi,t , yi,t ) + ∇2xy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t
           ≤ ∇x fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ∇x fi (xi,t , yi,t )


            + ∇2xy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2xy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t )



                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            + ∇2xy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )


           ≤ Lfi x2 + Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t )    yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lψy1 vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) .


We now combine all terms and upper-bound the total descent of the UL objective:
            Φµt+1 (x̄t+1 ) − Φµt (x̄t )
                                                                             !                           m
              αt              2                  αt  α2 LΦµ                                   αt LΦµt 1 X
           ≤−    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −                    − t 2 t                      ∥h̄tx ∥2 +                 ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥2
              2                                  2    2σψµ                                     rσψ2 µ m i=1
                                                                        t                          t
                     m
               2αt r X                               2                      2
             +         Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2    yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
                m i=1
                           m
                 αt rL2ψy1 X                                        2
             +                      vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                    m         i=1
                              m                      2
                     1 X i,t
             + 2αt r      d − h̄tx
                     m i=1 x
                                                                                                                
                                       ∗
                1 X  2 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
                   m                                                                yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                                        t    t+1 
             +
               m i=1                        σhi                                                           µt
                    m                 ∗                       2                       2
               1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥                         µt − µt+1
             +                                                                            .
               m i=1         σh2 i                                      µt



Step 2: Controlling both LL solution and multiplier errors.
In this step, we analyze the errors arising from the LL variables yµt (xi,t ) and the multiplier vµt (xi,t ).
These errors contribute to the overall descent of the upper-level (UL) objective function, as discussed
in Lemma 2. The boundedness of yµ∗ t (xi,t ) and vµ∗ t (xi,t ) will be key to understanding the impact of
these errors.
Lemma 3. For yµ∗ t (xi,t ) and vµ∗ t (xi,t ), we have (recall that rv and ry are defined in (9)):
                                      Lf
     (a) ∥vµ∗ t (xi,t )∥ ≤ rvt = σψ i0 = O( σψ1 ),
                                          µt                  µt


     (b)   ∥yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥ ≤ ryt = O( σ21            ), for any xi,t satisfying ∥xi,t ∥ ≤ rxt = O( σψ1 ).
                                               ψµt                                                                µt



                                                          1
The assumption that ∥xi,t ∥ ≤ rxt = O                    σψµt       will be proven later, but for now, it ensures that xi,t is
bounded relative to σψµt , further supporting the use of the bounds for yµ∗ t (xi,t ) and vµ∗ t (xi,t ).

Proof. (a) By the Lfi 0 -Lipschitz continuity of fi and σψµ -strong convexity of ψµi t in Assumption 1,
we can deduce that
                                                                                         −1    1
             ∇y fi (xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t )) ≤ Lfi 0 and    ∇yy ψµt (xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ))
                                                         2 i
                                                                                            ≤      .
                                                                                              σψµt
                                                   −1
For vµ∗ t (xi,t ) = ∇2yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t )     ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) , we have


                                                              −1                                                   Lfi 0
            vµ∗ t (xi,t ) ≤     ∇yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t )                          ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) ≤
                                 2
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                   σψµt
(b) Assume ∥xi,t ∥ ≤ rxt . By the optimality of yµ∗ t (xi,t ) and Lemme 11 (a), we take x′i = 0 and have
                                      Lψy1
                  ∥yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥ ≤        ∥xi,t − 0∥ + ∥yµ∗ t (0)∥
                                      σψµ

                                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Lψy1
                                       =      ∥xi,t ∥ + ∥yµ∗ t (0) − 0∥
                                         σψµ
                                         Lψy1            1
                                       ≤      ∥xi,t ∥ +       ∥∇y ψµ (0, yµ∗ t (0)) − ∇y ψµ (0, 0)∥
                                         σψµ            σψµ
                                         Lψy1 t       1
                                       ≤      r +        ∥∇y ψµt (0, 0)∥,
                                         σψµ x σψµt
where the second inequality follows from the strong convexity of ψµt (xi,t , ·), the last inequality
follows from the optimality of yµ∗ t (0).
Lemma 4. For any i ∈ [m], the sequence of xi,t , yi,t , vi,t generated by our algorithm satisfy
                                                   2
                 yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )

                                        ∗      2                                1                         2
                                                                                       − βt2       hi,t

               ≤ 1 − σψµt βt yi,t − yµt (xi,t ) − 2βt                                               y         ,
                                                                           σψµt + Lψµt
and
                                       2                                      2
         vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t )            ≤ 1 − ηt σψµt vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )


                                                2ηt                                 2
                                                                                                          2
                                            +         Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2    yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) ,
                                               σψµt
                               2
if we choose βt ≤ σψ                           and ηt ≤ Lψ1 .
                          µt +Lψµt                         µt



Proof. We begin by analyzing the update for the LL solution, yi,t+1 . Recall that the update is
performed via a projected gradient step:
                                           yi,t+1 = Pryt [yi,t − βt ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )],

where Pryt [·] denotes the projection onto the feasible set with radius ryt . This projection ensures
that yi,t+1 = yi,t+1 (xi,t+1 ) remains bounded, preventing it from diverging. To analyze the error
∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥, we decompose the update step:

                ∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 = ∥Pryt [yi,t − βt ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )] − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 .
                                                                                                                  2
Since the projection is non-expansive, i.e., it does not increase distances, and yµ∗ t (xi,t )                        ≤ ryt by
Lemma 3, we have:
                   ∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 ≤ ∥yi,t − βt ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 .
Next, we expand the right-hand side:
                           2
  yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
                               2                                                                                           2
 ≤ yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )            − 2βt yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) , ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) + βt2 ∥∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )∥ ,

To bound the inner product term, by the σψµt -strong convexity and Lψµt -smoothness of ψµt (x, ·),
since ∇y ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) = 0, Theorem 2.1.12 in (Nesterov, 2018) implies that


                  yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) , ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )
              = yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) , ∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇y ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t )


                 σψµt Lψµt                            2          1                             2
              ≥                 yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) +                  ∥∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )∥ .
                σψµt + Lψµt                                 σψµt + Lψµt

                                           2
Hence, when 0 < βt ≤ σψ                            , we have
                                       µt +Lψµt

                                   2
      yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )


                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2σψµt Lψµt

                              ∗         2           1         2                        2
≤ 1−             βt   yi,t − yµt (xi,t ) − 2βt             − βt ∥∇y ψµt (xi,t , yi,t )∥
     σψµt + Lψµt                               σψµt + Lψµt
      2σψµt Lψµt

                              ∗         2           1         2        2
= 1−             βt   yi,t − yµt (xi,t ) − 2βt             − βt   hi,t
                                                                   y     ,
     σψµt + Lψµt                               σψµt + Lψµt
                                                            Lψ
which implies the desired result since 12 ≤ σψ +L     µt
                                                         ψµt
                                                             ≤ 1. This inequality shows that the error
                                                   µt
in yi,t contracts as long as the step size βt is chosen appropriately, ensuring the progress of the
algorithm toward the optimal solution yµ∗ t (xi,t ).
Now,
  2 we proceed         to bound     the error in the multiplier v i,t+1 = vi,t+1 (xi,t+1 ) by using
 ∇yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t ) = ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) . As with the previous projection


for yi,t+1 , the non-expansiveness property of the projection operator Prvt [·] gives us:
                                      2
              vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                                                                                                    2
            = Prvt [vi,t − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − ∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t ) ] − vµ∗ t (xi,t )

                                                                                              2
            ≤ vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − ∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t )

                                                                                                ,              (13)
                                                           2
where the inequality holds because vµ∗ t (xi,t ) ≤ rvt by Lemma 3. Next, we expand the right-hand
side, which gives:
                vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − ∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t )


              =vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )


                 − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t )


                 − ηt ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ∇y fi xi,t , yi,t
                                                                   ∗

                                                                         .                     (14)
Hence, by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, for all ϵ ≥ 0, we incorporate (14) into (13) and have
                                     2
              vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                                                                         2
           ≤(1 + ϵ) I − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )


                     1
                          ηt2 × ∥ ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t )

             + 1+
                      ϵ
                                                                   2
               + ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − ∇y fi xi,t , yi,t
                                                             ∗

                                                                     .
When ηt ≤ 1/Lψµt , by the σψµ - strongly convexity of ψµt (xi , ·), since the spectral norm is monotone,
we have
        I − ηt ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t+1 ) vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) ≤ 1 − ηt σψµt ∥vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )∥.



Next, by Lipschitz continuity of ∇2yy ψµt (x, ·) and ∇y fi (x, ·), we get

       ∥ ∇2yy ψµt (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇2yy ψµt xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t ) vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + ∇y fi xi,t , yµ∗ t (xi,t )


            −∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t )∥

     ≤ Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2               yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) .

Taking ε = ηt σψµt , we have
                                          2
               vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                                         2                       2
                                            vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )

             ≤ 1 + ηt σψµt 1 − ηt σψµt
                                                                    2
                           1                                                              2
              + 1+                ηt2 Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2    yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) ,
                       ηt σψµt
which implies the desired result since ηt2 ≤ ηt /Lψµt ≤ ηt /σψµt .


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This shows that the error in the multiplier vi,t also contracts over iterations, provided that the step
size ηt is chosen appropriately.
By the above lemmas, we can now proceed to analyze the error of LL and multiplier variables.
Lemma 5. Suppose Assumptions hold. For any i ∈ [m], the the sequence of xi,t , yi,t , vi,t generated
by our algorithm satisfy
                                                                                                           2
                                       2           2L2ψy1                            8 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                                                                   µt − µt+1
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                             2
 yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )         ≤                ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥ +                                                      ,
                                                   σψ2 µ                                     σh2 i                     µt
                                                       t

and
                                                                            2
                                           2     2 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2                    2
      vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )        ≤                              ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
                                                            σψ4 µ
                                                                 t

                                               + 2 ( Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                                         2   µ − µ  2
                                                                                               t     t+1
                                                 +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )                   ,
                                                                                                 µ2t
where both Cv1 and Cv2 are constants given by

             Cv1 := 2 Lhiyy2 + Lgi yy2 /σh2 i ,                         Cv2 := 2 Lfi y2 + Lgi y2 /σh2 i .



Proof. By the triangle inequality, and Lemma 11(a) and 13(a) with µ′ = µt and µ = µt+1 ,

                            yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                        ≤ yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − yµ∗ t (xi,t+1 ) + yµ∗ t (xi,t+1 ) − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                          Lψy1                    2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                         t    t+1
                        ≤      ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥ +                                 .
                          σψµt                            σhi              µt
Then with µ′ = µt and µ = µt+1 , we have

  vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) ≤ vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − vµ∗ t (xi,t+1 ) + vµ∗ t (xi,t+1 ) − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                       Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2

                                    ≤                                 ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
                                                   σψ2 µ
                                                        t

                                      + Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                                    µ − µ
                                                                  ∗                     t      t+1
                                      +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )                            .
                                                                                          µ2t


Building upon the aforementioned lemmas, we can now proceed to analyze the iteration-wise
differences in the errors of LL and multiplier variables.
Lemma 6. Then for any i ∈ [m], the sequence of xi,t , yi,t , vi,t generated by our algorithm satisfy
                                               2                             2
           yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )      − yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )

         1                          ∗         2          1                   1
      ≤ − βt σψµt           yi,t − yµt (xi,t ) − 1 + βt σψµt        2βt             − βt ∥hi,t
                                                                                       2
                                                                                           y ∥
                                                                                               2
         2                                               2              σψµt + Lψµt
                                                                             2
             6L2ψy1                                   24 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                                     µt − µt+1
                                                                                                  2
                                           2
         +               ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥ +                                                           ,
             βt σψ3 µ                                        σh2 i βt σψµt               µt
                    t


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
                                            2                             2
              vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )        − vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                                                                                2
              1                 ∗        2    6 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2                           2
          ≤ − ηt σψµt vi,t − vµt (xi,t ) +                                        ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
              2                                             ηt σψ5 µ
                                                                    t

               3ηt                               2
                             ∗                                   ∗           2
            +        Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2       yi,t − yµt (xi,t )
              σψµt
                           2
                µt − µt+1        6              ∗

            +                           C v1  v µt+1 (x i,t+1  )   +  Lfi y2    yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                   µ2t       ηt σψµt
                                                       2
              +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )       .



Proof. By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, it is easy to check that for any ϵ > 0, we have
                  ∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2
               =∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) + yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2
                                                             1
               ≤(1 + ϵ)∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 + (1 + )∥yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2 .
                                                             ϵ
Taking ϵ = 21 βt σψµt , by Lemma 4 and Lemma 5, we have

   ∥yi,t+1 − yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2

          1                                 2     1                   1
  ≤ 1 − βt σψµt         yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) − 1 + βt σψµt   2βt             − βt2 ∥hi,t
                                                                                     y ∥
                                                                                         2
          2                                       2              σψµt + Lψµt
      2L2ψ

                        2
   + 2 y1 1 +                  ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥2
       σψµ           βt σψµt
              t
                                2
          8 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                             2

                                                         µt − µt+1
                                                                      2
      +                              1+                                   ,
                   σh2 i                  βt σψµt            µt
which implies the desired result since βt σψµt ≤ 1 when βt ≤ 2/(σψµt + Lψµt ).
Similarly, for any δ > 0, by Cauchy-Schware inequality,
                  ∥vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2
               =∥vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2
                                                             1
               ≤(1 + δ)∥vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t (xi,t )∥2 + (1 + )∥vµ∗ t (xi,t ) − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )∥2 .
                                                             δ
Taking δ = 21 ηt σψµt , by Lemma 4 and Lemma 5, we have
                                            2
            vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                 1                                  2
          ≤ 1 − ηt σψµt        vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                 2
                                              2
             2 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2

                                                           2                     2
           +                                      1 +            ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
                           σψ4 µ                       ηt σψµt
                                t
                                                                        2
              2ηt         1                                                                      2
           +         1 + ηt σψµt        Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2        yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
             σψµt         2

           + 2 Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        2                                          2
                                                                           2          µt − µt+1
               +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )     × 1+                                          .
                                                                       ηt σψµt           µ2t
This desired result follows since ηt σψµt ≤ 1 when ηt ≤ 1/Lψµt .

Step 3: Controlling both the consensus steps and the gradient tracking steps.
In this step, we are focusing on controlling both the consensus steps and the gradient tracking steps
within our decentralized algorithm. The goal is to show that the iterates contract over time, which
means that both the decision variables xt and the gradient tracking variables htx converge as the
algorithm progresses. This lemma proves that the discrepancy between these variables across agents
reduces over iterations, thus guaranteeing convergence.
Lemma 7 (Iterates Contraction). The following contraction properties of the iterates hold:
                                                                           1 2 t
            ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2 ≤ (1 + l1 )λ2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (1 +       )α ∥h − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 ,
                                                                           l1 t x
      and
                                                                            1
            ∥ht+1
              x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1 2           2  t         t 2
                          x ∥ ≤ (1 + l2 )λ ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥ + (1 +              )∥dt+1
                                                                                  x   − dtx ∥2 ,
                                                                            l2
where l1 and l2 are arbitrary positive constants.
Additionally, we have
             ∥xt+1 − xt ∥2 ≤ 8∥(xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t )∥2 + 4αt2 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + 4αt2 m∥h̄tx ∥2 .
And also,
                                       ∥yt+1 − yt ∥2 ≤ βt2 ∥hty ∥2 .


The first inequality states that the deviation of the iterates xt+1 from their consensus value 1 ⊗ x̄t+1
(where 1⊗ represents the averaging operator) is bounded by a factor that depends on the previous
deviation, scaled by the contraction factor λ, and the gradient tracking error. The second inequality
bounds the change in the gradient tracking variables htx between iterations t and t + 1, showing
that it contracts over time, depending on the contraction factor λ and the difference in the gradient
correction steps dt+1
                    x    − dtx . These two contraction results help ensure that the iterates (both the
decision variables and the gradient tracking variables) converge towards their consensus values over
time.

Proof. We begin by analyzing the iterates of xt+1 . The idea is to show that the deviation of xt+1
from its average consensus value 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 contracts over iterations. Define M
                                                                             f = M ⊗ Im . First for
the iterates xt , we have the following contraction:
                      f t − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 = ∥M(x
                     ∥Mx                  f t − 1 ⊗ x̄t )∥2 ≤ λ2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 .                        (15)
This is because xt − 1 ⊗ xt is orthogonal 1, which is the eigenvector corresponding to the largest
              f and λ = max{|λ2 |, |λm |}. Recall that x̄t = x̄t−1 − αt−1 h̄t−1 , hence,
eigenvalue of M,                                                            x

              ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 = ∥Mx
                                  f t−1 − αt−1 ht−1 − 1 ⊗ (x̄t−1 − αt−1 h̄t−1 )∥2
                                                x                         x
               (a)
                           f t−1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t−1 ∥2 + (1 + 1 )α2 ∥ht−1 − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 ∥2
               ≤ (1 + l1 )∥Mx
                                                        l1 t−1 x             x

               (b)                                      1 2
               ≤ (1 + l1 )λ2 ∥xt−1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t−1 ∥2 + (1 + )αt−1 ∥ht−1
                                                                 x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 2
                                                                             x ∥ ,
                                                        l1
where (a) is because of triangle inequality and (b) is from (15). Next, we analyze the gradient
tracking steps. The goal here is to show that the deviation of the gradient tracking variables from
their consensus value also contracts over time. Using the update rule for htx , we have
            ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              f t−1 + dt − dt−1 − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 + d̄t − d̄t−1 ∥2

           =∥Mh  x        x    x            x     x      x
                                                 1
           ≤(1 + l2 )λ2 ∥ht−1 − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 2
                                                    )∥dtx − dt−1 − 1 ⊗ d̄tx − d̄t−1
                                                                                       2
                          x           x ∥ + (1 +              x                 x     ∥
                                                 l2
                                                 1          1
           ≤(1 + l2 )λ2 ∥ht−1 − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 2
                                                    )∥ I − (11⊤ ) ⊗ I dtx − dt−1
                                                                                       2
                          x           x ∥ + (1 +                                 x    ∥
                                                 l2        n
          (a)                                    1
          ≤ (1 + l2 )λ2 ∥ht−1
                          x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 2
                                      x ∥ + (1 +    )∥dtx − dt−1 2
                                                              x ∥ ,                             (16)
                                                 l2
                         1
where (a) is due to ∥I − m (11⊤ ) ⊗ I∥ ≤ 1.
From (16), letting l2 = 1−λ
                         λ , we can further have

                                                                       1
                       (1 + l2 )λ2 ∥ht−1
                                     x   − 1 ⊗ h̄xt−1 ∥2 + (1 +           )∥dtx − dt−1
                                                                                   x ∥
                                                                                       2
                                                                       l2
                                                     1
                     ≤λ∥ht−1
                         x   − 1 ⊗ h̄xt−1 ∥2 +         ∥dt − dt−1 2
                                                              x ∥ .
                                                    1−λ x
Then we have
                                                     t+1
                                                 1 X t+1−s s
                       ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 ≤                ∥dx − dxs−1 ∥2 .

                                                         λ                                      (17)
                                               1 − λ s=0

By using ∥htx ∥2 = ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + n∥h̄tx ∥2 and (17), we can immediately deduce that
                                         t+1
                                     1 X t+1−s s
                       ∥htx ∥2 ≤               ∥dx − ds−1 2
                                                              + n∥d̄tx ∥2 .

                                             λ        x ∥
                                   1 − λ s=0

According to the updating mechanism detailed in (5), we have
               ∥xt − xt−1 ∥2
                f t−1 − αt−1 ht−1 − xt−1 ∥2
              =∥Mx                 x
                 f − I)xt−1 − αt−1 ht−1 ∥2
              =∥(M                  x

              ≤2∥(M − I)xt−1 ∥ + 2α ∥ht−1 ∥2
                  f           2     2
                                         t−1    x
                  f − I)(xt−1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t−1 )∥2 + 2α2 ∥ht−1 ∥2
              =2∥(M                               t−1 x

              ≤8∥(xt−1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t−1 )∥2 + 4αt−1
                                           2
                                               ∥ht−1
                                                 x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t−1 2   2       t−1 2
                                                             x ∥ + 4αt−1 m∥h̄x ∥ .

Also,
 ∥yt − yt−1 ∥2 = ∥P ryt [yt−1 − βt2 ht−1 ] − yt−1 ∥2 ≤ ∥yt−1 − βt2 ht−1 − yt−1 ∥2 ≤ βt2 ∥ht−1 2
                                                                                          y ∥ ,
                                                    2
where the first inequality holds because ∥yt−1 ∥ ≤ ryt−1 ≤ ryt by the algorithm setting, implying the
non-expensive property.
Lemma 8. Let rx be defined as in (9). Then, the following inequality holds:
                                                                       !
                                                               1
                                       ∥xi,t ∥2 ≤ rx2 = O                  .
                                                             σψ2 µ
                                                                   t


                                                                        2
This     states that the squared norm of the vector xi,t is bounded by rx , which is of the order
    lemma
O σ21    .
        ψµt



Proof. By Assumption 2, we have
                       di,t
                        x   = ∥∇x fi (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇xy ψi (xi,t , yi,t )vi,t ∥
                             ≤ ∥∇x fi (xi,t , yi,t )∥ + ∥∇xy ψi (xi,t , yi,t )∥ ∥vi,t ∥


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                            1
                                            ≤ Lfi 0 + (Lψi y1 rv ) = B1 = O(                                    ),
                                                                                                           σψµt
and
                                                                          m
                                                                 1 X i,t             1
                                                d̄i,t
                                                  x   ≤                dx ≤ B1 = O(      ).
                                                                 m i=1              σψµt
Here we also prove that
        ∥di,t
          y ∥ = ∥∇y ψi (xi,t , yi,t )∥ ≤ ∥∇y ψi (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇y ψi (0, 0)∥ + ∥∇y ψi (0, 0)∥
                                                                                             1
              ≤ Lψy (∥xi,t ∥ + ∥yi,t ∥) ≤ Lψy (rxt + ryt ) + ∥∇y ψi (0, 0)∥ ≤ B2 = Õ( 2 ),
                                                                                            σψµ
                                                                                                                                                t

and
                                                                                                                                                 1
      di,t
       v   = ∥∇y fi (xi,t , yi,t ) − ∇yy ψi (xi,t , yi,t )vi,t ∥ ≤ Lfi 0 + (Lψi y2 rv ) = B3 = O(                                                    ).
                                                                                                                                                σψµt
We can deduce that
                 m                                                t+1
                                                                                        !
                                   4mB12

                 X             2                                  X                                                      4
                        hi,t+1
                         x       ≤                                         λ  t+1−s
                                                                                            + mB12 ≤            1+                     B12 m.
                 i=1
                                                1−λ               s=0
                                                                                                                     (1 − λ)2
                                                    i,t
                       P
From xi,t+1 =              i′ ∈Ni [M]ii xi ,t − αt hx , we have
                                       ′  ′


           m
           X                                2
                 ∥xi,t+1 − xi,t ∥
           i=1
           m                                                                                                               2
           X       X                                                      X
       ≤                   [M]ii′ xi′ ,t − αt hi,t
                                               x −                                 [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1 − αt−1 hi,t−1
                                                                                                           x
           i=1    i′ ∈Ni                                                  i′ ∈Ni
             m                                                                                 2              m
         1X            X                                      X                                          1 X                   i,t−1 2
       ≤                        [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −                       [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1              +             αt hi,t
                                                                                                                     x − αt−1 hx
         λ i=1                                                                                         1 − λ i=1
                       i′ ∈Ni                             i′ ∈Ni
            m                                                                  2                m
         1  X          X                                                               1    2
                                                                                               X                 2
       ≤                        [M] (xii′       i′ ,t   −x     i′ ,t−1    )        +      α        hi,t − hi,t−1   ,
         λ i=1                                                                       1 − λ t−1 i=1 x       x
                       i′ ∈Ni

where the second inequality is due to the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Now we have
                                m                                                                                                  2
                                X           X                                      X
                                                   [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −                      [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1 − (x̄t − x̄t−1 )
                                i=1    i′ ∈Ni                                  i′ ∈Ni
                                  m
                                  X                                                                    2
                           ≤λ2              ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 − (x̄t − x̄t−1 )∥ .
                                   i=1

Moreover, we have
                           m                                                                                                   2
                           X          X                                    X
                                             [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −                       [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1 − (x̄t − x̄t−1 )
                           i=1    i′ ∈Ni                                  i′ ∈Ni
                           m                                                                               2
                           X          X                                    X                                                           2
                       =                     [M] x      ii′   i′ ,t   −            [M] x ii′   i′ ,t−1         + m ∥x̄t − x̄t−1 ∥
                           i=1    i′ ∈Ni                                  i′ ∈Ni
                                 m
                                        *                                                                                      +
                                 X              X                                   X
                           −2                            [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −                    [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1 , x̄t − x̄t−1
                                 i=1         i′ ∈Ni                                i′ ∈Ni
                           m                                                                               2
                           X          X                                    X                                                           2
                       =                     [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −                       [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1             − m ∥x̄t − x̄t−1 ∥ ,
                           i=1    i′ ∈Ni                                  i′ ∈Ni


                                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
               m
               X                                                     2
                       ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 − (x̄t − x̄t−1 )∥
                 i=1
               m
               X                                                                   m
                                                                                   X
                                            2                              2
           =           ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ + m ∥x̄t − x̄t−1 ∥ − 2                               ⟨xi,t − xi,t−1 , x̄t − x̄t−1 ⟩
               i=1                                                                  i=1
               Xm
                                            2                              2
           =           ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ − m ∥x̄t − x̄t−1 ∥ .
                 i=1

Then we obtain
                                 m                                                                  2
                                 X         X                             X
                                                 [M]ii′ xi′ ,t −               [M]ii′ xi′ ,t−1
                                 i=1 i′ ∈Ni                          i′ ∈Ni
                                   m
                                   X                             2                                           2
                             ≤λ2           ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ + (1 − λ2 )m ∥x̄t − x̄t−1 ∥
                                   i=1
                                   m
                                   X                             2                                           2
                             =λ2           ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ + (1 − λ2 )mαt−1
                                                                         2
                                                                             d̄xt−1                              .
                                   i=1

Now we have that
        m
        X                          2
             ∥xi,t+1 − xi,t ∥
        i=1
          m                                                                      m
         X                             2        1 − λ2   2         2    1       X
                                                                                          i,t−1 2
      ≤λ         ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ +                    mαt−1 d̄t−1
                                                               x     +     α 2
                                                                            t−1     hi,t
                                                                                     x − hx
           i=1
                                                  λ                    1−λ      i=1
           m
           X                          1 − λ2
                                       2         2           2
      ≤λ         ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ +           mαt−1  d̄t−1
                                                       x
           i=1
                                          λ
                                   m           m
                                                             !
                   2               X       2   X           2
           +          α2             hi,t    +     hi,t−1      .
                 1 − λ t−1         i=1
                                      x             x
                                                          i=1
                       2
We set λ1 = 1−λ   4      16
             λ + 1−λ + (1−λ)3 and have

                   m
                   X                                      m
                                                          X
                                                 2                                       2
                           ∥xi,t+1 − xi,t ∥ ≤ λ                 ∥xi,t − xi,t−1 ∥ + λ1 B12 mαt−1
                                                                                            2

                   i=1                                     i=1
                                                            Xm                                              t
                                                                                                            X
                                                          t                               2
                                                     ≤λ          ∥xi,0 − xi,−1 ∥ + λ1 B12 m                           2
                                                                                                                     αs−1
                                                           i=1                                              s=1
                                                                     t
                                                                     X
                                                     ≤ λ1 B12 m             2
                                                                           αs−1
                                                                     s=1
                                                                                     1
                                                     ≤ λ1 B12 mβ̄ µ̄                                 ,
                                                                                    2(1+ 47 τ +p)
                                                                          (t + 1)
                                                     Pt
where αt = (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt µt 3 , and                       2
                                                        s=1 αs−1 ≤ β̄ µ̄
                                                                                             1
                                                                                                         log(t + 1). Then we have
                                                                                (t+1)    (
                                                                                      2 1+ 7 τ +p
                                                                                           4        )
                           m
                           X              m
                                          X                     m
                                                                X
                             ∥xi,t ∥2 ≤ 2   ∥xi,t − xi,0 ∥2 + 2   ∥xi,0 ∥2
                           i=1                    i=1                               i=1
                                                     t−1 X
                                                     X   m                                       m
                                                                                                 X
                                           ≤ 2t                ∥xi,s+1 − xi,s ∥2 + 2               ∥xi,0 ∥2
                                                     s=0 i=1                                     i=1


                                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                              m
                                                            t2              X
                                ≤ 2λ1 B12 mβ̄ µ̄                         +2   ∥x0i ∥2
                                                           2(1+ 47 τ +p)
                                                   (t + 1)                    i=1
                                                     m
                                                     X
                                ≤ 2λ1 B12 mβ̄ µ̄ + 2   ∥x0i ∥2
                                                         i=1
                           Pm                        1
which implies ∥xi,t ∥2 ≤                2   2
                             i=1 ∥xi,t ∥ ≤ rx = O( σψ
                                                    2          ), where rx is defined in (9).
                                                          µt



We now analyze the contraction properties of the iterates xt+1 and ht+1
                                                                    x ,respectively, as generated
by the algorithm. Specifically, we aim to track how the differences between successive iterations
decrease over time.
Lemma 9.
                ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2 − ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2
                                                                     1 2 t
                ≤ ((1 + l1 )λ2 − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (1 +             )α ∥h − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 ,
                                                                     l1 t x
where l1 is an arbitrary positive constant.
      ∥ht+1
        x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1 2   t         t 2
                    x ∥ − ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                         1                       2
      ≤ ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + (1 +          )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ),
                                                         l2
where l2 is also an arbitrary positive constant.

Proof. We start by examining the difference in the updates between iterations for both xt and htx .
Using the smoothness assumptions (Assumption 2), we first bound the difference between successive
updates of dx , which are defined as the gradient of the objective function:
                                     2                           2                        2
∥dt+1
  x   − dtx ∥2 ≤ L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 ∥yt+1 − yt ∥ ≤ L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 .
Applying the results from Lemma 7, we have:
                      ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2
                                                               1 2 t
                    ≤(1 + l1 )λ2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (1 +         )α ∥h − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 ,
                                                               l1 t x
which reflects the contraction behavior of the consensus steps for the decision variable xt . Similarly,
the contraction property for htx , the gradient tracking variable, follows:
             ∥ht+1
               x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1
                           x ∥
                               2

                                                     1                      2
           ≤(1 + l2 )λ2 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + (1 +       )(L2fi 1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                                                     l2
Finally, we combine the two bounds to obtain the iterative contraction properties for both xt+1 and
ht+1
 x :

      ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2 − ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2
                                                       1 2 t
      ≤ ((1 + l1 )λ2 − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (1 +         )α ∥h − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                                                       l1 t x
      ∥ht+1
        x   − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1 2   t         t 2
                    x ∥ − ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                         1                       2
      ≤ ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + (1 +          )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                                                         l2



Step 4: Choosing suitable coefficients such that the descent of Lyapunov function is well
controlled.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The purpose of Step 4 is to identify suitable decreasing coefficients {at , bt , ct , dt }∞
                                                                                          t=1 and a well-
chosen averaging parameter µt such that the descent of the Lyapunov function is well-controlled and
can be bounded by a summable series. This ensures the algorithm converges under the framework
provided by the potential function.
In this lemma, we define a potential function Vt that tracks the overall progress of the algorithm and
analyze its behavior over iterations. We then establish an upper bound on the difference between
Vt+1 and Vt , showing that the Lyapunov function Vt decreases at each step, guided by well-chosen
coefficients that control the descent rate.
                                                                           ∞
Lemma 10 (Potential function). We          assume that {at , bt , ct , dt }t=1 be a sequence of decreasing
positive constants, where Vt := at f (x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t )) − f0 + dt ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + dt αt ∥htx − 1 ⊗
h̄tx ∥2 + bt ∥yt − yµ∗ t (xt )∥2 + ct ∥vt − vµ∗ t (xt )∥2 .
        Vt+1 − Vt
             at+1 αt                                                                          2
        ≤−           ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 + C1 ∥h̄tx ∥2 + C2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + C3 yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
                2
                                  2
           + C4 vt − vµ∗ t (xt ) + C5 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + C6 ∥hty ∥2

                                            ∗
              1 X 2at+1 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
                 m                                           yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                  t    t+1
           +
             m i=1                              σhi                                 µt
                 m                  ∗             2              2
              1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥       µt − µt+1
           +
             m i=1               σh2 i                    µt
                                              2
               m 24b      ∗
                     t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                    2
               X                                      µt − µt+1
           +
               i=1
                           σh2 i βt σψµt                  µt
                m                         2
               X  6ct+1 µt − µt+1                    ∗

           +                         2         Cv1 v µ     (x i,t+1 ) + Lfi y2
                                                                                 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
             i=1
                 η t σ ψµt
                                    µt
                                                       t+1


                                                      2
             +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )         ,
where
                                    !                                                                          2
                     αt  α2 LΦµ                    6bt+1 L2ψy1                6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C1 = −at+1             − t 2 t         + 4αt2 m                   + 4αt2 m
                     2    2σψµ                        βt σψ3 µ                          ηt σψ5 µ
                                t                              t                               t

          1
      +      dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 m,
        1−λ
                                                                       2 !
          αt LΦµt         6bt+1 L2ψy1   6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C2 = at+1 2       +8                 +
          rσψµ m             βt σψ3 µ             ηt σψ5 µ
                     t                    t                              t

                                  1
      + dt+1 (λ − 1) + 8              dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 ,
                               1−λ
                 1                                       2
 C3 = at+1 αt r      Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                m
           bt+1                3ct+1 ηt                                    2
                                                      ∗
      −          βt σψµt −                 Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2          ,
             2                   σψµt
            αt r 2           ct+1
 C4 = at+1       L       −        ηt σψµt ,
            m ψy1              2
                        2                        ∗
                                                                      2 !
              6b t+1 L  ψ        6c t+1 L   v1 v µ   (x  i,t ) + Lv2
 C5 = 4αt2                y1
                              +                    t

                βt σψ3 µ                       ηt σψ5 µ
                         t                                t

           1                                  1
      +       dt+1 αt2 + dt+1 αt+1 (λ − 1) +     dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 ,
        1−λ                                  1−λ

                  1     2   2              1                     1          2
 C6 = dt+1 αt+1       L β − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt         2βt                 − βt .
                1 − λ fi 2 t               2             σψµt + Lψµt

                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof.
     Vt+1 − Vt
          h                                                    i
    =at+1 f (x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )) − f (x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t )) + (at+1 − at )f (x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t ))
     + dt+1 ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2 − ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (dt+1 − dt )∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2


     + dt+1 αt+1 ∥ht+1       − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1    2           t          t 2

                        x              x ∥ − ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
     + (dt+1 αt+1 − dt αt )∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2

                                          2                            2                                   2
     + bt+1 yt+1 − yµ∗ t+1 (xt+1 ) − yt − yµ∗ t (xt )                      + (bt+1 − bt ) yt − yµ∗ t (xt )

                                          2                            2                                   2
     + ct+1 vt+1 − vµ∗ t+1 (xt+1 ) − vt − vµ∗ t (xt )                      + (ct+1 − ct ) vt − vµ∗ t (xt )
         h                                                      i
    ≤at+1 f (x̄t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )) − f (x̄t , yµ∗ t (x̄t ))
     + dt+1 ∥xt+1 − 1 ⊗ x̄t+1 ∥2 − ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2


     + dt+1 αt+1 ∥ht+1       − 1 ⊗ h̄t+1    2           t            t 2

                        x              x ∥ − ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
            "m                                               m
                                                                                       #
              X                                     2      X                         2
                                  ∗                                         ∗
     + bt+1          yi,t+1 − yµt+1 (xi,t+1 ) −                   yi,t − yµt (xi,t )
                   i=1                                              i=1
                  "m                                                 m
                                                                                                            #
                   X                                       2        X                             2
         + ct+1           vi,t+1 − vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )           −             vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                   i=1                                              i=1
By combining the estimates from the above lemmas, we have
      Vt+1 − Vt
           "                                                             !                              m
              αt          2                    αt  α2 LΦµ                            2       αt LΦµt 1 X
     ≤at+1 − ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ −                      − t 2 t                     h̄tx       +                 ∥x̄t − xi,t ∥2
              2                                2    2σψµ                                      rσψ2 µ m i=1
                                                                    t                               t
                  m
             αt r X                                             2                               2
         +               Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2                   yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
             m i=1
                       m                                                       m                        2
             αt rL2ψy1 X                              2                    1 X i,t
         +                     vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )       + 2αt r               d − h̄tx
               m         i=1
                                                                           m i=1 x
                                                                                                      
                                  ∗
           1 X  2 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
              m                                                           yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                              t    t+1 
         +
           m i=1                       σhi                                                      µt
              m                ∗             2               2              #
           1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥          µt − µt+1
         +
           m i=1               σh2 i                 µt
                 m
                    "
                X         1                              2    6L2ψy1                     2
         + bt+1        − βt σψµt yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) +            3    ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
                i=1
                          2                                  β t σ ψ µt

                    1                          1
           − 1 + βt σψµt             2βt                − βt2 ∥hi,t y ∥
                                                                        2
                    2                    σψµt + Lψµt
                                      2
                                                        
             24 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ  2 
                                           t     t+1
           +
                   σh2 i βt σψµt              µt
                                                        

                   m
                  X    1                             2
         + ct+1       − ηt σψµt vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                  i=1
                       2


                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                        2
            6 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2                       2
          +                               ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
                       ηt σψ5 µ
                               t

             3ηt                                2
                               ∗                                            2
          +         Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2       yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
            σψµt
                                  2
                6     µt − µt+1                ∗

          +                            C v1 v  µ     (x i,t+1 )   + Lf        yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
            ηt σψµt       µ2t                    t+1                   i y2

                                                      2
                                     ∗
            +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )

                               2                   2            1 2 t                 t 2
          + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥ + (1 + )αt ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                                l1
          + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                           1                     2
          + dt+1 αt+1 (1 + )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 )
                           l2

Rearranging it, we have

        Vt+1 − Vt
                                                                           !
         at+1 αt              2                        αt  α2 LΦµ
      ≤−         ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ − at+1                     − t 2 t              ∥h̄tx ∥2
            2                                          2    2σψµ
                                                                       t

               αt LΦµ
         + at+1 2 t ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2
               rσψµ m
                       t
                        m
                   αt r X                                          2                              2
         + at+1                Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2                yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
                   m i=1
                             m                                                            m           2
                   αt rL2ψy1 X                              2                       1 X i,t
         + at+1                      vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )       + 2at+1 αt r             d − h̄tx
                     m         i=1
                                                                                    m i=1 x
                                                                                                         
                                       ∗
                1 X  2 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
                   m                                                         yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                                 t    t+1 
         + at+1
                m i=1                       σhi                                                    µt
                      m                ∗                2                      2
                1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥                  µt − µt+1
         + at+1
                m i=1         σh2 i                               µt
                         m                                         m
           bt+1         X                        2 6bt+1 L2ψy1 X                      2
         −      βt σψµt     yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t ) +         3          ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
             2          i=1
                                                     β t σ ψµt    i=1
                                                              X m
                      1                        1
         − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt       2βt               − βt2          ∥hi,t
                                                                      y ∥
                                                                         2
                      2                 σψµt + Lψµt            i=1
                                               2
             m 24b      ∗
                   t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                    2
             X                                         µt − µt+1
         +
             i=1
                           σh2 i βt σψµt                   µt
                         m
           ct+1         X                        2
         −      ηt σψµt     vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
             2          i=1
            m                                     2
           X   6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2                        2
         +                      5                   ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
           i=1
                            η σ
                             t ψµ
                                           t
            m                                           2
           X   3ct+1 ηt                                                        2
         +                Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2    yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
           i=1
                σ ψµt


                                                          30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             m                  2
             X 6ct+1 µt − µt+1
         +                                          Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2            yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
                ησ
             i=1 t ψµt
                                 µ2t
                                                        2
               +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                               2                      2   1 2 t            t 2
             + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥ + (1 + )αt ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                          l1
             + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                              1                     2
             + dt+1 αt+1 (1 + )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 )
                              l2

Rearranging it, we have

      Vt+1 − Vt
                                                                     !
        at+1 αt                                  αt  α2 LΦµ
     ≤−         ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 − at+1               − t 2 t              ∥h̄tx ∥2
           2                                     2    2σψµ
                                                                t

             αt LΦµ
       + at+1 2 t ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2
             rσψµ m
                     t

                            m                2                       m
                    1 X i,t                                αt rL2ψy1 X                                2
       + 2at+1 αt r      d − h̄tx                + at+1                        vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
                    m i=1 x                                     m        i=1
                      m
              αt r X                                     2                      2
       + at+1            Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2      yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
              m i=1
          m                                                        2 !
         X     6bt+1 L2ψy1     6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2                             2
       +               3    +                     5                     ∥xi,t − xi,t+1 ∥
         i=1
                  β  σ
                    t ψµ                     η  σ
                                               t ψµ
                         t                          t
          m
         X bt+1                                                            2
                                3ct+1 ηt
                                                      ∗                                                2
       −             βt σψµt −             Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2             yi,t − yµ∗ t (xi,t )
         i=1
                 2               σ ψµt
                                                              X m
                      1                      1
       − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt         2βt                  − βt2       ∥hi,t
                                                                      y ∥
                                                                          2
                      2                σψµt + Lψµt             i=1
                       m
         ct+1         X                             2
       −      ηt σψµt     vi,t − vµ∗ t (xi,t )
           2          i=1
                                                                                                 
                                               ∗
              1
                  m     2 ∇ y f i   x̄ t+1 , y µ t+1
                                                     (x̄ t+1 )       yµ∗ t+1 (x̄t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                         t    t+1 
                  X
       + at+1         
              m i=1                                  σhi                                   µt
                    m              ∗                 2                    2
                 1 X 2Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥              µt − µt+1
       + at+1
                 m i=1         σh2 i                           µt
                                            2
           m 24b      ∗
                 t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                 2
           X                                        µt − µt+1
       +
           i=1
                      σh2 i βt σψµt                     µt
            m                        2
           X  6ct+1 µt − µt+1                   ∗

       +                        2         Cv1 v µ     (xi,t+1 )  + Lfi y2
                                                                            yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
         i=1
             ηt σ ψµt
                               µt
                                                  t+1


                                                    2
           +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                                                              1
         + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ2 − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + (1 + )αt2 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                                                              l1
           + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             1                       2
          + dt+1 αt+1 (1 +      )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                             l2
Since vµ∗ t (xi,t ) is of order O( σψ1 ), to simplify the proof, we take vµ∗ t (xi,t ) as its maximal
                                        µt
value over all m agents at iteration t. By further calculating the terms from the previous result, we
have
        Vt+1 − Vt
                                                               !
            at+1 αt               2            αt    αt2 LΦµt
       ≤−           ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ − at+1          −               ∥h̄tx ∥2
               2                                2      2σψ2 µ
                                                                 t

                                                                      m              2
               αt LΦµ                             1 X i,t
         + at+1 2 t ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + 2at+1 αt r      d − h̄tx
               rσψµ m                             m i=1 x
                       t

                      1                                      2                     2
         + at+1 αt r       Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2          yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
                     m
             bt+1              3ct+1 ηt                                       2
                                                        ∗                                             2
         −        βt σψµt −               Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2                 yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
               2                σψµt
                 αt r 2                        2      ct+1                              2
         + at+1      Lψy1 vt − vµ∗ t (xt ) −                ηt σψµt vt − vµ∗ t (xt )
                 m                                      2
                                                                     X  m
                         1                         1              2
         − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt            2βt                   − βt          ∥hi,t
                                                                              y ∥
                                                                                  2
                         2                 σψµt + Lψµt                 i=1
                                                                      2 !
             6bt+1 L2ψy1                        ∗
                              6ct+1 Lv1 vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2                                 2
         +                  +                                              ∥xt − xt+1 ∥
               βt σψ3 µ                       ηt σψ5 µ
                       t                              t

                                              ∗
            1 X 2at+1 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
               m                                                   yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                           t     t+1
         +
           m i=1                                  σhi                                        µt
               m                    ∗               2                  2
            1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥             µt − µt+1
         +
           m i=1                 σh2 i                        µt
                                             2
             m 24b      ∗
                   t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                  2
             X                                       µt − µt+1
         +
             i=1
                         σh2 i βt σψµt                   µt
              m                         2
             X  6ct+1 µt − µt+1                    ∗

         +                         2         Cv1 v µt+1 (x i,t+1 ) + Lfi y2   yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
           i=1
               η t σ ψµt
                                  µt
                                                    2
           +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                                2                 2           1 2 t              t 2
         + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥ + (1 + )αt ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                              l1
        + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                           1                   2
        + dt+1 αt+1 (1 + )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                           l2
Then, we obtain the following expression:
        Vt+1 − Vt
                                                          !
           at+1 αt              2         αt     αt2 LΦµt
      ≤−           ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥ − at+1       −             ∥h̄tx ∥2
              2                            2      2σψ2 µ
                                                                 t

                                                                      m              2
               αt LΦµ                             1 X i,t
         + at+1 2 t ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + 2at+1 αt r      d − h̄tx
               rσψµ m                             m i=1 x
                       t

                     1                               2                  2
         + at+1 αt r   Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2    yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
                     m

                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                              2
              bt+1              3ct+1 ηt                 ∗                                            2
          −        βt σψµt −                Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2               yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
                2                σψµt
                                                                     X  m
                          1                         1
          − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt             2βt                  − βt2        ∥hi,t
                                                                              y ∥
                                                                                 2
                          2                  σψµt + Lψµt               i=1
                  αt r 2               ∗        2      ct+1                             2
          + at+1      L       vt − vµt (xt ) −               ηt σψµt vt − vµ∗ t (xt )
                  m ψy1                                  2
                                                                      2 !
              6bt+1 L2ψy1      6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
          +                 +                                              ×
                βt σψ3 µ                       ηt σψ5 µ
                        t                              t

             8∥(xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t )∥2 + 4αt2 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + 4αt2 m∥h̄tx ∥2


                                               ∗
             1 X 2at+1 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
                m                                                  yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                          t      t+1
          +
            m i=1                                  σhi                                       µt
                m                    ∗               2                 2
             1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥             µt − µt+1
          +
            m i=1                 σh2 i                        µt
                                                 2
              m 24b      ∗
                    t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                      2
              X                                          µt − µt+1
          +
              i=1
                          σh2 i βt σψµt                      µt
               m                         2
              X  6ct+1 µt − µt+1                    ∗

          +                         2         Cv1 v µt+1 (x i,t+1 ) + Lfi y2
                                                                               yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
            i=1
                η t σ ψµt
                                   µt
                                                     2
            +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                                 2                 2           1 2 t              t 2
          + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥ + (1 + )αt ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                               l1
            + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                           1                     2
          + dt+1 αt+1 (1 + )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                           l2

Then, we obtain the following expression:

    Vt+1 − Vt
       at+1 αt
   ≤−          ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2
          2                     !
                 αt   αt2 LΦµt            2
                                              6bt+1 L2ψy1
    − at+1          −               −  4αt  m
                 2     2σψ2 µ                   βt σψ3 µ
                             t                          t

                               ∗
                                                    2 !
                6ct+1 Lv1 vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2
       −4αt2 m                                            ∥h̄tx ∥2
                              ηt σψ5 µ
                                         t
                                                                                         2 !!
               αt LΦµ              6bt+1 L2ψy1         6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
      +    at+1 2 t + 8                              +
               rσψµ m                βt σψ3 µ                    ηt σψ5 µ
                       t                     t                            t

          × ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2

                       1                                 2
          + at+1 αt r      Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                       m
                                                                       2
              bt+1            3ct+1 ηt
          −        βt σψµt −             Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2       ×
                2              σψµt

                    ∗        2                1                      1
             yt − yµt (xt ) − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt              2βt             − βt ∥hty ∥2
                                                                               2
                                              2                 σψµt + Lψµt

                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           m            2
                 αt r 2           ct+1
                                                             ∗         2                1 X i,t       t
        + at+1       L         −         ηt σψµt vt − vµt (xt ) + 2at+1 αt r                    d − h̄x
                 m ψy1                2                                                m i=1 x
                           2                          ∗
                                                                            2 !
                 6b t+1 L  ψ          6ct+1   L v1  v µ   (x i,t ) + L  v2
        + 4αt2                y1
                                 +                      t
                                                                                ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                   βt σψ3 µ                         ηt σψ5 µ
                            t                               t

                                                ∗
           1 X 2at+1 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
               m                                                   yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                         t      t+1
        +
          m i=1                                    σhi                                     µt
            m                      ∗              2                 2
        1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥             µt − µt+1
      +
        m i=1                   σh2 i                      µt
                                            2
            m 24b     ∗
                 t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                 2
            X                                       µt − µt+1
        +
            i=1
                        σh2 i βt σψµt                   µt
             m                         2
            X  6ct+1 µt − µt+1                     ∗

        +                         2         C v1 v µ     (x i,t+1 ) + Lfi y2
                                                                               yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
          i=1
              η t σ ψµt
                                 µt
                                                     t+1


                                                    2
          +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )

                               2                  2            1 2 t              t 2
        + dt+1 ((1 + l1 )λ − 1)∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥ + (1 + )αt ∥hx − 1 ⊗ h̄x ∥
                                                               l1
        + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 )λ2 − 1)∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                         1                     2
        + dt+1 αt+1 (1 + )(L2fi 1 ∥xt+1 − xt ∥ + L2fi 2 βt2 ∥hty ∥2 ).
                         l2

                                                 t 2
                        PT      1
                                    Pm     i,t
For algorithm 1, with     t=0   m     i=1 dx − h̄x   = 0, we have

  Vt+1 − Vt
       at+1 αt
  ≤−           ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2
          2
                                    !                                                                       2
                αt      αt2 LΦµt               2
                                                  6bt+1 L2ψy1          2
                                                                             6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
     − at+1          −                 − 4αt m                   − 4αt m
                2        2σψ2 µ                     βt σψ3 µ                             ηt σψ5 µ
                                 t                           t                                   t

                              1
      +dt+1 αt+1 1 +               L2fi 1 4αt2 m ∥h̄tx ∥2
                             l2
                                                                                         2 !
             αt LΦµt               6bt+1 L2ψy1     6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
     + at+1 2            +8                      +
             rσψµ m                  βt σψ3 µ                        ηt σψ5 µ
                   t                         t
                                                                           t
                            2                                  1
                                                                    Lfi 1 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2
                                                                      2

      +dt+1 (1 + l1 )λ − 1 + 8dt+1 αt+1 1 +
                                                               l2

                  1                                         2
     + at+1 αt r       Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                 m
                                                                               2
          bt+1                 3ct+1 ηt                                                               2
      −         βt σψµt −                    Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2            yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
            2                    σψµt
            αt r 2            ct+1
                                                                   2
     + at+1      Lψy1 −             ηt σψµt vt − vµ∗ t (xt )
             m                  2
                         2
                                                                           2 !
          2
               6b t+1 L  ψy1       6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
     + 4αt                      +
                 βt σψ3 µ                          ηt σψ5 µ
                          t                                t

                      1
      + dt+1 1 +             αt2 + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 ) λ2 − 1)
                      l1

                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         1
       +dt+1 αt+1 1 +           Lfi 1 4αt ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2
                                   2      2
                         l2

                         1        2     2                 1                       1          2
     + dt+1 αt+1 1 +           Lfi 2 βt − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt               2βt              − βt    ∥hty ∥2
                        l2                                2                  σψµt + Lψµt

                                          ∗
       1
          m 2a
                t+1 ∇  y f i   x̄ t+1 , y µt+1 (x̄ t+1 )    yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                  t    t+1
         X
     +
       m i=1                                 σhi                                    µt
        m                 ∗                 2                2
     1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥          µt − µt+1
   +
     m i=1            σh2 i                          µt
                                       2
         m 24b      ∗
               t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                2
         X                                     µt − µt+1
     +
         i=1
                 σh2 i βt σψµt                     µt
          m                     2
         X 6ct+1 µt − µt+1
     +                     2         Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
          ησ
       i=1 t ψµt
                          µt
                                               2
       +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )     .
Then, it holds that
      Vt+1 − Vt
            at+1 αt                                                                          2
       ≤−           ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 + C1 ∥h̄tx ∥2 + C2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + C3 yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
                2
                                 2
          + C4 vt − vµ∗ t (xt ) + C5 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + C6 ∥ht−1  y ∥
                                                                         2

                                           ∗
             1 X 2at+1 ∇y fi x̄t+1 , yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )
                 m                                          yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )   µ − µ
                                                                                 t    t+1
          +
             m i=1                             σhi                                 µt
                 m                  ∗            2                2
             1 X 2at+1 Lfi y2 ∥yµt+1 (x̄t+1 )∥

                                                     µt − µt+1
          +                        2
             m i=1              σhi                      µt
                                               2
               m 24b      ∗
                     t+1 yµt+1 (xi,t+1 )
                                                                     2
               X                                       µt − µt+1
          +
               i=1
                      σh2 i βt σψµt                        µt
                m                    2
               X6ct+1 µt − µt+1
          +                     2         Cv1 vµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 ) + Lfi y2 yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )
               ησ
            i=1 t ψµt
                               µt
                                                    2
            +Cv2 ∇y fi xi,t+1 , yµ∗ t+1 (xi,t+1 )     ,

where                            !                                                                       2
                αt    αt2 LΦµt               2
                                                6bt+1 L2ψy1         2
                                                                          6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C1 = −at+1         −                + 4αt m                  + 4αt m
                 2      2σψ2 µ                    βt σψ3 µ                           ηt σψ5 µ
                              t                           t                                  t

                           1
      + dt+1 αt+1 1 +            L2fi 1 4αt2 m,
                          l2
                                                                                   2 !
           αt LΦµt           6bt+1 L2ψy1        6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C2 = at+1 2         +8                       +
           rσψµ m               βt σψ3 µ                       ηt σψ5 µ
                 t                       t                              t

                                                            1
      + dt+1 (1 + l1 )λ2 − 1 + 8dt+1 αt+1 1 +                    L2fi 1 ,

                                                            l2
                1                                      2
 C3 = at+1 αt r     Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                m
          bt+1             3ct+1 ηt                                         2
                                                    ∗
      −         βt σψµt −                  Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2           ,
            2                 σψµt

                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           αt r 2         ct+1
 C4 = at+1     L        −        ηt σψµt ,
            m ψy1            2
                                                               2 !
         2
            6bt+1 L2ψy1         6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C5 = 4αt                   +
               βt σψ3 µ                       ηt σψ5 µ
                       t                              t

                       1      2                           2                    1
      + dt+1 1 +            αt + dt+1 αt+1 ((1 + l2 ) λ − 1) + dt+1 αt+1 1 +        L2fi 1 4αt2 ,
                      l1                                                       l2

                          1      2     2                1                 1           2
 C6 = dt+1 αt+1 1 +             Lfi 2 βt − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt      2βt              − βt .
                         l2                             2            σψµt + Lψµt



Step 5: Step-size calculations.
To ensure convergence, we choose step-sizes carefully by setting l1 = l2 = λ1 − 1, which simplifies
several terms. Under this setting, we have 1 + l11 = 1 + l12 = 1−λ1
                                                                     and (1 + l1 )λ2 − 1 = λ − 1.
Using these values, we proceed to calculate each of the constants C1 through C6 , which represent
various components that contribute to the change in the Lyapunov function.
                                !                                                              2
                αt    αt2 LΦµt         2
                                           6bt+1 L2ψy1      2
                                                               6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
  C1 = −at+1        −             + 4αt m              + 4αt m
                 2     2σψ2 µ                βt σψ3 µ                        ηt σψ5 µ
                                    t                                t                                            t

          1
      +      dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 m,
        1−λ
                                                                       2 !
          αt LΦµt         6bt+1 L2ψy1   6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C2 = at+1 2       +8                 +
          rσψµ m             βt σψ3 µ             ηt σψ5 µ
                   t                          t                                      t

                               1
      + dt+1 (λ − 1) + 8           dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 ,
                            1−λ
                1                                     2
 C3 = at+1 αt r      Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                m
           bt+1             3ct+1 ηt                                  2
      −         βt σψµt −               Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2      ,
             2                σψµt
            αt r 2        ct+1
 C4 = at+1      Lψy1 −         ηt σψµt ,
            m               2
                                                               2 !
         2
              6bt+1 L2ψy1     6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
 C5 = 4αt                  +
                βt σψ3 µ                    ηt σψ5 µ
                         t                                      t

           1                                    1
      +       dt+1 αt2 + dt+1 αt+1 (λ − 1) +        dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 ,
        1−λ                                  1−λ

                 1                         1                        1
 C6 = dt+1 αt+1       L2fi 2 βt2 − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt     2βt                 − βt2 .
                1−λ                        2                σψµt + Lψµt
Next, we set the unified form as follow:
               "                                #
                          −τ /4          1                  bt+1                     at+1
        βt ∈ β̄(t + 1)          ,                 , ηt = cη      βt σψ2 µt , αt = cα      ηt σψ5 µt ,
                                  Lfi y2 + Lgy2             ct+1                     ct+1
where

                                  ct+1        ηt                                    ct+1        αt
                       cη =                            σψ−2 ,            cα =                            σψ−5 .
                                  bt+1        βt          µt                        at+1        ηt          µt


Also, we set
                             ηt = (t + 1)−τ /2 βt ,                 αt = (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt µt 3 ,
                             at+1 = (t + 1)−τ ,                 bt+1 = (t + 1)−τ /2 σψ3 µt ,
                             ct+1 = (t + 1)−τ σψ5 µt ,                   dt+1 = (t + 1)−τ /8 ,


                                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         cη = (t + 1)−τ ,                cα = (t + 1)−τ σψ3 µt .
For C1 , we have
                                             !
                             αt  α2 LΦµ                         6bt+1 L2ψy1
          C1 = −at+1            − t 2 t          + 4αt2 m
                             2    2σψµ                   βt σψ3 µ
                                         t                       t

                                           ∗
                                                             2
                           6ct+1 Lv1      vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2         1
                + 4αt2 m                                         +     dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 m
                                          ηt σψ5 µ                 1−λ
                                                     t

                 at+1 αt    at+1 αt2 LΦµt          1
              =−         +                 +          dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 m
                    2           2σψ2 µ         1−λ
                                " t                                                   #
                   2   a t+1      6bt+1 αt L2ψy1                        ∗
                                                                                    2
               − 4αt m       cα                      + 6ct+1 Lv1 vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2      .
                         αt       cα at+1 βt σψ3 µ
                                                           t

By further simplification and applying our chosen step-size settings, we derive:
            1                                                                           2
   C1 = − (t + 1)−5τ /2 βt µ3t + 24m(t + 1)−7/2τ βt µ6t Lψy1 + Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
            2
                             LΦµ          L2f
         + (t + 1)−4τ βt2 µ6t 2 t + 4m i 1 (t + 1)−37τ /8 βt3 µ9t .
                             2σψµ        1−λ
                                   t

As we can see, the dominant term for C1 is −(t + 1)−5τ /2 βt µ3t , which is smaller than 0. This
indicates that C1 contributes to the overall decrease in the Lyapunov function.
Next, for C2 , we have
                                                                                             2 !
                 αt LΦµ                6bt+1 L2ψy1          6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
        C2 = at+1 2 t + 8                                 +
                 rσψµ m                 βt σψ3 µ                      ηt σψ5 µ
                         t                       t                                 t

                                   1
              + dt+1 (λ − 1) + 8        dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1
                                 1−λ
                                        "                                               #
                   αt LΦµt     at+1       6bt+1 αt L2ψy1            ∗
                                                                                      2
            = at+1 2       +8        cα                    + 6 Lv1 vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2
                  rσψµ m        αt        cα at+1 βt σψ3 µ
                         t                                          t

                                  1
              + dt+1 (λ − 1) + 8     dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 .
                                 1−λ
Simplifying further, we obtain:
                                     Lψy1                       8L2fi 1
        C2 = (t + 1)−τ /8 (λ − 1) +          (t + 1) −5τ /2 3
                                                           µt +         (t + 1)−13τ /8 βt µ3t
                                    rmσψ2 µ                     1−λ
                                           t

               1        −τ /2
                                                                  2
              + (t + 1)         48 + 48 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2         .
               βt
The leading term is −(t + 1)−τ /8 , ensuring that C2 is negative.
For C3 , we have
                             1                                       2
              C3 = at+1 αt r      Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                             m
                       bt+1                3ct+1 ηt                                    2
                                                                  ∗
                   −         βt σψµt −                Lψyy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi y2
                         2                  σψµt
                     bt+1              3ct+1 ηt                                      2
                 =−       βt σψµt +                Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2
                       2                  σψµt
                                1                                       2
                   + at+1 αt r     Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                               m
                               6ct+1 ηt                                           2
                                                         ∗
                 =− 1−                        Lψ       v µt (x i,t )  +   Lf
                             bt+1 βt σψ2 µ       yy2                        i y2
                                             t


                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         2at+1 αt r                 ∗
                                                                        2     bt+1
                     −                    Lψxy2 vµt (xi,t ) + Lfi x2        ×       βt σψµt
                       bt+1 βt σψµt m                                           2
                                        6ct+1 ηt                                     2
                  = − 1 − cη                    2      Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2
                                    cη bt+1 βt σψµ
                                                  t

                           2at+1 αt r                                      2
                     +                      Lψxy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi x2
                       cη bt+1 βt σψµt m
                          bt+1
                       ×        βt σψµt .
                            2
After simplification, we have:
                        1
                    C3 = (t + 1)−τ /2 βt σψ4 µt
                        2                                            2
                    × −1 + (t + 1)−τ 6 Lψyy2 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lfi y2
                                                                                                     !!
                             2r                 −τ
                                                                                                 2
                        +            (t + 1)         µ3t   Lψxy2     vµ∗ t (xi,t )   + Lfi x2             ,
                            σψµ4 m
                               t


which is negative as well, with the dominant term −(t + 1)−τ /2 βt .
For C4 , the calculation proceeds similarly:
                                                                                                !
                      αt r 2     ct+1                 2at+1 αt L2ψy1 r                               ct+1
            C4 = at+1     Lψy1 −      ηt σψµt = − 1 −                                                     ηt σψµt .
                      m            2                   ct+1 ηt σψµt m                                  2
Then
                                     σψ5 µ
                                                1 − (t + 1)−τ µ−3   (t + 1)−3τ /2 βt ,

                            C4 = −          t
                                                               t
                                       2
ensuring C4 is negative with its dominant term being −(t + 1)−3τ /2 βt .
For C5 , we have
                                                                                             2 !
                              6bt+1 L2ψy1         6ct+1 Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
               C5 = 4αt2                        +
                               βt σψ3 µ                     ηt σψ5 µ
                                        t                                     t

                         1                                    1
                     +       dt+1 αt2 + dt+1 αt+1 (λ − 1) +       dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2
                       1−λ                                  1−λ
                                 "                                                 #
                       2 at+1
                                   6bt+1 αt L2ψy1            ∗
                                                                                2
                   = 4αt      cα                    + 6 Lv1 vµt (xi,t ) + Lv2
                          αt       cα at+1 βt σψ3 µ
                                                            t

                        1                                  1
                     +     dt+1 αt2 + dt+1 αt+1 (λ − 1) +     dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 1 4αt2 .
                       1−λ                                1−λ
Then we have
                           h                                 2 i
C5 = 24(t + 1)−7τ /2 βt µ6t L2ψy1 + Lv1 vµ∗ t (xi,t ) + Lv2
            1                                                             4
       +       (t + 1)−25τ /8 βt2 µ6t + (λ − 1) (t + 1)−13τ /8 βt µ3t +      L2 (t + 1)−37τ /8 βt3 µ9t .
           1−λ                                                          1 − λ fi 1
As we can see, C5 should be the same order as the order of −(t + 1)−13τ /8 βt µ3t , which is smaller
than 0.
Finally, for C6 , we have

            1                                   1                    1
    C6 =       dt+1 αt+1 L2fi 2 βt2 − bt+1 1 + βt σψµt     2βt              − βt2
          1−λ                                   2               σψµt + Lψµt
            1                                bt+1                  σψµt       1
        =      L2 dt+1 αt+1 βt2 − 2βt                + bt+1 βt2             + bt+1 βt3 σψµt .
          1 − λ fi 2                     σψµt + Lψµt            σψµt + Lψµt   2

                                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we can get
                  (t + 1)−τ /2 σψ3 µ        1                                                  σψ4 µ
    C6 = −2βt                      t
                                       +       L2fi 2 (t + 1)−25τ /8 βt3 µ3t + (t + 1)−τ /2         t
                                                                                                       β2
                    σψµt + Lψµt            1−λ                                              σψµt + Lψµt t
          1
         + (t + 1)−τ /2 βt3 σψ4 µt .
          2
As we can see, C6 should be the same order as the order of −(t + 1)−τ /2 βt , which is smaller than 0.
Step 6: Proof of Theorem.
It is helpful to find suitable coeffcients at+1 , bt+1 , ct+1 , dt+1 such that C1 to C6 < 0 and all of the
sequences involving µt − µt+1 (denoted by Atµ , Bµt , Cµt respectively) are summable. Achieving this
would allow us to conclude convergence using Lemma 10. First, we establish the following inequality
for the change in the potential function Vt :
                                           Vt+1 − Vt ≤ Atµ + Bµt + Cµt .
By the definition of potential function, we get Vt ≥ 0 for all t. This implies that the potential function
is bounded from below, and we can write:
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                                           Atµ + Bµt + Cµt .

                                       VT ≤ V0 +
                                                     t=1

Since the sequences Atµ , Bµt , and Cµt are summable, we can conclude that:
                                            VT = O(1)       as T → ∞.
Next, applying Lemma 10, we have the following summation over the interval t = T to t = 2T + 1:
       2T +1
        X        at+1 αt                                                                               2
                    2    ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 − C1 ∥h̄tx ∥2 − C2 ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 − C3    yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
       t=T

                                            2
                  −C4 vt − vµ∗ t (xt )          − C5 ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 − C6 ∥hty ∥2 = O(1).

Since the constants C1 through C6 are all strictly negative, the terms on the left-hand side are non-
                                                               P2T +1               R 2T +2
negative, and thus, the overall sum remains bounded. Note that t=T (t + 1)−s ≥ T +1 k −s dk =
21−s −1       1−s
  1−s (T + 1)     .
Now, by lower-bounding the coefficients, according to different step size strategies and the coefficients
of Lyapunov function, we can get the estimates on

                                                                                        2
              min ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 + ∥h̄tx ∥2 + ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + yt − yµ∗ t (xt )
            0≤t≤T

                                           2
                      + vt − vµ∗ t (xt ) + ∥htx − 1 ⊗ h̄tx ∥2 + ∥hty ∥2 .

By choosing suitable upper bounds for the parameters p and τ , we conclude that the desired con-
vergence holds, completing the proof. To further lead to the convergence rates as measured by the
KKT residual, due to the optimality of yµ∗ t (xt ) and the definition of vµ∗ t (xt ) , there exists a positive
constant C , independent of t, such that:
      KKT(xt , yt , vt )

                                                            2                  2
     ≤C ∥∇Φµt (x̄t )∥2 + ∥xt − 1 ⊗ x̄t ∥2 + yt − yµ∗ t (xt ) + vt − vµ∗ t (xt ) + µ2t .


D     S UPPORTING L EMMAS
Now, we present the technical lemmas that would be useful throughout our main result.
To establish the convergence result of DUET , we first characterize the Lipschitz continuity of yµ∗ (xi )
in xi and vµ∗ (xi ) in xi , without any boundedness assumption of ∇y fi (xi , yi ).


                                                           39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 11. Suppose assumptions holds, the follow statement holds.

     (a) For any i ∈ [m], the function yµ∗ (xi ) is Lipschitz continuous in xi , i.e, for all xi , x′i ,
                                                                    Lψy1
                                       ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥ ≤        ∥xi − x′i ∥,
                                                                    σψµ
         where both Lψy1 = µLhiy1 + (1 − µ)Lgi y1 and σψµ = µσhi + (1 − µ)σgi are constants.

     (b) For any i ∈ [m], the function vµ∗ (xi ) satisfies
                                                                             ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi )

                                                    −1
           ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥ =                   ∗                       ∗
                               2
                              ∇yy ψµ xi , yµ (xi )     ∇y fi xi , yµ (xi ) ≤                       ,
                                                                                   σψµ
         and for all xi , x′i ,
                                                         Lv1 ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥ + Lv2

                              vµ∗ (xi ) − vµ∗ (x′i )   ≤                         ∥xi − x′i ∥,
                                                                  σψ2 µ
         where both Lv1 := Lψyy2 Lψy1 + Lψyy1 σψµ and Lv2 := Lfi y2 Lψy1 + Lfi y1 σψµ are
         constants.

                                 ∗
Proof. (a) By the optimality of yi,µ to LL problem, we have ∇y ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (xi )) = 0. Thus
                       ∇y ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (xi )) − ∇y ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (x′i ))


                         + ∇y ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (x′i )) − ∇y ψµ (x′i , yµ∗ (x′i )) = 0.


Multiplying the above equation by yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i ), by the σψµ - strongly convexity of ψµ (x, ·) and
Lψy1 -smoothness of ψµ (·, y), we have
                 σψµ ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥2
                 ≤ ∥∇y ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (x′i )) − ∇y ψµ (x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ))∥ · ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥
                 ≤ Lψy1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ · ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥.
Then the conclusion follows immediately from the above inequality.
(b) First, by the σψµ - strongly convexity of ψµ (x, ·) and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
          σψµ ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥2 ≤ ⟨vµ∗ (xi ), ∇2yy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi )⟩


                           = ⟨vµ∗ (xi ), ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) ⟩ ≤ ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥∥∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) ∥,


which implies the conclusion.
Second, the definition of vµ∗ (xi ) implies that ∇2yy ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (x′i )) vµ∗ (xi ) = ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) .

Thus
                        ∇yy ψµ (x′i , yµ∗ (x′i )) vµ∗ (x′i ) − vµ∗ (xi )
                        2

                    = ∇y fi x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) − ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi )


                      + ∇2yy ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (xi )) − ∇2yy ψµ (x′i , yµ∗ (x′i )) vµ∗ (xi ).


By (a), the σψµ - strongly convexity of ψµ (xi , ·) and Lipschitz continuity of ∇y ψµ and ∇y fi , we
have
           σψµ ∥vµ∗ (xi ) − vµ∗ (x′i )∥

          ≤ Lfi y1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lfi y2 ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥
            + ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥ Lψyy1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lψyy2 ∥yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )∥


            ∥xi − x′i ∥   ∗
          ≤              ∥vµ (xi )∥ Lψyy2 Lψy1 + σψµ Lψyy1 + Lfi y2 Lψy1 + σψµ Lfi y1 ,
              σψµ
which implies the desired result.


                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we have a lemma that characterizes the smoothness of Φiµ (xi ) = fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) in xi ,


without any boundedness assumption of ∇y fi (xi , yi ), where ∇Φiµ (xi ) = ∇x fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) −


∇2xy ψµi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi ).


Lemma 12. Suppose all assumptions holds, for any i ∈ [m] and xi ∈ Rp1 , we have
                                              CΦ1 vµ∗ (xi ) + CΦ2

                                      ′
                     i           i
                 ∇Φµ (xi ) − ∇Φµ (xi ) ≤                            ∥xi − x′i ∥ ,
                                                       σψ2 µ

where both CΦ1 := L2ψy1 Lψyy2 + Lψy1 Lψyy1 + Lψxy2 σψµ + Lψxy1 σψ2 µ and CΦ2 := L2ψy1 Lfi y2 +

Lψy1 Lfi y1 + Lfi x2 σψµ + Lfi x1 σψ2 µ are constants.

                                                            −1
Proof. Recall that vµ∗ (xi ) = ∇2yy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi )          ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) and ∇Φµ (xi ) =


∇x fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) − ∇2xy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi ). Thus


  ∇Φiµ (xi ) − ∇Φiµ (x′i ) =∇x fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) − ∇x fi x′i , yµ∗ (x′i )


                             + ∇2xy ψµ x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) vµ∗ (x′i ) − ∇2xy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi ).


First, by Lipschitz continuity of ∇x fi , we have
    ∇x fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) − ∇x fi x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) ≤ Lfi x1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lfi x2 yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i ) .


Second, note that
                    ∇xy ψµ x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) vµ∗ (x′i ) − ∇2xy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi )
                     2

                  = ∇2xy ψµ x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) vµ∗ (x′i ) − vµ∗ (xi )


                    + ∇2xy ψµ x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) − ∇2xy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi ).


Thus, by Lipschitz continuity of ∇2yy ψµ and Lemma 11, we have

         ∇xy ψµ x′i , yµ∗ (x′i ) vµ∗ (x′i ) − ∇2xy ψµ xi , yµ∗ (xi ) vµ∗ (xi )
          2

      ≤Lψy1 vµ∗ (x′i ) − vµ∗ (xi ) + vµ∗ (xi ) Lψxy1 ∥x′i − xi ∥ + Lψxy2 yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i )


        Lψy1 Lv1 vµ∗ (xi ) + Lv2

      ≤                               ∥xi − x′i ∥
                   σψ2 µ
        + vµ∗ (xi ) Lψxy1 ∥x′i − xi ∥ + Lψxy yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ (x′i ) .


where Lψy1 is constant given by Lψy1 = µLhiy1 + (1 − µ)Lgi y1 .
It implies the desired result since
Lψy1 Lv1 + Lψxy2 Lψy1 σψµ + Lψxy1 σψ2 µ = L2ψy1 Lψyy2 + Lψy1 Lψyy1 + Lψxy2 σψµ + Lψxy1 σψ2 µ


and

 Lψy1 Lv2 + Lfi x2 Lψy1 σψµ + Lfi x1 σψ2 µ = L2ψy1 Lfi y2 + Lψy1 Lfi y1 + Lfi x2 σψµ + Lfi x1 σψ2 µ .



Next lemma characterize the smoothness of yµ∗ (xi ) and vµ∗ (xi ) in µ when the LL problem has
multiple minimizers.

Lemma 13. Suppose assumptions holds, let 0 ≤ µ ≤ 1/2 and µ′ ≤ 2µ, the follow statements hold.

      (a) For any i ∈ [m],
                                          2 ∇y hi xi , yµ∗ (xi )                2 yµ∗ (xi )

                                                                    |µ − µ′ |                 |µ − µ′ |
              yµ∗ (xi ) − yµ∗ ′ (xi )   ≤                         ·           =             ·           .
                                                  σhi                  µ′          σhi           µ′

                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (b) For any i ∈ [m],
                                                                                        |µ − µ′ |
                    vµ∗ (xi ) − vµ∗ ′ (xi ) ≤ Cv1 ∥vµ∗ (xi )∥ + Lfi y2 ∥yµ∗ (xi )∥ ·
                                                                                           (µ′ )2
                                                                                      ′
                                                                             |µ − µ |
                                             + Cv2 ∥∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) ∥ ·

                                                                                         ,
                                                                               (µ′ )2

         where both Cv1 := 2 Lhiyy2 + Lgi yy2 /σh2 i and Cv2 := 2 Lfi y2 + Lgi y2 /σh2 i are
         constants.

                        ∗
                            = yµ∗ (xi ) satisfies µ∇y hi xi , yi,µ
                                                               ∗                          ∗

Proof. (a) Recall that yi,µ                                          + (1 − µ)∇y gi xi , yi,µ   = 0. Thus

        (µ − µ′ )∇y hi xi , yi,µ
                              ∗
                                    + µ′ ∇y hi xi , yi,µ∗                    ∗

                                                            − ∇y hi xi , yi,µ  ′

              ′                   ∗               ′               ∗                 ∗

         + (µ − µ)∇y gi xi , yi,µ + (1 − µ ) ∇y gi xi , yi,µ − ∇y gi xi , yi,µ         ′    = 0,
which imply that
   µ′ ∇y hi xi , yi,µ
                  ∗                    ∗
                                              + (1 − µ′ ) ∇y gi xi , yi,µ
                                                                      ∗                   ∗

                        − ∇y hi xi , yi,µ′                                  − ∇y gi xi , yi,µ′

                                                                                              ∗

        ′                  ∗
                                     ′         µ               ∗
                                                                          ′
                                                                               ∇y hi xi , yi,µ
    = (µ − µ)∇y hi xi , yi,µ + (µ − µ)             ∇y hi xi , yi,µ = (µ − µ)                       .
                                             1−µ                                    1−µ
Since hi (xi , ·) is σhi - strongly convex, we have
                               ∗                 ∗
                                                       ∗        ∗              ∗      ∗     2
              ⟨∇y hi xi , yi,µ     − ∇y hi xi , yi,µ′ , yi,µ − yi,µ′ ⟩ ≥ σhi ∥yi,µ − yi,µ′ ∥ .


Similarly, since gi (xi , ·) is convex, we get
                                       ∗                 ∗
                                                               ∗        ∗
                        ⟨∇y gi xi , yi,µ   − ∇y gi xi , yi,µ′ , yi,µ − yi,µ′ ⟩ ≥ 0.


Combining the above inequalities, we have
                                           ′
                 ′      ∗       ∗   2     µ −µ                ∗
                                                                    ∗        ∗
           0 ≤ µ σhi ∥yi,µ − yi,µ′ ∥ ≤           ⟨∇y hi xi , yi,µ  , yi,µ − yi,µ′ ⟩.
                                          1−µ
Since 0 ≤ µ ≤ 1/2, we get 1/(1 − µ) ≤ 2 and then
              µ′ σhi ∥yi,µ
                       ∗      ∗     2                ∗             ′      ∗      ∗

                           − yi,µ′ ∥ ≤ 2∥∇y hi xi , yi,µ ∥ · ∥µ − µ ∥ · ∥yi,µ − yi,µ′ ∥

                                           ∗
                                      = 2∥yi,µ ∥ · ∥µ − µ′ ∥ · ∥yi,µ
                                                                 ∗      ∗
                                                                     − yi,µ′∥


which implies the desired result.
                      ∗
                           = vµ∗ (xi ) says that ∇yy ψµ (xi , yµ∗ (x′i )) vµ∗ (xi ) = ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi ) .

(b)The definition of vi,µ
Thus we have
           ∇yy ψµ′ (xi , yµ∗ ′ ) vi,µ
                                  ∗       ∗
                                                 + ∇yy ψµ (xi , yµ∗ ) − ∇2yy ψµ′ (xi , yµ∗ ′ ) vi,µ
            2                                      2                                            ∗
                                      − vi,µ ′

                      ∗                    ∗

        =∇y fi xi , yi,µ    − ∇y fi xi , yi,µ  ′ .


                                   ∗      ∗
Multiplying the above equation by vi,µ − vi,µ′ , by the σψµ - strongly convexity of ψµt (xi , ·), we get


             ∗      ∗     2     2           ∗       2            ∗         ∗         ∗      ∗
      σψµ′ ∥vi,µ − vi,µ′ ∥ ≤ ∥∇yy ψµ (xi , yµ ) − ∇yy ψµ′ (xi , yµ′ )∥ · ∥vi,µ ∥ · ∥vi,µ − vi,µ′ ∥

                                             ∗                   ∗           ∗       ∗

                             + ∥∇y fi xi , yi,µ   − ∇y fi xi , yi,µ ′ ∥ · ∥vi,µ − vi,µ′ ∥.


Note that by the definition of ψµ we have
                        ∗                       ∗
         ∇2yy ψµ (xi , yi,µ ) − ∇2yy ψµ′ (xi , yi,µ′)

                ′   2            ∗         ′              ∗                      ∗
                                               2
                                                               − ∇2yy hi xi , yi,µ

        =(µ − µ )∇yy hi xi , yi,µ + µ ∇yy hi xi , yi,µ                             ′


          + (µ′ − µ)∇2yy gi xi , yi,µ∗
                                          + (1 − µ′ ) ∇2yy gi xi , yi,µ
                                                                    ∗                     ∗
                                                                          − ∇2yy gi xi , yi,µ

                                                                                             ′    .
Since µ′ ≤ 2µ ≤ 1, we get
         ∗      ∗
  σψµ′ ∥vi,µ − vi,µ′∥


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    h                                                            i
≤                                                   ∗
    Lhiy2 + Lgi y2 ∥µ − µ′ ∥ + Lhiyy2 + Lgi yy2 ∥yi,µ       ∗
                                                        − yi,µ       ∗
                                                              ′ ∥ ∥vi,µ ∥ + Lfi
                                                                                y2
                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                   ∥yi,µ    ∗
                                                                                         − yi,µ′∥

 h                                 i
                       ∗              ∗       ∗                            ∗
≤ Lhiyy2 + Lgi yy2 ∥vi,µ ∥ + Lfi y2 ∥yi,µ − yi,µ ′∥ +   Lhiy2 + Lgi y2 ∥vi,µ ∥ · ∥µ − µ′ ∥.

By (a), since σψµ′ = µ′ σhi when σgi = 0, we have
                                  h                                    i 2 y∗ (xi )   |µ − µ′ |
             ∗      ∗                                    ∗                  µ
           ∥vi,µ − vi,µ′∥ ≤        Lhiyy2 + Lgi yy2 ∥vi,µ   ∥ + Lfi y2       2      ·        2
                                                                            σhi        (µ′ )

                                     Lhiy2 + Lgi y2            |µ − µ′ |
                                                        ∗
                                 +                    ∥vi,µ ∥·           .
                                          σhi                     µ′
Since µ′ ≤ 2µ, Lemma 11 implies that
                                         ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi )    2 ∇y fi xi , yµ∗ (xi )

                     ′  ∗
                    µ ∥vi,µ ∥ ≤ µ′                             ≤                         .
                                               µσhi                      σhi
Hence we get the desired result.

Finally, we present the lemma that characterizes the Lipschitz properties of the approximate gradient
by using ∥∇y fi (xi , yi )∥ ≤ Lfi 0 from Assumption 1.
Lemma 14. For any i ∈ [m],
                                                      2                           2              2
                ∥∇fi (xi , yi ) − ∇fi (x′i , yi′ )∥ ≤ L2fi 1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + L2fi 2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ ,

where L2fi 1 = 4L2fi x1 + 4L2ψy1 σ21 L2fi y1 + 4 σ21 L2fi 0 L2ψxy1 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 σ41 L2ψyy1 , and L2fi 2 =
                                        ψµ                 ψµ                               ψµ

4L2fi x2 + 4L2ψy1 σ21 L2fi y2 + 4 σ21 L2fi 0 L2ψxy2 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 σ41 L2ψyy2 .
                    ψµ                 ψµ                                    ψµ



Proof. Recall that
                            ∇fi (xi , yi ) = ∇x fi (xi , yi ) − ∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi ) vi ,
where vi ∈ Rp2 is define as:
                                    vi := [∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]−1 ∇y fi (xi , yi ).
Then, we have
           ∥∇fi (xi , yi ) − ∇fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
            ≤ 2∥∇x fi (xi , yi ) − ∇x fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
              + 2∥∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi ) [∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]−1 ∇y fi (xi , yi )
              − ∇2xy ψµi (x′i , yi′ ) [∇2yy ψµi (x′i , yi′ )]−1 ∇y fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
            ≤ 2∥∇x fi (xi , yi ) − ∇x fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
              + 2∥∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi ) [∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]−1 (∇y fi (xi , yi ) − ∇y fi (x′i , yi′ ))∥2
              + 2∥(∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi ) − ∇2xy ψµi (x′i , yi′ ))[∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]−1 ∇y fi (xi , yi )∥2
              + 2∥∇2xy ψµi (x′i , yi′ ) ([∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]−1 ([∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi )]
              − [∇2yy ψµi (x′i , yi′ )])[∇2yy ψµi (x′i , yi′ )]−1 )∇y fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2 .
Then we have the following:
                                                                                      2
               ∥∇x fi (xi , yi ) − ∇x fi (x′i , yi′ )∥ ≤ Lfi x1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lfi x2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ .

               ∥∇y fi (xi , yi ) − ∇y fi (x′i , yi′ )∥ ≤ Lfi y1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lfi y2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ .
Furthermore, we have
            ∥∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi ) − ∇2xy ψµi (x′i , yi′ )∥ ≤ Lψxy1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lψxy2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ .


                                                            43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             ∥∇2yy ψµi (xi , yi ) − ∇2yy ψµi (x′i , yi′ )∥ ≤ Lψyy1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + Lψyy2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ .
Assuming that ∥∇2xy ψµi (xi , yi )∥ ≤ Lψy1 and ∥∇y fi (xi , yi )∥ ≤ Lfi 0 , then we have

               ∥∇fi (xi , yi ) − ∇fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
                                        2                      2
                ≤ 4L2fi x1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + 4L2fi x2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥
                           1                    2             1              2
                + 4L2ψy1 2 L2fi y1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + 4L2ψy1 2 L2fi y2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥
                          σψµ                               σψµ
                      1 2 2                     2    1
                +4        L L        ∥xi − x′i ∥ + 4 2 L2fi 0 L2ψxy2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥
                     σψ2 µ fi 0 ψxy1                σψµ
                                   1 2                                   1
                + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0        L     ∥xi − x′i ∥ + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 4 L2ψyy2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ .
                                  σψ4 µ ψyy1                            σψµ
Thus we have
      ∥∇fi (xi , yi ) − ∇fi (x′i , yi′ )∥2
                              1             1                             1                     2
       ≤ (4L2fi x1 + 4L2ψy1 2 L2fi y1 + 4 2 L2fi 0 L2ψxy1 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 4 L2ψyy1 ) ∥xi − x′i ∥
                             σψµ           σψµ                           σψµ
                                1 2           1                               1                     2
        + (4L2fi x2 + 4L2ψy1    2  Lfi y2 + 4 2 L2fi 0 L2ψxy2 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 4 L2ψyy2 ) ∥yi − yi′ ∥
                               σψµ           σψµ                             σψµ
                           2                      2
        ≤ L2fi 1 ∥xi − x′i ∥ + L2fi 2 ∥yi − yi′ ∥ ,
where
                                         1 2            1                               1
           L2fi 1 = 4L2fi x1 + 4L2ψy1        L      + 4 2 L2fi 0 L2ψxy1 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 4 L2ψyy1 ,
                                        σψ2 µ fi y1    σψµ                             σψµ
                                         1 2            1                               1
           L2fi 2 = 4L2fi x2 + 4L2ψy1        L      + 4 2 L2fi 0 L2ψxy2 + 4L2ψy1 L2fi 0 4 L2ψyy2 .
                                        σψ2 µ fi y2    σψµ                             σψµ



E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND RESULTS
All numerical experiments were conducted on a MacBook Pro equipped with an Apple M3 Pro chip,
featuring a 12-core CPU with 6 performance cores and 6 efficiency cores, and 36GB of memory.

E.1     A P EDAGOGICAL E XAMPLE

In this section, we present the results of a pedagogical example using the DUET and DSGT algorithms.
                                                                              1           1
For the DUET algorithm, we set the LL learning rate to 0.005, with p = 10        and τ = 40 . For the
                                                                    1          1
DSGT algorithm, the LL learning rate is set to 0.001, with p = 15 and τ = 40 .
The following figures illustrate the norm of the variables x and y during the optimization process.

E.2     D ECENTRALIZED M ETA - LEARNING P ROBLEMS WITH R EAL -W ORLD DATA :

In this section, we present more details for decentralized meta-learning problems with Real-World
Data. At each node, we construct a neural network classifier comprising an input layer, a single hidden
layer with 32 neurons using a sigmoid activation function, and a linear layer as final output layer param-
eterized by θ. The hidden layer parameters x are shared across all nodes to ensure global consensus,
while the output layer parameters θ are fine-tuned locallyP  to adapt to the specific data available at each
node. The objective functions fi and gi are: fi (x, θ) = (sij ,bij )∈Di bij ln(yj (x, θ; sij )) + γ2 ∥θ∥2 ,
                 P
and gi (x, θ) = (sij ,bij )∈Di bij ln(yj (x, θ; sij )), where (sij , bij ) represents the j-th sample at node
i, with sij as the feature vector and bij as the corresponding label. Here, γ = 0.1 denotes the
regularization coefficient, and yj (x, θ; sij ) denotes the output of the neural network.


                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         DUET, GT=1       0.2                                                       DUET, GT=1     1.0
                                6
                                         DUET, GT=0                                                        8        DUET, GT=0
                                5        DSGT, GT=1       0.0                                                       DSGT, GT=1     0.5
                                         DSGT, GT=0                                                                 DSGT, GT=0
                                4                                                                          6
                                                          0.25        6          7                                                 0.05       6       7


                    ||X||


                                                                                           ||Y||
                                3                                                                          4
                                2
                                                                                                           2
                                1
                                0                                                                          0
                                    0           2           4             6                                    0         2           4            6
                                              Time(s)                                                                    Time(s)
                                        (a) The norm of x.                                                         (b) The norm of y.

                                                          Figure 4: The norms of x and y.


The decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) approach is used as baseline for i.i.d. case
that updates θ first by gradient descent and then uses the updated θ to calculate the gradient of x,
subsequently updating x via SGD.
We compare the performance of DUET and DSGT in both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. settings. Figures 5 and
6 illustrate the train loss and accuracy results for both settings.


                          2.25          DUET, GT = 1      0.8
                          2.00          DSGT, GT = 1                                                   0.8
                                        DSGD              0.6
                                                                                          Train Accuracy


                          1.75
                 Train Loss


                          1.50                            0.4                                          0.6
                                                                  850 900 950
                          1.25
                                                                                                       0.4                         0.9
                          1.00
                          0.75                                                                                     DUET, GT = 1
                                                                                                       0.2         DSGT, GT = 1
                          0.50                                                                                     DSGD            0.8
                                                                                                                                           850 900 950
                                    0     200       400     600      800      1000                             0     200     400     600      800 1000
                                                     Epochs                                                                   Epochs
                                           (a) Train loss.                                                         (b) Train accuracy.

Figure 5: Comparisons between DUET and DSGT in the i.i.d. data scenario on the meta-learning
problem with a 5-agent network on MNIST.


                              2.3       DUET, GT = 1                                                   0.6
                                        DUET, GT = 0      1.8
                              2.2                                                                      0.5
                                        DSGT, GT = 1
                              2.1
                                                                                          Train Accuracy


                                        DSGT, GT = 0      1.6
                   Train Loss


                              2.0                                                                      0.4
                                                                  185019001950
                              1.9                                                                      0.3                        0.6
                              1.8                                                                                   DUET, GT = 1
                              1.7                                                                      0.2          DUET, GT = 0  0.5
                              1.6                                                                                   DSGT, GT = 1
                                                                                                       0.1          DSGT, GT = 0       185019001950
                              1.5
                                    0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                                   0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
                                                     Epochs                                                                   Epochs
                                           (a) Train loss.                                                         (b) Train accuracy.

Figure 6: Comparisons between DUET and DSGT in the non-i.i.d. data scenario on the meta-learning
problem with a 5-agent network on MNIST.

In Figure 5, the DUET algorithm demonstrates superior performance by achieving the highest training
accuracy, along with fast convergence. For the non-i.i.d. case (Figure 6), the algorithms with gradient
tracking handle the heterogeneity of the data well, with better performance.
Figure 7 shows the label distributions of data heterogeneity across different nodes, highlighting the
strong non-i.i.d. nature of the data used in our experiments. This visual representation of non-i.i.d.
data distribution provides a clear understanding of the varying degrees of heterogeneity.
For a 10-agent network (Figure 8) and a 50-agent network (Figure 9) in the i.i.d case, DUET continues
to perform effectively and demonstrates the best performance among the tested methods DSGT and


                                                                                     45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Agent 1                  Agent 2                               Agent 3                    Agent 4                             Agent 5
                    5000


             Count        0 0123456789                     0123456789                         0123456789                    0123456789                       0123456789
                                    Labels                   Labels                                 Labels                    Labels                               Labels
Figure 7: Label distributions of data heterogeneity across nodes for non-iid case on the meta-learning
problem with a 5-agent network on MNIST.


baseline DSGD, maintaining robust convergence and accuracy even in larger, more complex network
settings.


         2.25        DUET, GT = 1   0.6                                                                                                    0.9
         2.00        DSGT, GT = 1                                          0.8                                                             0.8
                     DSGD           0.5                                                                                                    0.7
                                                              Train Accuracy



         1.75


                                                                                                                               Test Accuracy
Train Loss


         1.50                                                              0.6                                                             0.6
                                          185019001950
         1.25                                                                                                                              0.5                     0.90
                                                                           0.4                    0.925
         1.00                                                                                                                              0.4
         0.75                                                                         DUET, GT = 1 0.900                                   0.3        DUET, GT = 1 0.85
                                                                           0.2        DSGT, GT = 1 0.875                                              DSGT, GT = 1
         0.50                                                                         DSGD                                                 0.2        DSGD
                                                                                                         185019001950                                                    185019001950
                0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                         0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                  0.1 0     250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
                                Epochs                                                          Epochs                                                          Epochs
                        (a) Train loss.                                              (b) Train accuracy.                                              (c) Test accuracy.

Figure 8: Comparisons between DUET and DSGT in the i.i.d. data scenario on the meta-learning
problem with a 10-agent network on MNIST.



         2.25        DUET, GT = 1                                                                                                          0.9
                     DSGT, GT = 1   0.6                                                                                                    0.8
         2.00                                                              0.8
                     DSGD                                                                                                                  0.7
         1.75
                                                              Train Accuracy


                                                                                                                               Test Accuracy


                                    0.4                                                                                                    0.6
Train Loss


         1.50                                                              0.6
                                          185019001950
         1.25                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                   0.90                                                             0.8
         1.00                                                              0.4                                                             0.4
                                                                                                   0.85
         0.75                                                                         DUET, GT = 1                                         0.3        DUET, GT = 1
                                                                           0.2        DSGT, GT = 1 0.80                                    0.2        DSGT, GT = 1  0.6
         0.50                                                                         DSGD                                                            DSGD
                                                                                                         185019001950                      0.1                           185019001950
         0.25 0     250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                         0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000                        0   250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
                                Epochs                                                          Epochs                                                          Epochs
                        (a) Train loss.                                              (b) Train accuracy.                                              (c) Test accuracy.

Figure 9: Comparisons between DUET and DSGT in the i.i.d. data scenario on the meta-learning
problem with a 50-agent network on MNIST.

The following table summarizes the parameter settings for the DUET , DSGT , and DSGD algorithms
under both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. cases, illustrating the diverse configurations tested in our experiments.
E.3 D ECENTRALIZED H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION WITH R EAL -W ORLD DATA :

In this section, we explore the hyperparameter optimization problem, which is formulated as a bilevel
optimization task. Specifically, we employ softmax regression (with parameters yi ) as the classifier
and introduce hyperparameters xi to weight samples for training.
Let Dtr,i and Dval,i as the training and validation sets for agent i. We define ℓ(yi ; ui , vi ) as the
cross-entropy loss function, where yi denotes the classification parameters and (ui , vi ) are the data
pairs. The LL problem minimizes the softmax regressionP     loss over the training dataset, and the LL
objective function is formulated as follows: gi (xi , yi ) = (ui ,vi )∈Dtr,i [σ(xi )]ℓ(yi ; ui , vi ), where
xi is the hyperparameter that penalizes the objective for different training sample.
Simultaneously, the UL problem aims to improve the performance of the regression model
on the validation dataset by fine-tuning the hyperparameters. The UL objective is defined as:


                                                                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Setting             Algorithm                UL Learning Rate                   LL Learning Rate                   Parameters (µ, p)
                                DUET                          10                                 0.01                            (0.1, 15 )
            IID                 DSGT                         0.5                              0.00001                            (0.5, 15 )
                               DSGD                            1                                 0.01                                -
                                DUET                         0.1                               0.0001                            (0.1, 15 )
          non-IID
                                DSGT                        0.001                               0.001                            (0.5, 15 )

Table 3: Parameter settings for DUET, DSGT, and DSGD under iid and non-iid conditions on the
meta-learning problem on MNIST.

                                                         Pd      ρ(ys (xi ))2                   −4
fi (xi , yi ) = (ui ,vi )∈Dval,i ℓ(y(xi ); ui , vi ) + d1 s=1 1+ρ(y
               P
                                                                               2 , where ρ = 10    is the reg-
                                                                      s (xi ))
ularization parameter. This regularizer is non-convex and is applied in a distributed manner. To
evaluate the proposed method, we use the FashionMNIST dataset, which consists of images of
clothing categories and serves as an alternative to the classic MNIST dataset. For each agent, the
dataset is split into training, validation, and testing sets, each containing 5000 samples. We compare
the performance of DUET and DSGT algorithms in terms of test accuracy and F1 score, utilizing a
10-agent communication network with a connection probability pc = 0.5.
As show in Figure 10, the analysis of F1 score and test accuracy reveals similar trends across the three
algorithms, indicating consistency between the metrics in evaluating performance. DUET achieves
the best results in both F1 score and test accuracy, with the fastest convergence and highest stability
across epochs. DSGT follows closely, showing competitive performance but slightly behind DUET.
In contrast, DSGD, which lacks gradient tracking, exhibits slower convergence, lower overall
performance in both metrics. These results highlight the effectiveness of gradient tracking in
DUET and DSGT, with DUET emerging as the most robust and generalizable approach. The similar
trends in F1 score and test accuracy further validate the reliability of these algorithms’ performance
in decentralized optimization.


                                0.7                                                       0.7
                                0.6                                                       0.6
                    Test Accuracy


                                0.5                                                       0.5
                                                                                   F1 Score


                                0.4                                                       0.4
                                0.3                                                       0.3
                                                               DUET, GT = 1               0.2                            DUET, GT = 1
                                0.2                            DSGT, GT = 1                                              DSGT, GT = 1
                                0.1                            DSGD                       0.1                            DSGD
                                      0   25   50   75 100 125 150 175 200                      0   25   50   75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                     Epochs                                                    Epochs
                                          (a) Test accuracy.                                             (b) F1 Score.

Figure 10: Comparisons between DUET and DSGT on the hyperparameter optimization problem
with 10-agent network on FashinMNIST.

The following table summarizes the parameter settings for the DUET, DSGT, and DSGD algorithms
on the hyperparameter optimization problem with 10-agent network on FashinMNIST.

               Algorithm                       UL Learning Rate               LL Learning Rate                       Parameters (µ, p)
               DUET                                 0.001                           0.1                                  (0.1, 15 )
               DSGT                                  0.1                            0.01                                 (0.9, 15 )
               DSGD                                  0.01                           0.01                                     -

Table 4: Parameter settings for DUET, DSGT, and DSGD on the hyperparameter optimization
problem with 10-agent network on FashinMNIST.


                                                                              47
