Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE D IRECTIONALITY OF O PTIMIZATION T RAJECTO -
RIES IN N EURAL N ETWORKS

 Sidak Pal Singh˚                                        Bobby He                   Thomas Hofmann
 ETH Zürich & MPI-IS Tübingen                            ETH Zürich                 ETH Zürich

 Bernhard Schölkopf
 MPI-IS Tübingen & ETH Zürich


                                                 A BSTRACT
            The regularity or implicit bias in neural network optimization has been typically
            studied via the parameter norms or the landscape curvature, often overlooking the
            trajectory leading to these parameters. However, properties of the trajectory —
            particularly its directionality — capture critical aspects of how gradient descent
            navigates the landscape to converge to a solution. In this work, we introduce the
            notion of a Trajectory Map and derive natural complexity measures that highlight
            the directional characteristics of optimization trajectories. Our comprehensive
            analysis across vision and language modeling tasks reveals that (a) the trajectory’s
            directionality at the macro-level saturates by the initial phase of training, wherein
            weight decay and momentum play a crucial but understated role; and (b) in sub-
            sequent training, trajectory directionality manifests in micro-level behaviors, such
            as oscillations, for which we also provide a theoretical analysis. This implies that
            neural optimization trajectories have, overall, a more linear form than zig-zaggy, as
            evident by high directional similarity, especially towards the end. To further hone
            this point, we show that when the trajectory direction gathers such an inertia, op-
            timization proceeds largely unaltered even if the network is severely decapacitated
            (by freezing ą 99% of the parameters), — thereby demonstrating the potential for
            significant computational and resource savings without compromising performance.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Loss landscapes imply optimization trajectories, but also vice versa. Given a network architecture
and the training task, the loss landscape is the high-dimensional surface whose each point characterizes
the fit of the parameters to the task objective. A priori, the loss landscape entails the possible
trajectories (or paths) that might be followed by an optimization algorithm, such as stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). However, the particular sets of optimization trajectories that are realized depend on
the particular optimization choices and hyperparameters, such as the learning rate, momentum, batch
size, weight decay, and more. Such is the importance of trajectory, that it could be argued the regions
of the landscape that are never encountered or realized in typical optimization trajectories, might as
well not be in the landscape at all. Essentially, the possible optimization trajectories that are realized
by an optimization method determine its effective loss landscape.
Implicit bias of optimization and what it means for trajectories. Consequently, a significant
body of literature builds around the principle of implicit bias facilitated by standard optimization
algorithms (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; 2020; Moroshko et al., 2020; Barrett and Dherin,
2020), which loosely speaking refers to an undesigned and oftentimes beneficial simplicity that
arises in optimized trajectories. This preferential access of realized landscapes should be contrasted
with the established non-convexity of global neural network (NN) landscapes (Dauphin et al., 2014;
Choromanska et al., 2015; Kawaguchi, 2016; Li et al., 2018), and suggests that implicit bias may
lend a formal and reasonable support to the empirical success of massively over-parameterized NNs.
As a result, one might expect to see signs and hallmarks of regularity in the sequence of steps that
comprise realized NN loss landscape trajectories. In other words, the following questions, which
form the basis of this work, naturally arise:
    ˚
        Correspondence to contact@sidakpal.com


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         What, if any, directional structure exists in neural trajectories? Do these paths have
         a lot of zigzags and bends, reaching the solution winding and coiling, or are they
         straight and direct? How do these properties evolve as optimization progresses?
Mapping the Trajectory Properties. More precisely, we explore and develop key qualitative as well
as quantitative indicators (hallmarks) about the directional complexity/regularity of the optimization
trajectory. Towards this end, we analyze and compare multiple intermediate checkpoints amongst
themselves, across different scenarios and large-scale case studies. A qualitative hallmark, which
we call the ‘Trajectory Map’, conveys the directional (dis)similarity of the parameters and visually
depicts the nature of optimization within and across various stages of training, i.e., at a pan-trajectory
level. Our quantitative hallmarks are functions of these trajectory maps, measuring various notions
of angles, over and above the sequence of steps in the trajectory.
Benefits of the Trajectory View. We believe the trajectory view has several advantages over other
measures to study NN training landscapes, such as loss-based linear interpolation (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Frankle et al., 2020) or hidden representation based metrics (Kornblith et al., 2019; Nguyen
et al., 2022; Lange et al., 2023). For example, it: (a) brings in a level of architecture agnosticity and
helps unlock shared insights onto features of optimization, (b) contains an intrinsic independence to
loss and data that necessitates no explicit inference over additional data samples, (c) allows analyzing
and prognosing the developing solution strategy on-the-fly instead of waiting until convergence, and
(d) provides potential hints at the bottlenecks and redundancies in the optimization procedure.
Our contributions are:
(1) We propose the novel perspective of trajectory maps, and showcase how it uncovers new insights
into the nature of directional evolution in parameter space during neural network training.
(2) We use this to uncover that optimization trajectories possess, in general, highly directional
similarity, but simultaneously there reside oscillations at micro-levels — which we study theoretically.
(3) We show how model scale in LLMs has a regularizing effect on the directional complexity of
trajectories, and that directional measures have a trend which is more predictive of performance than
traditional norm-based complexity measures.
(4) We provide evidence that after the trajectory direction saturates, a significant amount of the
network capacity can be frozen without compromising performance while making training efficient.

2    M ETHODOLOGY
Matrix representation of Trajectory. Let us assume the optimization trajectory consists of a set
T of points tθθ t uTt“0 , each denoting the (flattened) parameters of the network encountered at some
step and which live in the parameter space θ “ Rp , i.e., T Ď θ . This set of points need not contain
the entire set of points visited in the course of optimization but instead can represent a subset of
points, possibly sampled at an interval of k points. It will be convenient to organize this set of points,
which define the trajectory, in the form of a matrix, Θ P RpT `1qˆp , whose first dimension T ` 1
makes explicit the inclusion of the initialization θ 0 .
Trajectory Map Analyzing the matrix Θ , on its own, might get cumbersome as the size of modern
networks ranges in millions and billions of parameters. Hence, we will resort to looking at functions
of the kernel matrix K “ ΘΘ J which would be a square matrix of shape n “ T ` 1. Further, it
will also be helpful to isolate and analyze the directional aspect of the trajectory, for which we will
normalize the set of points by their norm, and in effect, consider the set Tp “ tθθ t {}θθ t }2 uTt“0 with the
respective matrix Θp . As a result, the ensuing kernel matrix ΘpΘp J , which we will refer to as C will
contain the cosine similarities between every pair of points in the trajectory, i.e.,
                           pCqij “ cos-simpθθ i , θ j q “ xθθ i , θ j y{}θθ i }2 }θθ j }2 .

Hereafter, we will refer to C as the Trajectory Map (TM). We remark that, although not necessary,
here we are essentially considering linear kernels, which we will see provide a variety of insights by
themselves. The TM will be our qualitative hallmark of choice for analyzing optimization trajectories.
Quantitative Hallmarks. Besides visualizing the TM as the qualitative hallmark, we will consider
the following set of indicators for quantitatively hallmarking the optimization trajectories.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(i) Mean Directional Similarity (MDS): We take the cosine similarity averaged over the entire
trajectory map, i.e., over every pair of points in the trajectory. This can be written as, ω :“
 1    J                     J             J     1ˆn
 n2 1n ¨ C ¨ 1n , where 1n “ p1 ¨ ¨ ¨ 1q P R        denotes the vector of all ones and n “ |T | is the
cardinality of the trajectory. By using the form of the matrix C discussed before, we can further
                       › p J ›2
                       ›          ›
rewrite MDS as, ω “ › n1 Θ     1n › . Now, it becomes apparent that MDS essentially projects all the
trajectory points onto the unit sphere, computes their average and finally takes the squared norm.

To get a better sense of MDS, we can consider
its two possible extremes: (a) all the parameter
unit-vectors cancel out, yielding a value of ω “ 0.
For instance, this would happen in the scenario
when the points in the trajectory are exactly
following a circular orbit around the origin; or,
(b) when each of the parameters point in the same
direction, implying that the trajectory is simply
a linear path, with ω “ 1. Knowing the nature of
these two extremes, we can expect neither to be Figure 1: Illustration of two trajectories and
desirable in an ideal trajectory which leads up to a angular measures.
generalizing solution. Thus, hitting its sweet spot
would be the target, or where that is unknown, at least avoiding these extremes.
(ii) Angular Measures: One such key measure would be the angle between consecutive (net) updates,
i.e., =pθθ t`1 ´ θ t , θ t ´ θ t´1 q, which will measure the extent of directional movement along the
trajectory. Next, we can consider a cone with the vertex at at origin and compute the apex angle there,
=pθθ t , θ 0 q. This measure will give us an idea of the amount of directional movement at a global scale.
(iii) Norm-based Measures: Besides, for baselines, we also include measures such as: parameter
norms }θθ t }2 , distance from initialization }θθ t ´ θ 0 }2 , norm between consecutive points }θθ t`1 ´ θ t }2 .
Remark 1. For extremely large neural networks, building the underlying kernel matrices can start
becoming resource-expensive. In principle, there is a rich body of work in kernel methods that has
focused on developing efficient approximations (Davis et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2021). We do not
resort to such approximations for the sake of accuracy.
Remark 2. While beyond the scope of the main text, the appendix also catalogs results for other vari-
ants of angular/norm-based measures, as well as a relativized version of trajectory map (Section D).


3       G AINING I NSIGHTS VIA T RAJECTORY E XEMPLARS

Setup for obtaining the trajectory exemplars. To begin with, in order to obtain a better grasp of
the directionality of trajectories, let us contrast the trajectory map obtained with an optimal choice
of hyperparameters against those with sub-optimal ones. As an exemplar of a desirable trajectory
map, we employ the standard SGD-based training recipe1 for ResNet50 on ImageNet that achieves a
top-1 accuracy of „ 76%. To compare against sub-optimal trajectory maps, we analyze the effects
of disabling2 momentum and weight decay one by one, since empirically they lead to significant
deterioration in performance. The resulting trajectory maps, built from checkpoints taken at each
epoch, are shown in Figure 2.
Observations. We can make out that the trajectory maps for the sub-optimal hyperparameter
choices develop a darker hue much more quickly into training, indicating a significantly higher
directional similarity. To the extent that, when put on the same scale as in Figure 2, the rightmost
(worst hyperparameter choice) trajectory map shows almost no directional variation as compared
to the leftmost (optimal hyperparameter choice) map. Further, for the leftmost trajectory map, the


    1
      Namely, this consists of training for 90 epochs with a learning rate η “ 0.1 (decayed multiplicatively by
a factor of 0.1 at epochs 30 and 60), momentum µ “ 0.9, batch size B “ 256, and weight decay λ “ 0.0001.
    2
      In the Appendix F, we also present the directional effects of hyper-parameters such as learning rate and
batch size, as well as recent regularizers like Sharpness-Aware Minimization (Foret et al., 2021).


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 trained on ImageNet with optimal and sub-optimal (in the
order of disabling momentum µ “ 0, weight decay λ “ 0, or both) hyperparameter choices. The MDS
values are, 0.764, 0.901, 0.931, 0.979 respectively. A darker hue represents higher cosine similarity.


directional movement shows a phase-wise trend3 , with its last phase 60 ´ 90 epochs having a similar
behaviour as the entire rightmost plot in the figure above. We emphasize that the onset of this dark
hue doesn’t mean the network has converged, as evident from Figure 3(b) which shows the trajectory
length covered over time. Rather, only the directional movement reaches a saturation by the end
of the initial phase (which is „ 30 epochs) as shown in Figure 3(a).
Qualitatively different solutions. More than just the deterioration of the performance („ 8%), we
conclude that this toggling of the hyperparameters leads to solutions that are qualitatively different
in terms of the directionality of their trajectories. In particular, the presence of weight decay or
momentum encourages more directional exploration, while in their absence, the trajectory latches on
to a solution which is nearby in a directional sense.


                                                                           řT
                             (a) =pθt , θ0 q                         (b)    i“1 }θt ´ θt´1 }2

Figure 3: Evolution of the angle traced at origin by the trajectory and its path length over training
across different momentum and weight decay settings. The left figure suggests that around epoch 30,
marked by the gray dotted line, the directional movement saturates, while based on the right figure,
we see that the trajectory still goes further. Set-up: ResNet50 on ImageNet.

Directional Redundancy. Another visible aspect from the trajectory maps is that, in general, neural
optimization trajectories seem to possess a high mean directionality score (MDS), with ω “ 0.764
being the least amongst these exemplars. To contextualize this better, note that the parameters live
in „ 25.6 million dimensional space. This strongly suggests that network optimization trajectories
do not merely comprise random points4 in high-dimensions whose cosine similarity might go to
zero, but rather the sequence of points encountered in a trajectory must be highly structured to yield
such directionally redundant trajectories. In the Appendix F, we also present a wider set of results,
namely, with adaptive optimizers like AdamW as well as more datasets/architectures such as Vision
Tranformers on ImageNet and VGG16 on CIFAR10, and for different amounts of label noise — all
of which support this finding of directional redundancy.
A word of caution. However, the above experiment also suggests that extreme values of MDS (ě 0.9)
should be avoided5 . This can also be understood from the fact that trajectory maps here also comprise
    3
      While 3 phases can be spotted distinctly, if we look closely, there seems to be another phase transition
neighbouring the initialization and the subsequent couple epochs, giving rise to a thin horizontal and vertical sliver
of relatively lighter hue. Empirically, we find in this transient phase, the distance to the solution rapidly decreases.
    4
      In Appendix C, we analyze the relative trajectory map and MDS for a random walk/Brownian motion, and
in comparison we find that (expectedly) the trajectory maps of neural networks are more directionally redundant.
    5
      Besides, a certain amount of directional exploration is crucial as evident from our analysis of the
grokking (Power et al., 2022) phenomenon discussed in Appendix I.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the random initialization, and hence a trajectory with the maximum possible MDS value of 1 would
have as its end point a scaled version of the random initialization.
    Section 3 Key Takeaways:

    • Optimization trajectories have, overall, a high directional similarity (MDS ą 0.75 across cases).
    • Disabling momentum and weight decay reduces the directional movement in the trajectories.
    • Directional movement saturates by the early phase, despite the trajectory going longer than that.

4        U NDERSTANDING D IRECTIONAL M OVEMENT

In this section, our aim is to investigate the nature of directional movement in further depth, and in
particular, focus on the below two questions:
Question 1: How exactly does the directional nature of trajectories manifest in the late phase of
training, when we know from Figure 3(a) that the overall directionality does not change significantly?
Initial Thoughts. A tempting first guess is that perhaps the trajectories are just linear in this phase.
But, if that were the case, we would be just using line-search (Zhang and Hager, 2004; Vaswani et al.,
2019) to train neural networks and skip this otherwise slow second phase of training.
Question 2: How do weight decay and momentum promote directional movement and lower MDS?
Initial Thoughts. The current results might even seem to run against the intuitive pictures of
momentum and weight decay. For instance, intuitively, the use of momentum should strengthen the
previous gradient directions and lead to increased directional similarity, but we find the opposite.
Similarly, in the absence of weight decay, the network is not constrained to remain in a ball around
the origin and, in principle, there should be more license to explore in the landscape.

                      What are these intuitive impressions not taking into account?

4.1      D IRECTIONAL M OVEMENT AT DIFFERENT L EVELS AND O SCILLATIONS


                  (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt ´ θt´1 q                           (b) }θt`1 ´ θt }2
Figure 4: (a): Oscillatory nature of updates. (b): Beyond the first phase (after 30 epochs), the updates
reside at a micro-scale with smaller update norms. The different curves show the effect of momentum
and weight decay hyperparameters. The setup is same as before: ResNet50 on ImageNet.

 Answer 1. We find that the late phase of training is not so straightforward. Far from co-linear
 updates, it is marked by significant noise and oscillation in the (stochastic) gradient descent updates.
 The answer to this conundrum then lies in the fact that such noisy directional movement resides at a
‘micro’-level but does not surface up to the ‘macro’-level.6
To see this, let us first take a general overview of the Figure 4, without looking at each of the
individual curves. We see in Figure 4(a) that for a significant part of the training, the angle between
successive update directions7 is obtuse (gray horizontal line marks 90˝ ). Apart from short intervals
     6
      We use this macro-micro distinction in terms of the angle traced at origin by the trajectory, see Figure 3(a).
     7
      These updates should be thought of as ‘net’ or ‘aggregate’ updates, since they are at an per-epoch granularity
for tractability reasons, and not at every single step taken by the optimizer. Empirically, the current granularity is
still rich enough in that the presented trends persist even if we go 2ˆ to 5ˆ more coarser.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Figure 5: (Left): Directional movement
                                                                   due to oscillations results in obtuse angles;
                                                                   (Right): Added directional movement
                                                                   due to weight decay. Here, the downward
                                                                   vector represents the pull towards the
                                                                   origin (O) due to weight decay, while the
                                                                   rightward vector the force due to the loss.


near learning rate decay, this obtuse angle holds almost throughout the late phase. However, the
extent to which this angle is obtuse decreases over the phases and further, Figure 4(b) reveals that
beyond the early phase (marked by the vertical gray line), these oscillatory updates have much
smaller norm.8 Consequently, the late-phase oscillations reside at a micro-scale and therefore leave
the macro-level directionality unaffected.
Answer 2. Interestingly, when we look closely at Figure 4(a), we find that the angle between
updates is more obtuse when momentum is turned on versus when off (compare the solid lines versus
dashed-dotted lines). Also, rather visibly, the angle tends to be larger when weight decay is enabled
additionally (compare the solid dark blue and turquoise lines) , suggesting that weight decay and
momentum are closely intertwined. Crucially, this observation points to how there is more direction
movement when these hyperparameters are enabled and thereby decreasing MDS.
Furthermore, weight decay by itself has added directional effects, which we illustrate through a
simple physics-based intuition in the Figure 5, right. In particular, we can think of the loss gradient
pulling the network parameters rightwards, while the force exerted by weight decay tries to pull the
network downwards. The joint presence of these forces lends more directionality to the trajectory, and
is accentuated with increasing weight decay (downward force). See Appendices E.2 and E.4 for more.

4.2    T HEORETICAL M ODELLING OF THE U NDERLYING M ECHANISM

To further understand the mechanism underlying the oscillatory nature and the intertwined role of
momentum and weight decay, we turn to the simplest and oft-employed model of a quadratic problem.
Lemma 1. Given a quadratic problem with ℓ2 regularization of strength α ą 0, namely,
minθ PRd 12 θ J M θ ` 12 α}θθ }2 , with M P Rdˆd symmetric with eigenvalues λ1 ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě λd , the angle
between successive steps ∆t “ θ t ´ θ t´1 , ∆t`1 “ θ t`1 ´ θ t , when using gradient descent with a
one-step momentum (µ ą 0) and learning rates ηt , ηt`1 , can be upper and lower bounded as follows:
                      x∆t , ∆t`1 y ď ηt ηt`1 p1 ´ ηt pµ ` α ` λd qqpλd ` αq2 }θθ t´1 }2
                      x∆t , ∆t`1 y ě ηt ηt`1 p1 ´ ηt pµ ` α ` λ1 qqpλ1 ` αq2 }θθ t´1 }2

The proof, in Appendix A, inherently considers the solution at θ ‹ “ 0, but if that is not the case, we
can substitute it in the objective and our derived bounds would scale in the squared distance to the
solution, i.e. }θθ t´1 ´ θ ‹ }2 . Besides, in the above proof, we consider a one-step momentum, which
inherently means resetting the momentum after every 2 steps. This is done for convenience, as our
main purpose is to anyways gain insights into the phenomenon and not provide its ultimate proof.
Turning to the bounds themselves, notice that if the learning rate ηt ě 1{pλ1 ` µ ` αq, the lower
bound will turn negative and will be multiplied by a factor of pλ1 ` αq2 }θθ t´1 }2 . On the other hand,
although the first term of the upper bound might still be positive, importantly, it is scaled by a factor
of pλd ` αq2 « α2 for matrices M which are close to degenerate (λd Ñ 0).
Low-rank Hessian and Edge of Stability (EoS). In NNs, the Hessian of the loss with respect to
the parameters will play the role of the matrix M, since we can assume a second-order Taylor series
will hold across the two steps. But it is also known through prior empirical work that the Hessian is
significantly degenerate (Sagun et al., 2017), which has also been proven rigorously for deep linear
fully-connected and convolutional networks (Singh et al., 2021). Furthermore, this requirement on
the learning rate ηt is actually looser than the adaptivity of the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian to
the learning rate λ « 2{η, as shown in the recent work on Edge of Stability (Cohen et al., 2022).
   8
     The smaller update norms and the micro-level directionality in the late phase do not simply arise due to
lower learning rates, but also are closely related to the loss of plasticity (Lyle et al., 2023; Dohare et al., 2024) .


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Explaining the Obtuse angles. Owing to these facts, we will have that λd pMq « 0, and which
further implies that the upper bound on the inner-product between the updates will be approximately
zero (as typically the regularization strength α is also small, e.g., α “ 0.0001 in the ResNet setting),
and the lower-bound will be large in absolute value but negative. Therefore, this explains how the
angles between consecutive epochs can be obtuse. More broadly, the obtuse angle indeed implies
that there are oscillations, especially along the direction of the largest Hessian eigenvector. Further,
from Lemma 1, we see that the magnitude of the inner-product of the updates scales in proportion to
ηt`1 . Hence, a way to dampen the oscillations is to decrease the learning rate, and as can be seen in
Figure 4(a), the learning rate decay at epochs 30 and 60 is followed right after with the angles turning
from obtuse to acute. Lastly, here in the constraint on the learning rate (the additive terms α and µ), we
can also see momentum and weight decay go hand-in-hand, each accentuating the effect of the other.
    Section 4 Key Takeaways:

    • Training close to EoS causes obtuse angles between updates, leading to directional exploration.
    • Weight decay and momentum are closely intertwined, and further enhance the oscillations.
    • The late-stage oscillations/bouncing reside at a micro-scale, as evident from smaller update
      norms (Figure 4(b)) and angles between consecutive epochs (Figure 4(a)).


5      LLM S AND D IRECTIONAL H ALLMARKS OF T RAJECTORIES
Having better understood the nature of directional movement, we would like to know how general-
izable are our findings. So, given the increasing relevance of Large Language Models (LLMs), in this
section, we study whether language modelling tasks result in a similar trajectory structure as exhibited
in vision tasks. Besides, in connection to LLMs, scaling comes up as a natural question. Hence, we
would like to investigate how scale affects the directionality of trajectories: does it provide more direc-
tions for learning and increase the complexity of trajectories or if instead it has a regularizing effect?

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 6:     Trajectory Maps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of Pythia GPT-NeoX mod-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       els across two orders of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       scales    trained     on  Pile.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The corresponding MDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ω “ 0.678, 0.759, 0.815.

Thanks to Pythia’s (Biderman et al., 2023) publicly released model checkpoints over training, for
GPT-NeoX (Black et al., 2022) models — ranging in sizes from 14 Million (M) to 12 Billion (B)
— we can provide answers to the above questions. For tractability, we select every fourth available
checkpoint and consider models of sizes: 14M, 70M, 160M, 410M, 1.4B, 2.8B, 6.9B, 12B. The
results for a shortlist of these experiments can be found in Figure 6 (for more, see Figure 69). First
up, these results establish that even the LLM trajectory maps have high directional redundancy
across scales, — suggesting a widespread applicability of our key finding.

                                                                                                                                    Scale
                                              80                                                                                      70M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                      Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2


                                                                                                                                      160M
                                                                                                                  2000
          Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                      410M
                                                                                                                                      1.4B
                                                                                                 Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                              60
                                                                                                                                      2.8B                                                                           1500
                                                                                                                  1500                6.9B
                                                                                                                                      12B
                                              40                                        Scale                                                                                                                                                                               Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1000
                                                                                          70M                                                                                                                                                                                 70M
                                                                                          160M                    1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              160M
                                                                                          410M                                                                                                                                                                                410M
                                              20                                          1.4B                                                                                                                                   500                                          1.4B
                                                                                          2.8B                                                                                                                                                                                2.8B
                                                                                                                          500
                                                                                          6.9B                                                                                                                                                                                6.9B
                                               0                                          12B                                                                                                                                      0                                          12B

                                                   0   5   10   15     20     25   30     35                                    0           5   10   15        20      25   30   35                                                    0   5   10   15     20     25   30     35
                                                                 Epochs (t)                                                                               Epochs (t)                                                                                 Epochs (t)



         (a) Apex Angle at Origin                                                                                                               (b) }θt }2                                                                                 (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2
         =pθt , θ0 q
Figure 7: Directional complexity measures correlate better with performance than norm-based ones.

Detailed Observations. Elaborating further, in Figure 6, we find a tiny dark square grid in the
upper-left corner, which delineates precisely the learning rate warmup phase. Next, the trajectory


                                                                                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


map for the 160M model (and smaller) seems to have a discernible substructure, but which becomes
more homogeneous with increasing model scale. In general, increasing scale lends an intense dark
hue to the trajectory maps, suggesting rising directional similarity. Even the horizontal and vertical
slivers (see the first few rows and columns) corresponding to the warmup phase start to assume a
higher cosine similarity with scale. Overall, this seems to suggest that the larger models are biased
towards directionally regular optimization trajectories.
Directional measures correlate with performance better than norm-based measures. In fact,
Figure 7(a) shows that the apex angle made at the origin by the trajectory monotonically decreases
with increasing scale. This is in contrast to norm-based complexity measures such as overall
parameter norm (Gunasekar et al., 2018) and distance from initialization (Nagarajan and Kolter,
2019) which seem to be poorly correlated to performance, as visible in Figures 7(b) and 7(c).
Norm-based measures fail to capture the monotonic trend, and even have the largest complexity
value for the best-performing model.
Why do parameters become aligned with scale? A Theoretical Argument. We prove, in
Appendix B, that this surprising finding about the progressive increase in cosine similarity with scale
has a relatively simple explanation, at least in the case of the large-width limit of deep networks.
The gist of our argument is that in the large width limit, any parameter updates that lead to stable
feature updates must necessarily yield updated parameters that are identically aligned with their
initialisation. While this is not so surprising for lazy learning regimes like the Neural Tangent
Kernel (Jacot et al., 2020) where feature learning does not occur, a more surprising aspect of our
finding is that this is necessarily true also for feature learning regimes, such as µP (Yang et al., 2022).

    Section 5 Key Takeaways:

    • LLMs up to 12B parameters exhibit like patterns of directionally redundant trajectory maps.
    • Apex angle traced at origin monotonically decreases with increasing model scale, as opposed
      to traditional norm-based measures, thus showing promise as a useful complexity measure.


6      L EVERAGING D IRECTIONAL R EDUNDANCY FOR E FFICIENT T RAINING

Our trajectory map analyses have revealed significant directional redundancy in the optimization
trajectories of a broad range of neural networks, which is especially prominent later into training.
While we have seen that the macro-level directional movement saturates early (Section 3), micro-level
oscillations continue to persist in the late phases (Section 4). We thus hypothesize that once this
directional saturation is achieved, the full capacity of a network might not be required for training. If
true, this would motivate optimization hybrids for efficient training.
How to best decapacitate the network? As the primary desiderata, we want to (i) retain the least
number of parameters possible, (ii) ensure that the capacity is removed in a structured manner to real-
ize speed-ups (unlike, unstructured sparsity), (iii) intervene minimally in the implementation workflow.
Clearly, our desiderata is stringent; but it allows testing the above hypothesis more compellingly.


 Figure 8: Training only the BN scalar parameters suffices after the directional movement saturates.
The trajectory map of the original, full network, training is shown on the left and, in the bar chart to the
 right, the bars denoting the performance achieved by training BN parameters from a particular epoch.
‘Baseline’ denotes the network accuracy just before switching to optimizing the BN parameters only.

                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Approach: Training only Normalization Layers. This meets our desiderata since (i) normalization
layers have typically ă 1% of the parameters, (ii) all other layer types are frozen and do not need
gradient updates, thus ensuring speed-up is realizable, (iii) this is essentially a 1 line change in code.
Also, (batch/layer/group) normalization layers are ubiquitous in modern architectures. Further, this re-
purposing of normalization layers was inspired by Frankle et al. (2021) who empirically demonstrated
the better-than-expected performance when training just the scalar parameters in batch-normalization
(BN) layers from initialization, as well as theoretical expressivity results (Burkholz, 2024).
Experimental Setup. We experiment with ResNet20 on CIFAR10 using SGD over 160 epochs,
freezing non-BN layers at different points in training, and then using only the 1, 376 scalar parameters
in the BN layers for the remaining training duration. Figure 8 presents the results alongside the
trajectory map of the full network training.
Observations. (i) Training just BN layers from initialization, as claimed in Frankle et al. (2021),
results in a network with a test accuracy of 54.8%, which although interesting falls considerably short
of the 91.2% test accuracy obtained by training the entire network. In a way, from the horizontal strip
of trajectory map around 0, we see that at this stage the directional movement is yet to saturate. (ii)
However soon after, from around 40 epochs, where the trajectory map develops a dark hue (and the
cosine similarity to the final parameters is „ 0.9), training BN parameters alone leads to within 2%
of the full-network accuracy. (iii) From around 80-th epoch, this gets to within 1%, and completely
matches thereafter. Notably, this feat is achieved by training only 0.5% of the overall parameters, and
this fares even better than training all the parameters in the bulkier last layer as shown in Figure 77.
Similar findings on ImageNet. Likewise, in our experiments with ResNet50 on ImageNet as in
Figure 2, we found that although training BN layers right from initialization gets a top-1 accuracy of
just „ 6.4%, but this decapacitated training from epoch 30 gets to within „ 10% of the full-network’s
accuracy and from epoch 60 to within about „ 2% of it.This is again a striking result, considering
only 0.18% of the parameters are being trained.
Benefits for Efficient Training. Besides the runtime saved in backward pass, this also leads to
savings in the GPU memory consumption as the optimization buffers (like the momentum buffer
or those used for preconditioning in adaptive methods) now need to be of significantly smaller size
(typically ă 1%, i.e., 99% savings), which could, in turn, make larger batch sizes feasible.
Broader Implications. The above results pointedly demonstrate that the above hypothesis holds
through the strong desiderata fairly well. More broadly, we envision that this proof-of-concept can
be readily adapted into a hybrid optimization scheme, and possibly with more flexible desiderata
that possibly allow for interleaved training with other parameters or equip more parameters to start
with — thereby contributing to non-trivial cost savings. While our computational resources restrict
us to vision models, we anticipate many of these insights will carry over to LLMs, given the observed
similarities in their trajectory maps. We encourage the broader research community to explore the
decapacitation idea as a means to optimize LLM training and spark further innovation in this respect.

    Section 6 Key Takeaways:

    • When directional movement saturates, neural networks can be severely decapacitated and
      trained only through parameters in normalization layers.
    • Our results on CIFAR10 and ImageNet show that this comes with little compromise in
      performance, while making training much more efficient.


7     R ELATED W ORK
 Directional Redundancy and Trajectory Structure. Prior work (Ji and Telgarsky, 2020) has
 theoretically noted a notion of directional convergence, wherein the parameters of simple networks
 and classifiers converge quickly, in terms of their direction. Likewise (Merrill et al., 2020) have
 observed that cosine similarity between subsequent parameter checkpoints during T5 (Raffel et al.,
 2023) pre-training rapidly approaches one. In a similar vein, Guille-Escuret et al. (2023) find that
 gradients tend to have a moderate but positive alignment with the solution direction, all throughout
 training. Further, in a recent work (Dherin and Rosca, 2024), propose the existence of regions called
‘corridors’ in (full-batch) gradient descent training, whereby the trajectory behaves like line segments.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


All of these can be seen as diverse facets of the core phenomenon of redundancy in the directional
movement, which we elaborate in depth here. In comparison, our work lays out a comprehensive
analysis of the directional aspects of trajectories, which we study through trajectory maps and related
directional measures, and where we uncover different levels of directional movement and their
mechanisms — thus contributing significant nuance over existing literature.
Implicit Effects of Hyperparameters. Implicit bias (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; 2020;
Moroshko et al., 2020; Barrett and Dherin, 2020) has emerged as one of the main contenders for
explaining the success of deep neural networks. This principle has also inspired several works which
seek to uncover the implicit effects that might be latent in the regular working of hyperparameters.
To name a few, Andriushchenko et al. (2023) for instance suggest a loss stabilization mechanism
behind weight decay, while (Liu et al., 2023) attempt to characterize the implicit bias of large learning
rates in terms of resulting in a flatter solution, and Jelassi and Li (2022); Cao et al. (2023) explain
the implicit bias of momentum and batch normalization with regards to margin. In contrast, we
showed the implicit effects of momentum and weight decay from a trajectory perspective, i.e., on the
increased directional movement, as well as how these two hyperparameters interact with each other.
Decapacitation. This might be reminiscent of the lottery-ticket hypothesis (Frankle and Carbin,
2019), with a subtle but key distinction that the lottery-tickets are concerned with sub-networks
(certain neurons are set to zero) while here the network structure remains the same and the capacity
is stripped by freezing the parameters. Also, the mechanism of finding lottery-tickets is retrospective
in nature; while here we present a mechanism to decapacitate that depends on the current network
parameters. However, it would be worth investigating the connection further, especially given their
shared reliance on the early phase of training — albeit through directional saturation versus linear
mode connectivity (Frankle et al., 2020). Besides, a similar exploration of tuning normalization
parameters has been tried for fine-tuning (Zhao et al., 2023), although not in the context of
(pre-)training which is our focus here.

8    D ISCUSSION

Summary. We observe that optimization trajectories in neural networks exhibit a rich directional
structure, across a wide range of architectures, datasets, optimizers, and hyperparameters. This is
firstly visible through the trajectory maps, which generally have high mean dimensionality scores.
Next, as the angular measures reveal, the directional movement persists throughout training, but
resides at varying levels, with the macro-level behaviour in the early training phase and micro-level
oscillations subsequently. We utilize this to come up with and demonstrate network decapacitation,
whereby once the directional saturation is reached, freezing significant network capacity leaves the
performance unaltered — thus showcasing the potential for efficient training of neural networks.
Future Work. The two most interesting directions of future work are as follows:
(A). Testing the Generalization Potential of Directional Measures. We have seen in Sections 3 and 5,
that directional measures are correlated with generalization. In particular, they appear to exhibit
a U-shape trend, where the extreme values should clearly be avoided. A dedicated study focusing
exclusively on the generalization potential of directional measures, and comparing these findings to
flatness-based analyses, would be highly insightful. Intuitively, flatter solutions will contain several
low curvature directions in their vicinity, which would align well with the discussion here.
(B). Analysis of Layerwise dynamics. Another interesting aspect of trajectory maps is that they can
be easily extended to hone into directional dynamics at a layerwise level. Our initial analysis into
GPTNeoX models discussed in Section 5 shows that the layerwise trajectory maps inhabit a rich struc-
ture, as shown in Figure 75. In particular, for models with less than a billion parameters, the Q,K,V
trajectory maps show significant heterogeneity in the timescales of directional convergence, with
middle layers converging the last directionally. Strikingly, the Q,K,V dynamics homogenize across
depth with higher scale. Moreover, these intriguing observations suggest utilizing trajectory maps
for (data-free) mechanistic understanding, complementing (Elhage et al., 2021; Grosse et al., 2023).
Conclusion. Overall, we have merely scratched the surface of this trajectory perspective into
understanding optimization behaviour in neural networks. We hope this work will bring further
nuance in these areas and contribute towards hybrid optimization schemes that can exploit the
showcased directional redundancy.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Benoit Dherin and Tiago Pimentel for reading a draft of the paper and
providing useful comments. Also, we thank Weronika Ormaniec for catching typographical mistakes
and making useful remarks. Sidak Pal Singh would also like to acknowledge the financial support
from Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems.

R EFERENCES
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias in terms
  of optimization geometry. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1832–1841.
  PMLR, 2018.
Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang Zhang. Algorithmic regularization in over-parameterized
  matrix sensing and neural networks with quadratic activations, 2019.
Yuanzhi Li, Colin Wei, and Tengyu Ma. Towards explaining the regularization effect of initial large
  learning rate in training neural networks, 2020.
Edward Moroshko, Suriya Gunasekar, Blake Woodworth, Jason D. Lee, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel
  Soudry. Implicit bias in deep linear classification: Initialization scale vs training accuracy, 2020.
David GT Barrett and Benoit Dherin.            Implicit gradient regularization.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11162, 2020.
Yann N Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex
  optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Anna Choromanska, Mikael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, Gérard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun. The loss
  surfaces of multilayer networks. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 192–204. PMLR,
  2015.
Kenji Kawaguchi. Deep learning without poor local minima. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss landscape
  of neural nets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ian J Goodfellow, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew M Saxe. Qualitatively characterizing neural network
  optimization problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6544, 2014.
Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode
  connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 3259–3269. PMLR, 2020.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors,
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pages 3519–3529. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v97/kornblith19a.html.
Thao Nguyen, Maithra Raghu, and Simon Kornblith. On the origins of the block structure phe-
  nomenon in neural network representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07184, 2022.
Richard D Lange, Devin Kwok, Jordan Kyle Matelsky, Xinyue Wang, David Rolnick, and Konrad
  Kording. Deep networks as paths on the manifold of neural representations. In Timothy Doster,
  Tegan Emerson, Henry Kvinge, Nina Miolane, Mathilde Papillon, Bastian Rieck, and Sophia
  Sanborn, editors, Proceedings of 2nd Annual Workshop on Topology, Algebra, and Geometry
  in Machine Learning (TAG-ML), volume 221 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pages 102–133. PMLR, 28 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v221/
  lange23a.html.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Damek Davis, Jonathan Balzer, and Stefano Soatto. Asymmetric sparse kernel approximations for
  large-scale visual search. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 2107–2114, 2014.
Qi Chen, Bing Zhao, Haidong Wang, Mingqin Li, Chuanjie Liu, Zengzhong Li, Mao Yang, and
  Jingdong Wang. Spann: Highly-efficient billion-scale approximate nearest neighbor search, 2021.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization, 2021.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: General-
  ization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets, 2022.
Hongchao Zhang and William W Hager. A nonmonotone line search technique and its application to
  unconstrained optimization. SIAM journal on Optimization, 14(4):1043–1056, 2004.
Sharan Vaswani, Aaron Mishkin, Issam Laradji, Mark Schmidt, Gauthier Gidel, and Simon Lacoste-
  Julien. Painless stochastic gradient: Interpolation, line-search, and convergence rates. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 23190–23211. PMLR, 2023.
Shibhansh Dohare, J Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Qingfeng Lan, Parash Rahman, A Rupam Mah-
  mood, and Richard S Sutton. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning. Nature, 632(8026):
  768–774, 2024.
Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Empirical analysis of the
  hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04454, 2017.
Sidak Pal Singh, Gregor Bachmann, and Thomas Hofmann. Analytic insights into structure and
  rank of neural network hessian maps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  23914–23927, 2021.
Jeremy M. Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J. Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent
   on neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability, 2022.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace He,
  Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, et al. Gpt-neox-20b: An open-source autoregressive
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06745, 2022.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J. Zico Kolter. Generalization in deep networks: The role of distance from
  initialization, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.01672.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks, 2020.
Greg Yang, Edward J. Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder,
  Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural networks
  via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer, 2022.
Jonathan Frankle, David J. Schwab, and Ari S. Morcos. Training batchnorm and only batchnorm: On
  the expressive power of random features in cnns, 2021.
Rebekka Burkholz. Batch normalization is sufficient for universal function approximation in CNNs.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=wOSYMHfENq.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Directional convergence and alignment in deep learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17176–17186, 2020.
William Merrill, Vivek Ramanujan, Yoav Goldberg, Roy Schwartz, and Noah Smith. Effects of
 parameter norm growth during transformer training: Inductive bias from gradient descent. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2010.09697, 2020.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer, 2023.
Charles Guille-Escuret, Hiroki Naganuma, Kilian Fatras, and Ioannis Mitliagkas. No wrong turns:
  The simple geometry of neural networks optimization paths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11922,
  2023.
Benoit Dherin and Mihaela Rosca. Corridor geometry in gradient-based optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.08818, 2024.
Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco D’Angelo, Aditya Varre, and Nicolas Flammarion. Why do we
 need weight decay in modern deep learning?, 2023.
Chunrui Liu, Wei Huang, and Richard Yi Da Xu. Implicit bias of deep learning in the large learning
  rate phase: A data separability perspective. Applied Sciences, 13(6):3961, 2023.
Samy Jelassi and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding how momentum improves generalization in
  deep learning, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lf0W6tcWmh-.
Yuan Cao, Difan Zou, Yuanzhi Li, and Quanquan Gu. The implicit bias of batch normalization in
  linear models and two-layer linear convolutional neural networks. In The Thirty Sixth Annual
  Conference on Learning Theory, pages 5699–5753. PMLR, 2023.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03635.
Bingchen Zhao, Haoqin Tu, Chen Wei, Jieru Mei, and Cihang Xie. Tuning layernorm in attention:
  Towards efficient multi-modal llm finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11420, 2023.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for transformer
  circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1:1, 2021.
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, Evan Hubinger, Kamilė Lukovsiūtė, Karina Nguyen,
  Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, and Samuel R. Bowman. Studying large
  language model generalization with influence functions, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.         arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming,
  2020.
Tanishq Kumar, Blake Bordelon, Samuel J. Gershman, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Grokking as the
  transition from lazy to rich training dynamics, 2024.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Part I

Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Omitted Proofs                                                                             15

     B Why cosine similarities increase with scale?                                               16

     C Comparing Gradient Trajectories with Random Walks                                          17
       C.1 Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
       C.2 Expected MDS values for Random Walk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19

     D Relative Trajectory Maps                                                                   21

     E Detailed Experimental Results                                                              21
       E.1 ResNet50: Switching off the hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
       E.2 Additional Discussion on Effects of Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
       E.3 ResNet50: Weight Decay, AdamW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24
       E.4 Additional Discussion on Weight Decay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24

     F Directional Effects in Other Key Settings                                                  27
       F.1 ViT: Weight Decay, AdamW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
       F.2 ResNet50: Weight Decay, SGD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30
       F.3 ResNet50: Sharpness Aware Minimization analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33
       F.4 ResNet50: Momentum Analysis, LR 0.1, WD 0.0001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           36
       F.5 VGG: Momentum Analysis, LR 0.1, WD 0.0001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            39
       F.6 VGG: Momentum Analysis, LR 0.1, WD 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           40
       F.7 VGG: Momentum Analysis, LR 0.01, WD 0.0001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             42
       F.8 VGG: Momentum Analysis, LR 0.01, WD 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            44
       F.9 VGG16 Batch Size Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      46
       F.10 Trajectory Maps in the presence of label noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48

     G GPT-NeoX Trajectory Analysis                                                               50

     H Layerwise-Trajectory Maps                                                                  52
       H.1 Q,K,V Trajectory Maps across Scales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54

     I   Trajectory Maps for Grokking                                                             55

     J   Putting Directional Redundancy to Test                                                   56
         J.1 Comparison with (discretized) Trajectory Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     56

     K Effect of different learning rate schedules                                                57
       K.1 Trajectory Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    57
       K.2 Angle between successive epochs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      58

     L Effect of Trajectory Granularity                                                           59
       L.1 Trajectory Maps with finer granularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     59
       L.2 Angle between successive Epochs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      59
       L.3 Fine-Grained view into the first epoch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61

     M Angle between successive Epochs for very large batch size training                         61



                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    O MITTED P ROOFS
Lemma 2. Given a quadratic problem with ℓ2 regularization of strength α ą 0, namely,
minθ PRd 12 θ J M θ ` 12 α}θθ }2 , with M P Rdˆd symmetric with eigenvalues λ1 ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě λd , the angle
between successive steps ∆t “ θ t ´ θ t´1 , ∆t`1 “ θ t`1 ´ θ t , when using gradient descent with a
one-step momentum (µ ą 0) and learning rates ηt , ηt`1 , can be upper and lower bounded as follows:
                    x∆t , ∆t`1 y ď ηt ηt`1 p1 ´ ηt pµ ` α ` λd qqpλd ` αq2 }θθ t´1 }2
                    x∆t , ∆t`1 y ě ηt ηt`1 p1 ´ ηt pµ ` α ` λ1 qqpλ1 ` αq2 }θθ t´1 }2

Proof. Given function f pθθ q “ 12 θ J Mθθ ` 21 α}θθ }2 , the gradient at θ will be ∇f pθθ q “ pM ` αIqθθ .
Then at the first optimization step, we do
                                     θ t “ θ t´1 ´ ηt pM ` αIqθθ t´1
The particular update being ∆t :“ θ t ´ θ t´1 “ ´ηt pM ` αIqθθ t´1 . The next update is similar, but
now we also have to factor in the momentum,
                          θ t`1 “ θ t ´ ηt`1 p∇f pθθ t q ´ µηt pM ` αIqθθ t´1 q

            ∆t`1 :“ θ t`1 ´ θ t “ ´ηt`1 ppM ` αIqθθ t ´ µηt pM ` αIqθθ t´1 q
                           `                                                     ˘
                 “ ´ηt`1 pM ` αIqθθ t´1 ´ ηt pM ` αIq2 θt´1 ´ µηt pM ` αIqθθ t´1
                 “ ´ηt`1 pp1 ´ µηt ´ αηt qI ´ ηt Mq pM ` αIqθθ t´1

Now, let us evaluate the inner-product x∆t , ∆t`1 y,

         x∆t , ∆t`1 y “ ηt ηt`1θ J
                                 t´1 pM   ` αIq pp1 ´ µηt ´ ηt αqI ´ ηt Mq pM ` αIq θ t´1
                                     loooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                                  Z


Now without loss of generality we can consider Z to be a diagonal matrix, as Z is symmetric since
M is symmetric, we can consider its spectral decomposition Z “ UDUJ and project θ t´1 onto its
eigenvectors contained in U. With this the matrices in the middle are diagonal and we can commute
them, which yields us the following matrix:
                                      ¨                                  ˛
                                      p1 ´ µηt ´ ηt α ´ ηt λ1 qpλ1 ` αq2
                           Z “ diag ˝
                                    ˚                 ..                 ‹
                                                       .                 ‚
                                        p1 ´ µηt ´ ηt α ´ ηt λd qpλd ` αq2

where, we have denoted the eigenvalues of M as λ1 ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě λd .
Since the inner product of the updates is a quadratic form, we can upper and lower bound it based on
the maximum and minimum eigenvalues of Z, thus giving:


                  ηt ηt`1 λmin pZq}θθ t´1 }2 ď x∆t , ∆t`1 y ď ηt ηt`1 λmax pZq}θθ t´1 }2

Because of the above form of eigenvalues of Z (diagonal matrices have their eigenvalues as their
diagonal entries), we will have:
λmax pZq “ p1 ´ µηt ´ ηt α ´ ηt λd qpλd ` αq2 and λmin pZq “ p1 ´ µηt ´ ηt α ´ ηt λ1 qpλ1 ` αq2


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    W HY COSINE SIMILARITIES INCREASE WITH SCALE ?
Note, we assume that the majority of the parameter norm lies in the square hidden matrices, and not
the input or output layers. Moreover, we use o, O, θ to denote standard mathematical notation with
regards to scaling in the limit width n Ñ 8. For vectors, this notation is entry-wise.
Suppose we have a hidden layer with input x0 P Rn for width n, that is acted on by (without loss of
generality) a square matrix W0 P Rnˆn to give:

                                              h0 “ W0 x0

We suppose x has θ p1q entries, as is the case with standard initialisations/parameterisations
                                                                            ?                  He et al.
(2015). We suppose W0 has i.i.d. elements with initialisation that is Op1{ nq in order to ensure that
each element of the features h has entries θ p1q.
Now, if we take a gradient update with learning rate η on some downstream loss L that depends on h
(and not W or x), we get:

                                        W1 “ W0 ´ ηdh ¨ xJ
                                                         0

                  nˆ1
where dh “ BL
           Bh P R     is our feature derivative.
Then if we have new input x1 (wlog x1 “ x0 ), we have new features:

                                                                xJ
                                                                 0 x0
                                  h1 “ x1 W1 “ h0 ´ nηdh ¨
                                                                  n
For our features to be stable (i.e. θ p1q) after the update, we need nηdh to be Op1q, because
xJ
 0 x0
  n   “ θ p1q by assumption on x. NB: if nηdh “ op1q we have no feature learning (ie NTK regime
Jacot et al. (2018)), and if nηdh “ θ p1q we have feature learning (ie µP Yang et al. (2022)).
In any case, ηdh “ Op1{nq entry-wise, which means that W1 ´ W0 “ ´ηdh ¨ xJ       0 has Op1{nq entries,
again by assumption on the scale of elements of x0 .
                          ?
But because W0 “ θ p1{ nq, the initialisation will elementwise-dominate the Op1{nq update for the
                                    ? steps follows by induction). As a result, the update WT ´ W0
first training step (and more training
will always be an order of at least n smaller than the initialisation, and hence the new parameters
WT will be exactly aligned with the initialisation W0 for all T in the large width limit, i.e. the cosine
similarities will be 1.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     C OMPARING G RADIENT T RAJECTORIES WITH R ANDOM WALKS
The structure that we observe in trajectory maps following gradient trajectories raises the question of
if we would observe similar structure in a random walk.
If we have T timesteps or epochs, with parameter space θ P Rp and “learning rate” schedule pηt qTt“1 ,
we can consider a random walk with updates:

                                                   ind.
                                      θ t ´ θ t´1 „ N p0, ηt2 Ip q

which is to say that at time step t, each parameter coordinate in the parameter vector is updated
independently with a Gaussian of variance ηt2 , and the updates are independent across different time
steps.
Then, if θi denotes a single parameter coordinate for a dimension i ď p, for two time steps s ă t, we
have:
                                                             ` Hs Hs ˘
                                      pθsi , θti q „ N p0,    Hs Ht      q
             řu        2                                                1        1
where Hu “      t1 “1 ηt1 is the cumulative squared learning rate from t “ 1 to t “ u.

Then, by the strong law of large numbers we have for the large parameter space p Ñ 8 limit:

                                    p                                      p
                   1             1 ÿ i 2 a.s.             1             1 ÿ i 2 a.s.
                     ∥θθ s ∥22 “      pθ q Ñ Hs ,           ∥θθ t ∥22 “      pθ q Ñ Ht
                   p             p i“1 s                  p             p i“1 t

                                                         p
                                    1                 1 ÿ i i a.s.
                                      xθθ s , θ t y “      θ θ Ñ Hs
                                    p                 p i“1 t s

and by the property of composing almost sure limits, we also have almost sure convergence in the
cosine similarity:                                          c
                                 xθθ s , θ t y a.s. Hs        Hs
                                                Ñ ?       “
                              ∥θθ s ∥2 ∥θθ t ∥2     Hs Ht     Ht

in the large parameter space limit, which we use as an approximation to give analytic formulas for
the trajectory map and MDS that we can compare to gradient trajectories.
                                                    b
One thing to note, is that this cosine similarity H    Ht becomes invariant to the scale of the learning
                                                         s


rates η, and instead it is the relative rate of decay in the learning rate schedule that matters.

C.1   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

The first thing to note is that our empirical simulation of the random walk matches the theoretical
limit described in the section above, for a finite parameter count (such as 10, 000). Next, comparing
the these relative trajectory maps with those for ResNet50 (Figure 10) we find that the latter reveal a
much more directional redundancy component to their trajectories as opposed to random walks. This
further lends support to the thesis that optimization trajectories ensued when training neural networks
are highly structured and have significant directional redundancy.
An additional thing to note is that the above relative trajectory map for random walks covers the
setting of decreasing the step size to mirror how the optimization procedure is setup for ResNet50. In
the case of no such step size decay, the analytic and empirical versions of the relative trajectory map
are depicted in the Figure 12.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: With step size decay: Relative Trajectory Map for a Random Walk/Brownian motion in
both analytic and empirically simulated settings.


Figure 10: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models for different
amounts of momentum and weight decay.


Figure 11: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models when
subtracting the trajectory map of a Random Walk (shown in Figure 9) with a corresponding learning
rate schedule. As before, this is carried out for different amounts of momentum and weight decay.


Figure 12: No Step size decay: Relative Trajectory Map for a Random Walk/Brownian motion in
both analytic and empirically simulated settings.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2     E XPECTED MDS VALUES FOR R ANDOM WALK

Effectively, to get the MDS, we need to compute the expected mean entry of the matrix whose ps, tq
entry contains the cosine similarity between θ s and θ t in the described random walk, we’ll start by
noting the following:
In the large parameter space limit (p Ñ 8), the cosine similarity between θ s and θ t converges almost
surely to                                      d
                                                         minpHs , Ht q
                                        cos θs,t “
                                                         maxpHs , Ht q
             řu         2
where Hu “       t1 “1 ηt1 is the cumulative squared learning rate up to time u.

For simplicity, let’s consider the case where the learning rate is constant: ηt “ η for all t. Then,
Ht “ tη 2 , and the cosine similarity simplifies to
                                                    d
                                                      minps, tq
                                        cos θs,t “
                                                      maxps, tq

The expected mean entry of the matrix is the average of all these cosine similarities:
                                                     d
                                               T T
                                           1 ÿ ÿ minps, tq
                               Mean “ 2
                                          T s“1 t“1 maxps, tq
Due to the symmetry of the cosine similarity, we can write this as:
                                       T ´1 T      c            T c
                                     2 ÿ ÿ           s      1 ÿ s
                          Mean “ 2                     ` 2
                                    T s“1 t“s`1 t         T s“1 s

                                                          2     1
                                              Mean “       2
                                                             S`
                                                         T      T
where
                                                   Tÿ
                                                    ´1    T    c
                                                          ÿ        s
                                              S“
                                                   s“1 t“s`1
                                                                   t
To compute S, we approximate the sum by an integral for large T :
                                      żT żT c
                                                     s
                                  S«                   dt ds
                                        s“1 t“s      t
Calculating the integral:
                                        żT c
                                                 s
                               Ipsq “               dt “ 2s1{2 pT 1{2 ´ s1{2 q
                                          t“s    t
                      żT                                        żT               żT
                 S“          2s1{2 pT 1{2 ´ s1{2 q ds “ 2T 1{2       s1{2 ds ´ 2    s ds
                       s“1                                           s“1             s“1
Computing the integrals:
                    żT                                        żT
                                          2 3{2                               1 2
                              s1{2 ds “     pT  ´ 1q,                s ds “     pT ´ 1q
                        s“1               3                    s“1            2
Plugging back:                            ˆ             ˙    ˆ           ˙
                                              2 3{2            1 2
                             S “ 2T 1{2         pT  ´ 1q ´ 2     pT ´ 1q
                                              3                2
                                        4 1{2 3{2
                                   S“     T pT     ´ 1q ´ pT 2 ´ 1q
                                        3
                                          4
                                     S “ pT 2 ´ T 1{2 q ´ pT 2 ´ 1q
                                          3

                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                    ˆ        ˙
                                    4 2    2    4
                               S“     T ´T     ´ T 1{2 ` 1
                                    3           3
                                       1     4
                                  S “ T 2 ´ T 1{2 ` 1
                                       3     3

Now, under the large T assumption, we have as the MDS:
                                                ˆ           ˙
                               2      1     2 1 2 4 1{2        1
                      MDS “ 2 S ` « 2               T ´ T `1 `
                              T       T    T      3    3       T

                                      2 8 1        2      1
                               MDS «    ´       ` 2`               (1)
                                      3 3 T 3{2   T      T
                             1   1         1
As T Ñ 8, the terms involving , 3{2 , and 2 vanish, leaving:
                             T T          T
                                               2
                                        MDS «
                                               3


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     R ELATIVE T RAJECTORY M APS
In some cases, it might be useful to analyze the trajectory relative to some point θ τ as the origin, so
there we will instead consider the set of points Tτ “ tθθ t ´ θ τ uTt“0 , and correspondingly organize
it in the matrix Θ τ P RpT `1qˆp . When τ is itself one of the points of the trajectory, then we will
omit the row of zeros and shape the matrix as RT ˆp . A natural point from where to contextualize
the trajectory would be the initialization θ 0 , and this relative trajectory will then be denoted as Θ 0
(where the subscript 0 is not to be confused for the usual origin O, namely, θ O “ 0).
Trajectory Map. Analyzing the matrix Θ or Θ τ , on its own, might get cumbersome as the size of
modern networks ranges in millions and billions of parameters. Hence, we will resort to looking at
functions of the kernel matrix K “ ΘΘJ which would be a square matrix of shape n “ T ` 1, or
for τ ‰ O, the relative kernel matrix Kτ “ Θ τ Θ J        τ of shape n “ T ` 1 or n “ T depending if the
point θ τ is a part of the trajectory or not. Further, it will also be helpful to isolate and analyze the
directional aspect of the trajectory, for which we will normalize the set of points by their norm, and in
                                         θτ
effect, consider the set Tpτ “ t }θθθtt´θ
                                       ´θ       T
                                        θ τ }2 ut“0 with the respective matrix Θ τ . As a result, the ensuing
                                                                               p

kernel matrix ΘpτΘ p J , which we will refer to as Cτ (or C :“ CO for the usual origin τ “ O), will
                     τ
contain the relative cosine similarities between every pair of points in the trajectory. So, pCτ qij is,
                                                               xθθ i ´ θ τ , θ j ´ θ τ y
                         cos-simpθθ i ´ θ τ , θ j ´ θ τ q “                               .
                                                            }θθ i ´ θ τ }2 }θθ j ´ θ τ }2

We will refer to C as the Trajectory Map (TM) and Cτ (for τ ‰ O) as the Relative Trajectory Map
(RTM).

E     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
E.1    R ES N ET 50: S WITCHING OFF THE HYPERPARAMETERS


Figure 13: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 models across different amounts of momentum and weight
decay

The relative trajectory maps can be found in Figure 10.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                           Mom,WD
                                                           140                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                              0.9,0.0001
                                                                                                                                              0,0.0001
                                                           130                                                                                0.9,0
                                                                                                                                              0,0                                                                     90


                                                                                                                                                                         (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )           120

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                           110
                                 6


                                                           100


                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70                                            Mom,WD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.9,0.0001
                                                            90                                                                                                                                                                                                        0,0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.9,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60                                              0,0
                                                            80

                                                                     0       20      40                                               60         80                                                                        0        20             40          60       80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                    Epochs (t)


                                                                         (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                            (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                               110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70                                                 Mom,WD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.9,0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,0.0001
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                               100                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.9,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50



                                                                                                                                                                         (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40

                                                           80                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                            6


                                                                                                                                           Mom,WD                                                                20
                                                           70
                                                                                                                                             0.9,0.0001
                                                                                                                                             0,0.0001                                                            10
                  6


                                                                                                                                             0.9,0
                                                           60
                                                                                                                                             0,0                                                                      0

                                                                 0          20      40                                            60          80                                                                           0        20            40           60       80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                    Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                          (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                                                                Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                      100


                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                           90
                       (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                           80


                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mom,WD
                         6


                                                           70                                                                              Mom,WD
                                                                                                                                             0.9,0.0001                                                                                                               0.9,0.0001
                                                                                                                                             0,0.0001                                                  30                                                             0,0.0001
                                                                                                                                             0.9,0                                                                                                                    0.9,0
                                                           60                                                                                0,0                                                                                                                      0,0

                                                                 0          20      40                                                60         80                                                                        0        20            40           60      80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                    Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                            θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                             80


                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                         Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                             60


                                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                             40


                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mom,WD
                                                                                                                             20                                                                                                     0.9,0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0,0.0001
                                                                                                                             10                                                                                                     0.9,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0,0

                                                                                                                                  0         20             40                                                              60        80
                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                                              (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

        Figure 14: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    600
                                 Mom,WD                                                                                                   Mom,WD                                        500             Mom,WD
                                   0.9,0.0001                                                120                                            0.9,0.0001                                                    0.9,0.0001


                                                                                                                                                         Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                   0,0.0001                                                                                                 0,0.0001                                                      0,0.0001
                    500
                                   0.9,0                                                                                                    0.9,0                                       400               0.9,0
                                                                                             100
                                   0,0                                                                                                      0,0                                                           0,0
   Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                           kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                    400                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                        300

                                                                                                     60
                    300
                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                     40

                    200
                                                                                                     20                                                                                 100


                    100                                                                               0

                             0             20        40          60   80                                  0      20    40          60       80                                                      0              20   40           60   80
                                                    Epochs (t)                                                        Epochs (t)                                                                                        Epochs (t)



                                                (a) }θt }2                                                    (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                               (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

                            Figure 15: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                  (a) Train Loss                                                              (b) Train Accuracy                                                                                (c) Test Accuracy

Figure 16: Loss and accuracy values for Momentum, Weight Decay experiments. The final test
accuracy values are 75.96, 72.63, 70.86, 68.73, in the order listed in the figure legend.


                                                    (a) Correlation of MDS                                                              (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

                                   Figure 17: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance.


                                                                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2    A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION ON E FFECTS OF M OMENTUM

Besides, in Figure 3(a) and 14(f), we find that in the presence of momentum, a larger angle is traced
at the origin by the trajectory, suggesting a more directional exploration, while the angle traced at
initialization is smaller. The latter can also be seen from Figure 15(b), since with momentum, the
trajectory moves further away from the initialization. Apart from this, in the absence of weight decay,
the updates seem to be strengthening with momentum and the parameter norm rises 15(a) as well,
giving rise to a mental picture of a trajectory similar to that left purple trajectory in Figure 1, at least
until the training hits EoS.
With weight decay, as there is a decrease in parameter norm Figure 15(a) alongside the EoS process,
as well as due to the presence of larger obtuse angles, we expect a reasonable affinity with our
illustration, where we see the updates oscillating and slowly drifting towards the origin O below.

E.3    R ES N ET 50: W EIGHT D ECAY, A DAM W


      Figure 18: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 models across different amounts of weight decay


Figure 19: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models across
different amounts of weight decay


E.4    A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION ON W EIGHT D ECAY

Let us turn to weight decay alone and understand its directional effect. We have already noticed
the increase in mean directional similarity (MDS) when weight decay is disabled for ResNet50
trained with SGD on ImageNet. In fact, we find a similar effect with an adaptive optimizer,
like AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017) — the trajectory maps for which are shown in
Figure E.3. Here, we used regularization constants from λ “ 0 until the first value where we
witness a decrease in test performance, which in this case was λ “ 1. Specifically, we analyze the
weight decay coefficients in λ P t1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0u. The corresponding MDS come out to be,
ω “ 0.731, 0.679, 0.844, 0.882, 0.885. We notice that, as before, increasing weight decay leads to
a heightened directional exploration, or lower MDS; except λ “ 1 being the seeming anomaly.
But we find that this can be remedied simply by looking at the relative trajectory maps (Fig-
ure E.3), and computing the relative MDS, i.e., ω0 is 0.985, 0.807, 0.862, 0.897, 0.900 for λ “
1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0 respectively. This occurs since such a high weight decay λ “ 1, causes this
particular network to underfit (train/test top-1 accuracy are 54.63%, 50.52%). The performance for
the rest of the networks improves, more or less, as expected with weight decay, and in particular,
achieve accuracies of 75.45%, 73.38%, 71.03%, 71.41%.
Having reaffirmed our results extensively about the directional exploration due to weight decay, we
can understand it through a simple physics-based intuition, as shown in the Figure 5. In particular,
we can think of the loss gradient pulling the network parameters rightwards, while the force exerted
by weight decay tries to pull the network downwards. The relative strengths of these two ‘forces’


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


have been represented by the lengths of the two vector arrows. We notice that as the weight decay
strength is increased, from the left subfigure to the right, the angle traced at the origin (O) also
increases. This explains how weight decay can contribute towards directional exploration.

                                                            160
                                                                                                                                             Weight Decay                                                             110
                                                            150                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                         0.1                                                          105
                                                            140                                                                                          0.01
                                                                                                                                                         0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                                                            130                                                                                          0

                                (θt+1 − θt , θt )           120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            95

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90
                                                            110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay
                                  6


                                                            100                                                                                                                                                             85


                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                             90                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.001
                                                             80                                                                                                                                                             75                                                        0

                                                                      0       20      40                                               60           80                                                                           0          20             40          60        80
                                                                                     Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                          (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                 (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
               (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60                                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                            90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                            80                                                                              Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                    1                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                            70                                                                                      0.01                                                               10
                   6


                                                                                                                                                    0.001
                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                       0
                                                            60
                                                                  0          20      40                                            60            80                                                                              0         20             40           60        80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


              (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                               (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q
                                                                                                                                                                      Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                       110
                                                                                                                                                                                                             70

                                                       105
                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                       100
                        (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                            95                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.01
                                                            90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay                                                                                                                          0
                                                            85
                          6


                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                      0.1                                                    30
                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                                                                      0.001
                                                            75                                                                                        0                                                      20

                                                                  0          20      40                                                60           80                                                                           0         20             40           60        80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                  (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                     (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                  θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q


                                                                                                                              85
                                                                                          Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                              80

                                                                                                                              75

                                                                                                                              70

                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weight Decay
                                                                                                                              60                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                              55                                                                                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.001
                                                                                                                              50                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                   0           20                40                                                              60         80
                                                                                                                                                                 Epochs (t)


                                                                                               (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

        Figure 20: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Weight Decay                                                                                              Weight Decay                                                      Weight Decay
                     2000                1                                                       300                                                  1                                      2000                    1


                                                                                                                                                              Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                         0.1                                                                                                          0.1                                                            0.1
                                         0.01                                                                                                         0.01                                   1750                    0.01
                                                                                                 250
                                         0.001                                                                                                        0.001                                                          0.001
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                               kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                     1500                                                                                                                             0
                                         0                                                                                                                                                   1500                    0
                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                                             1250
                     1000                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                                                             1000

                                                                                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                         750
                             500
                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                         500

                                                                                                          0                                                                                              250
                               0
                                   0              20    40           60   80                                  0      20    40          60        80                                                            0              20   40           60   80
                                                        Epochs (t)                                                        Epochs (t)                                                                                               Epochs (t)



                                                   (a) }θt }2                                                     (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                    (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

                               Figure 21: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                       (a) Train Loss                                                             (b) Train Accuracy                                                                                     (c) Test Accuracy

Figure 22: Loss and accuracy values for Weight Decay experiments. The final test accuracy values
are 50.54, 75.45, 73.38, 71.03, 71.41, in the order listed in the figure legend.


                                                       (a) Correlation of MDS                                                               (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

Figure 23: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance. We omit the case
where the weight decay coefficient is set to the extremely large value of 1 such that the network
severely underfits (train accuracy ă 40%).


                                                                                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     D IRECTIONAL E FFECTS IN OTHER K EY S ETTINGS
In addition to the momentum and weight decay, there are other crucial hyperparameters, such as
learning rate and batch size, whose directional effects warrant a mention. We carry out additional
experiments in these settings, and from where, the key findings are that the learning rate, as it
would be easy to guess, indeed encourages directional exploration leading to low MDS scores. But,
somewhat more interestingly, we find that increasing the batch size also helps further exploration
and thereby decreases the MDS scores. The trajectory maps can be found in the Figure 64 While
we encourage the curious reader to have a look at the Appendix F.9, we find that with increased
batch size, the angle between the updates as well as the angle between the update and the current
location become increasingly obtuse, and thus making room for a wider directional exploration. In
contrast, for smaller batch sizes these angles are closer to 90˝ . We hypothesize that a similar mutual
interaction, as observed with weight decay and momentum, also occurs with batch size is considered.
A detailed analysis, however, remains outside the current scope.
Lastly, we also experimented with Sharpness-Aware Minimization (Foret et al., 2021) (SAM),
where we found that a higher value of the SAM regularization coefficient leads to a slightly increased
directional similarity, which could potentially be related to SAM directing optimisation to flatter
basins wherein the individual points are more directionally alike and have higher cosine similarities.
The detailed results can be found in the Appendix F.3.

Other Settings and Datasets. As a final remark for this section, we would like to emphasize that
similar results for weight decay as well as momentum, can be found under different hyperparameter
settings in the supplementary material. In particular, we analyze the qualitative and quantitative
hallmarks for multiple values of learning rate, weight decay, and momentum for VGG16 on CIFAR10
as well as other values for momentum and weight decay in the case of ResNet50 trained with SGD,
and even Vision Transformer trained with AdamW on ImageNet across varying weight decay, but
these have to be omitted here due to space constraints.

F.1   V I T: W EIGHT D ECAY, A DAM W


       Figure 24: Trajectory Maps of ViT models across different amounts of weight decay


Figure 25: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ViT models across different
amounts of weight decay


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           96   Weight Decay                                                                                                                                                    Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       95
                                                                        0.01                                                                                                                                                          0.01
                                                           94           0.0001                                                                                                                                                        0.0001
                                                                        0                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                           92


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                              (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       85
                                                           88


                                 6
                                                           86                                                                                                                                                          80


                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                           84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                           82


                                                                    0             20     40                                                60           80                                                                      0              20             40          60        80
                                                                                        Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                        (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                  (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Weight Decay
                                               95                                                                                                                                                                      80                                                            0.01
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                               90                                                                                                                                                                      60


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                               85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40


                                               80


                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                Weight Decay
                                               75                                                                                                       0.01
                  6


                                                                                                                                                        0.0001
                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                   0

                                                                0                20     40                                             60            80                                                                         0              20             40          60        80
                                                                                       Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                            Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                               (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                Weight Decay                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                                                                      Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                      95
                                                                        0.01
                                                                        0.0001                                                                                                                               80
                                                                        0
                                                      90
                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                       (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                      85                                                                                                                                                     70


                                                                                                                                                                                                             65
                                                      80
                         6


                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.01
                                                      75                                                                                                                                                     55                                                                      0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                0                20     40                                                 60        80                                                                         0              20             40          60        80
                                                                                       Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                            Epochs (t)


                                                                (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                       (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                  θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                              Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                  60


                                                                                                                                  50


                                                                                                                                  40


                                                                                                                                  30


                                                                                                                                  20                                                                                                     Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0001
                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                       0           20            40                                                             60              80
                                                                                                                                                                 Epochs (t)


                                                                                                   (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

     Figure 26: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ViT trained on the ImageNet dataset


                                                                                                                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                           700
                     700                                                                          80                                         Weight Decay
                             Weight Decay                                                                                                                                                                  Weight Decay
                                   0.01                                                                                                            0.01                                                          0.01
                                                                                                  70                                                                                       600


                                                                                                                                                            Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                   0.0001                                                                                                          0.0001                                                        0.0001
                     600                                                                                                                           0
                                   0                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                  60                                                                                       500
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                     500                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                           400
                                                                                                  40
                     400
                                                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                  30

                     300                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                  10                                                                                       100
                     200
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                             0              20        40          60     80                                   0      20   40           60        80                                                        0              20   40           60   80
                                                     Epochs (t)                                                           Epochs (t)                                                                                           Epochs (t)



                                                 (a) }θt }2                                                       (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                 (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

    Figure 27: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ViT trained on the ImageNet dataset


                                                                       (a) Train Loss                                                        (b) Test Accuracy

Figure 28: Loss and accuracy values for Weight Decay experiments. The final test accuracy values
are 75.81, 75.36, 73.26, in the order listed in the figure legend. The figures do contain the trends for
both 0.01 and 0.0001, but they often lie on top of each other, so zooming-in might be needed to see
them separately.


                                                     (a) Correlation of MDS                                                                 (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

                                  Figure 29: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance.


                                                                                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2    R ES N ET 50: W EIGHT D ECAY, SGD


      Figure 30: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 models across different amounts of weight decay


Figure 31: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models across
different amounts of weight decay


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                             Weight Decay                                                            90
                                                                                                                                                      0.001
                                                           160                                                                                        0.0001                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70


                                                                                                                                                                             (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )
                                                           140


                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50

                                                           120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40


                                 6


                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Weight Decay
                                                           100                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                     0       20      40                                                60           80                                                                         0             20             40          60        80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                             Epochs (t)


                                                                         (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                               (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                               120
                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay                                                             70                                                      Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                    0.001                                                                                                                          0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0001
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                               110                                                                                                  0.0001                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                              0

                                               100                                                                                                                                                                   50


                                                                                                                                                                             (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                           90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                           80


                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                  6


                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                 0          20      40                                            60             80                                                                            0             20             40          60        80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                              Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                              (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                       90                                                                                                                                                  70                 Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                    Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.001
                                                       80                                                                                                                                                                           0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                       70
                       (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                       50

                                                       40                                                                                                                                                  30
                          6


                                                       30
                                                                                                                                            Weight Decay                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                    0.001
                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                    0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                       10

                                                                 0          20      40                                                60         80                                                                           0              20             40          60       80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                              Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                    (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                             80

                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                         Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                             60

                                                                                                                             50

                                                                                                                             40

                                                                                                                             30

                                                                                                                             20                                                                                                        Weight Decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.001
                                                                                                                             10                                                                                                                   0.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                  0            20              40                                                              60             80
                                                                                                                                                               Epochs (t)


                                                                                              (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

        Figure 32: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     300                                                                                                                            Weight Decay
                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                                                          0.001


                                                                                                                                                                   Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                                                                                                                                          0.0001                                  250

                     250                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                        200
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                      kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                     200                                             Weight Decay                       150
                                                                             0.001
                                                                             0.0001                                                                                                               150
                     150                                                     0
                                                                                                        100

                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                     100                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weight Decay
                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                              50                                      0.0001
                             50                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                 0

                                   0      20        40          60      80                                           0      20    40          60        80                                                         0    20    40           60       80
                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                   Epochs (t)



                                               (a) }θt }2                                                                (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                             (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

                                  Figure 33: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                       (a) Train Loss                                                                    (b) Train Accuracy                                                                            (c) Test Accuracy

Figure 34: Loss and accuracy values for Weight Decay experiments. The final test accuracy values
are 66.42, 75.96, 70.86, in the order listed in the figure legend.


                                                   (a) Correlation of MDS                                                                          (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

                                       Figure 35: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance.


                                                                                                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3   R ES N ET 50: S HARPNESS AWARE M INIMIZATION ANALYSIS


Figure 36: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 models across different values of SAM regularization
coefficient


Figure 37: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models across
different values of SAM regularization coefficient


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           160                                                                                   SAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    90
                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                           150                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                       0.05                                                         80
                                                           140                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                            (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )
                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
                                                           130

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                           120


                                 6
                                                           110                                                                                                                                                      50                                                 SAM


                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                           100                                                                                                                                                      40                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                            90                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                     0       20      40                                                60        80                                                                          0        20             40          60   80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


                                                                         (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                              (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                               110                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                           90


                                                                                                                                                                            (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25
                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                           70                                                                                                                                                       15


                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                           60                                                                                SAM                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0.1                                                                5
                                                           50
                  6


                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                  0
                                                           40
                                                                 0          20      40                                            60         80                                                                              0        20             40          60   80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                       Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                            (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q
                                                                                                                                                                   Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                       90
                                                                                                                                                                                                          40

                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                                                                          35
                       (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )


                                                       70
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                       60

                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                       50                                                                                        SAM                                                                                                                  SAM
                          6


                                                                                                                                                      0.5                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0.1                                                 20                                                               0.1
                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                      0.05                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                    0
                                                       30                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                 0          20      40                                                60     80                                                                              0        20             40          60   80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                       Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                   (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                               θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                             80


                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                         Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                             60


                                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                             40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SAM
                                                                                                                             30                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                             20                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                  0         20                40                                                             60        80
                                                                                                                                                              Epochs (t)


                                                                                              (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

        Figure 38: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                              34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    275
                                                                SAM                                                                         SAM
                                                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                    0.5                      120                                                0.5
                    250


                                                                                                                                                       Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                                                    0.1                                                                         0.1
                                                                    0.05                                                                        0.05                                  250
                    225                                                                      100
                                                                    0                                                                           0
   Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                           kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                      225
                    200                                                                              80

                    175                                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                     60

                    150                                                                                                                                                               175
                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAM
                    125                                                                                                                                                               150                                           0.5
                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                             0.1
                    100                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                      125
                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                             0

                             0      20        40          60   80                                         0      20    40          60      80                                                     0    20    40           60   80
                                             Epochs (t)                                                               Epochs (t)                                                                             Epochs (t)



                                         (a) }θt }2                                                           (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                       (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

                            Figure 39: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                 (a) Train Loss                                                               (b) Train Accuracy                                                                      (c) Test Accuracy

Figure 40: Loss and accuracy values for SAM experiments. The final test accuracy values for
ρ “ 0.5, 0.1, 0.05, 0 are 72.72, 76.5, 76.3, 75.96 respectively.


                                             (a) Correlation of MDS                                                                     (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

                                 Figure 41: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance.


                                                                                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4   R ES N ET 50: M OMENTUM A NALYSIS , LR 0.1, WD 0.0001


      Figure 42: Trajectory Maps of ResNet50 models across different amounts of momentum


Figure 43: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of ResNet50 models across
different amounts of momentum


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                            Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                           140                                                                                         0.9
                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                           130                                                                                                                                                          90


                                                                                                                                                                           (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                           120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80


                                 6
                                                           110


                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.9
                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60                                                  0

                                                                     0       20      40                                               60         80                                                                          0        20            40          60     80
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                     Epochs (t)


                                                                         (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                              (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                               110                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                           Momentum                                                                                                                  Momentum
                                                                                                                                                      0.9                                                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                          50
                                               100
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40


                                                                                                                                                                           (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                           90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                           80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                  6


                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                 0          20      40                                            60         80                                                                              0        20           40           60     80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                     Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                            (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q
                                                                                                                                                                  Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                         55


                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                           90
                       (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                         45

                                                           80                                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                                                                                                                                         35
                         6


                                                           70
                                                                                                                                           Momentum                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Momentum
                                                                                                                                                      0.9                                                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                           60                                                                                                                                            25                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                 0          20      40                                                60         80                                                                          0        20           40           60     80
                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                     Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                  (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                              θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                             80


                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                         Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                             60


                                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                             40


                                                                                                                             30


                                                                                                                             20                                                                                                      Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                             10                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                  0         20               40                                                              60        80
                                                                                                                                                             Epochs (t)


                                                                                              (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

        Figure 44: Angular measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                             37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     275
                                                                Momentum                                                                   Momentum
                                                                      0.9                     120                                                0.9
                     250


                                                                                                                                                       Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6                                  250
                                                                      0                                                                          0
                     225                                                                      100
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                            kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                      200
                     200                                                                              80

                                                                                                                                                                                      150
                     175                                                                              60


                     150                                                                              40                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Momentum
                     125                                                                              20                                                                                                                                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                  50                                      0.6
                                                                                                       0                                                                                                                                  0
                     100

                              0      20        40          60    80                                        0      20    40          60      80                                                         0    20    40           60    80
                                              Epochs (t)                                                               Epochs (t)                                                                                 Epochs (t)



                                          (a) }θt }2                                                           (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                           (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

                             Figure 45: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet


                                  (a) Train Loss                                                               (b) Train Accuracy                                                                          (c) Test Accuracy

Figure 46: Loss and accuracy values for Weight Decay experiments. The final test accuracy values
are 75.96, 74.98, 72.63, in the order listed in the figure legend.


                                              (a) Correlation of MDS                                                                     (b) Correlation of Relative MDS

                                  Figure 47: Correlation plots of MDS and relative MDS with test performance.


                                                                                                                       38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.5   VGG: M OMENTUM A NALYSIS , LR 0.1, WD 0.0001


      Figure 48: Trajectory Maps of VGG16 models across different amounts of momentum


Figure 49: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of VGG16 models across different
amounts of momentum


                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            140                                                                                                                                                               110
                                                                                                                                                       Momentum                                                                                Momentum
                                                                                                                                                               0.9                                                            105                     0.9
                                                                                                                                                               0.5                                                                                    0.5
                                                            130
                                                                                                                                                               0                                                              100                     0


                                                                                                                                                                                       (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    95


                                (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                            120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    85
                                                            110


                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80


                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                            100                                                                                                                                                                     75

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70


                                                                      0    20    40    60                    80                          100    120     140         160                                                                        0          20         40          60       80        100   120    140         160
                                                                                            Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                                Epochs (t)


                                                                          (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                           (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                      Momentum                                                                 80                                                                               Momentum
                                                110                                                                                                           0.9                                                                                                                                                      0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
               (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                100                                                                                                                                                                            60


                                                                                                                                                                                       (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                            90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40

                                                            80


                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                            70
                   6


                                                            60                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                  0       20    40    60       80                                       100    120    140       160                                                                            0      20         40             60        80       100    120    140         160
                                                                                           Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                                 Epochs (t)


              (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                             (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                       110
                                                                  Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                              Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                       105                0.9
                                                                          0.5                                                                                                                                        70
                                                       100                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                        (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )


                                                            95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                            90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                            80
                          6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                         Momentum
                                                            75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10                                                                                                0.5
                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                  0       20    40    60            80                                  100    120     140          160                                                                    0         20          40             60       80        100    120   140      160
                                                                                            Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                               Epochs (t)


                                                                  (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                              (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                           θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                   80


                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                               Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                   60


                                                                                                                                   50


                                                                                                                                   40


                                                                                                                                   30


                                                                                                                                   20                                                                                                                          Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                                                                   10                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                          0      20     40           60       80                                                         100        120        140         160
                                                                                                                                                                          Epochs (t)


                                                                                                    (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

      Figure 50: Angular measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


F.6   VGG: M OMENTUM A NALYSIS , LR 0.1, WD 0


                                                                                                                                                                          40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                         60
                                                                          Momentum                                                                               Momentum                                    100
                     90
                                                                                0.9                                                                                    0.9


                                                                                                                                                                              Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                                                                0.5                      50                                                            0.5
                     85                                                         0                                                                                      0                                                 80
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                       kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                         40
                     80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                         30
                     75


                                                                                                         20                                                                                                              40
                     70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Momentum
                     65                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20                                                     0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                     60                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                              0

                              0   20   40   60      80        100   120   140    160                                 0   20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160                                                   0   20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160
                                                 Epochs (t)                                                                             Epochs (t)                                                                                               Epochs (t)



                                        (a) }θt }2                                                                       (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                         (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

   Figure 51: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


                             Figure 52: Trajectory Maps of VGG16 models across different amounts of momentum


Figure 53: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of VGG16 models across different
amounts of momentum


                                                                                                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            92                                                                                 Momentum                                                                90
                                                                                                                                                       0.9
                                                            91                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                       0                                                               85
                                                            90


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )
                                (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                            89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80

                                                            88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                            87


                                  6


                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                            86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70                                                                    Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9
                                                            85                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                            84                                                                                                                                                         65

                                                                 0   20   40   60               80                                100    120    140         160                                                                       0      20     40         60        80      100   120    140         160
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


                                                                     (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                       (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80
                                                100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
               (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60                                                                           0
                                                            90


                                                                                                                                                                               (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50

                                                            80                                                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                            70


                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                               Momentum
                                                                                                                                                      0.9                                                              10
                   6


                                                            60                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                     0

                                                                 0   20   40   60       80                                       100    120    140      160                                                                           0      20     40         60        80      100   120    140         160
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


              (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                    (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                        90
                                                                                                                                                                      Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                             70

                                                        85
                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                        (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                        80

                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                        75
                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                           6


                                                        70                                                                                     Momentum                                                      20                                                                              Momentum
                                                                                                                                                      0.9                                                                                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                                      0.5                                                    10                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                             0
                                                        65

                                                                 0   20   40   60       80                                       100    120     140     160                                                                       0         20      40         60       80       100   120   140      160
                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                       (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                   θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                        Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                            50


                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                                                            30


                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                                                                                                            10                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                   0      20     40          60       80                                                        100        120    140     160
                                                                                                                                                                  Epochs (t)


                                                                                             (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

      Figure 54: Angular measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


F.7   VGG: M OMENTUM A NALYSIS , LR 0.01, WD 0.0001


                                                                                                                                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Momentum                                                                    60                                                      Momentum                                                     Momentum
                     160                                                                                                                                                    0.9                                   140
                                       0.9                                                                                                                                                                                              0.9


                                                                                                                                                                                   Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                       0.5                                                                                                                                  0.5                                                         0.5
                                                                                                              50
                                       0                                                                                                                                    0                                     120                   0
                     140
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                            kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                              40                                                                                                  100


                     120                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                              20
                     100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                             80
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                  0    20    40   60      80        100   120   140   160                                 0   20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160                                                   0    20      40   60       80       100   120   140   160
                                                       Epochs (t)                                                                            Epochs (t)                                                                                                   Epochs (t)



                                             (a) }θt }2                                                                       (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                               (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

   Figure 55: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


                              Figure 56: Trajectory Maps of VGG16 models across different amounts of momentum


Figure 57: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of VGG16 models across different
amounts of momentum


                                                                                                                                         43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      Momentum                                                                                                                                                                     Momentum
                                                            115            0.9                                                                                                                                                          90                   0.9
                                                                           0.5                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                            110


                                                                                                                                                                                                (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        85


                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                            105

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                            100


                                 6


                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75
                                                             95



                                                             90                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                      0        20        40    60                     80                          100    120     140         160                                                                       0      20     40     60        80      100   120    140         160
                                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                   Epochs (t)


                                                                          (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                                   (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                               Momentum                                                                                                                                   Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                       0.9                                                                                                                                       0.9
               (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                95                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                60                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50


                                                                                                                                                                                                (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40

                                                85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30


                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                   6


                                                75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                  0       20        40        60       80                                        100    120    140       160                                                                           0      20     40     60        80      100   120    140         160
                                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                    Epochs (t)


              (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                  Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                       Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                       90                 0.9                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                          0.5
                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                        (θt+1 − θt , θT − θ0 )


                                                       85


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                       80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                          6


                                                       75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                       70
                                                                  0       20        40        60        80                                       100    120     140          160                                                                   0         20     40     60        80       100   120   140      160
                                                                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                    Epochs (t)


                                                                  (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                                       (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                                    θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                   Momentum
                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                        Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                            25


                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                            15


                                                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                                             5



                                                                                                                                                   0      20     40           60       80                                                        100        120    140    160
                                                                                                                                                                                   Epochs (t)


                                                                                                             (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

      Figure 58: Angular measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


F.8   VGG: M OMENTUM A NALYSIS , LR 0.01, WD 0


                                                                                                                                                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                              Momentum                                                    Momentum
                                                                                                          8                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                    0.9                                                        0.9


                                                                                                                                                                           Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                     74                                                                                                                                             0.5                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                          35
                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                          0
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                                          6


                                                                                        kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                     72

                                                                                                                                                                                                          25

                     70                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                     68
                                                                                                          2
                              Momentum                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                   0.9
                     66            0.5                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                   0                                                                      0

                              0    20    40   60      80        100   120   140   160                             0   20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160                                                  0    20      40   60       80       100   120   140   160
                                                   Epochs (t)                                                                        Epochs (t)                                                                                                  Epochs (t)



                                          (a) }θt }2                                                                  (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                              (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

   Figure 59: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


                             Figure 60: Trajectory Maps of VGG16 models across different amounts of momentum


Figure 61: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of VGG16 models across different
amounts of momentum


                                                                                                                                     45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           90

                                                            90.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           88


                                                                                                                                                                                                   (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                                                            89.5                                                                                                                                                                           86


                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           84
                                                            89.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           82


                                 6


                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                            88.5
                                                                                                                                                                   Momentum                                                                                                                                  Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           80                                                                       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                            88.0
                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                               78                                                                       0

                                                                       0        20        40        60                      80                       100    120     140         160                                                                   0          20     40     60       80       100   120    140         160
                                                                                                         Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                 Epochs (t)


                                                                           (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                                     (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                  Momentum                                                                                                                                   Momentum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                          0.9                                                                                                                                       0.9
                                                95
               (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                                          0.5                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                          0                                                                60                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50


                                                                                                                                                                                                   (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30


                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                   6


                                                75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                   0       20        40        60          80                                       100    120    140       160                                                                           0      20     40     60        80      100   120    140         160
                                                                                                    Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


              (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                       90
                                                                                                                                                                                          Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70

                                                       88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                        (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                       86


                                                       84                                                                                                                                                                        50


                                                       82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                          6


                                                                                                                                                                  Momentum                                                                                                                                   Momentum
                                                       80                                                                                                                 0.9                                                                                                                                       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                          0.5                                                    30                                                                                 0.5
                                                       78                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                   0       20        40        60          80                                       100    120     140          160                                                                   0         20     40     60        80       100   120   140      160
                                                                                                     Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                     Epochs (t)


                                                                   (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                                         (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                                       θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                      Momentum
                                                                                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                                               25           0.5
                                                                                                           Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                               20



                                                                                                                                               15



                                                                                                                                               10



                                                                                                                                                5



                                                                                                                                                      0      20     40           60       80                                                        100        120    140    160
                                                                                                                                                                                      Epochs (t)


                                                                                                                (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

      Figure 62: Angular measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


F.9   VGG16 BATCH S IZE A NALYSIS


                                                                                                                                                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     86                                                                                                                                      Momentum
                             Momentum                                                                    8                                                                                               40              Momentum
                                  0.9                                                                                                                              0.9                                                        0.9


                                                                                                                                                                          Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                  0.5                                                                                                                              0.5                                                        0.5
                     84                                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                  0                                                                                                                                0                                                          0
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                                         6


                                                                                       kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                     82
                                                                                                                                                                                                         25

                                                                                                         4
                     80                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                     78
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10

                     76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                         0

                             0    20    40   60      80        100   120   140   160                             0   20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160                                                  0    20      40   60       80       100   120   140   160
                                                  Epochs (t)                                                                        Epochs (t)                                                                                                  Epochs (t)



                                         (a) }θt }2                                                                  (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                              (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

   Figure 63: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


Figure 64: Trajectory Maps of VGG16 models across different batch sizes. The learning rates
have been scaled in proportion to the batch size, and the training schedule was adjusted to en-
sure an equal number of steps (and not simply epochs) for all the runs. We also adjusted the
learning rate schedule to drop learning rates at a corresponding number of steps across the experi-
ments. The respective MDS values are ω “ 0.753, 0.723, 0.660, 0.619 and the test accuracies are
91.63%, 91.82%, 92.44%, 92.39%.


Figure 65: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of VGG16 models across different
batch sizes


                                                                                                                                    47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             180                             Batch Size                                                                                                                                                                                                     Batch Size
                                                                                                                               128                                                                                                                                                                                 128
                                                                                                                               256                                                                                            160                                                                                  256
                                                                                                                               512                                                                                                                                                                                 512
                                                             160
                                                                                                                               1024                                                                                                                                                                                1024


                                                                                                                                                                                       (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              140


                                 (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                             140


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              120


                                   6
                                                             120


                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100

                                                             100



                                                                       0    20    40    60                    80                          100    120    140      160                                                                          0          20      40          60        80       100   120    140     160
                                                                                             Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                            Epochs (t)


                                                                           (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                         (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                 175                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Batch Size
                                                                                                                                                       Batch Size
                                                                                                                                                              128                                                              80                                                                                  128
                                                 150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               256
                (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                              256
                                                                                                                                                              512                                                                                                                                                  512
                                                 125                                                                                                          1024                                                                                                                                                 1024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60


                                                                                                                                                                                       (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                 100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                             75


                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                             25
                    6


                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                   0       20    40    60       80                                       100    120    140      160                                                                           0      20         40           60        80       100   120    140     160
                                                                                            Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                            Epochs (t)


               (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                           (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                       Batch Size
                                                                                                                                                                              Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                              128                                                    80
                                                        160                                                                                                   256
                                                                                                                                                              512
                                                                                                                                                              1024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                         (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                        140



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                        120

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Batch Size
                           6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                            128
                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   512
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                   0       20    40    60          80                                    100    120     140     160                                                                       0         20          40       60           80        100   120   140      160
                                                                                             Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                   (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                             (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                           θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q


                                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                    70



                                                                                                                                    60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Batch Size
                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      128
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      512
                                                                                                                                    40                                                                                                                                1024

                                                                                                                                           0      20     40          60       80                                                        100        120        140      160
                                                                                                                                                                          Epochs (t)


                                                                                                     (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

       Figure 66: Angular measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


F.10    T RAJECTORY M APS IN THE PRESENCE OF LABEL NOISE

We observe that with increasing label noise, the network is required to undergo more directional explo-
ration to find a solution that can interpolate the training set. The MDS scores decrease monotonically
with increasing label noise.


                                                                                                                                                                          48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    500                                                                                500                                                                                                  500
                                                                        Batch Size                                                                              Batch Size                                                                                           Batch Size
                                                                              128                                                                                     128                                                                                                  128


                                                                                                                                                                             Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2
                                                                              256                                                                                     256                                                                                                  256
                    400                                                                                400                                                                                                  400
                                                                              512                                                                                     512                                                                                                  512
                                                                              1024                                                                                    1024                                                                                                 1024
   Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                     kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1
                                                                                                       300
                    300                                                                                                                                                                                     300


                                                                                                       200
                    200
                                                                                                                                                                                                            200

                                                                                                       100
                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                            100

                                                                                                               0

                            0   20   40   60      80        100   120   140    160                                 0    20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160                                              0    20   40   60       80       100   120   140    160
                                               Epochs (t)                                                                              Epochs (t)                                                                                           Epochs (t)



                                     (a) }θt }2                                                                        (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                                      (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

   Figure 67: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for VGG16 models trained on CIFAR10.


                                (a) Label Noise 0.4                                                                    (b) Label Noise 0.7                                                                                  (c) Label Noise 1.0

Figure 68: Trajectory maps when a CNN is trained on CIFAR10 with different amounts of label
noise, i.e., what fraction of samples have been assigned random labels.


                                                                                                                                   49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G                    GPT-N EOX T RAJECTORY A NALYSIS


Figure 69: Trajectory Maps of Pythia GPT-NeoX models across two orders of model scales trained on
Pile. The corresponding MDS values are ω “ 0.650, 0.672, 0.678, 0.726, 0.759, 0.786, 0.818, 0.815.


Figure 70: Relative Trajectory Maps, with respect to initialization, of Pythia GPT-NeoX models
across two orders of model scales.


                                       Scale                                                                                                                 Scale
                                         70M                                                               600                                                 70M
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                      Distance from Initialization kθt − θ0 k2


                                         160M                                                                                                                  160M
                     2000                                                                                                                                      410M
                                         410M                                                              500
                                         1.4B                                                                                                                  1.4B
    Parameter Norms kθt k2


                                                                                         kθt+k − θt k2 for k = 1


                                         2.8B                                                                                                                  2.8B                                  1500
                                         6.9B                                                              400                                                 6.9B
                     1500
                                         12B                                                                                                                   12B
                                                                                                           300                                                                                                                                              Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70M
                     1000
                                                                                                           200                                                                                                                                                160M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              410M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500                                          1.4B
                                                                                                           100                                                                                                                                                2.8B
                             500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.9B
                                                                                                                   0                                                                                               0                                          12B

                                   0           5   10   15        20      25   30   35                                 0    5   10   15     20     25   30     35                                                      0   5   10   15     20     25   30     35
                                                             Epochs (t)                                                               Epochs (t)                                                                                     Epochs (t)



                                                   (a) }θt }2                                                              (b) }θt`k ´ θt }2                                                                               (c) }θt ´ θ0 }2

    Figure 71: Norm-based measures of the Trajectory for GPT-NeoX trained on the Pile dataset


                                                                                                                                     50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                            95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 85


                                                                                                                                                                                                         (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )
                                                            90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70M


                               (θt+1 − θt , θt )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                160M
                                                            85                                                                                                                                                                                   80                                             410M
                                                                             Scale                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.4B
                                                            80                 70M                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.8B
                                                                               160M                                                                                                                                                              75                                             6.9B


                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12B


                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                            75                 410M
                                                                               1.4B
                                                                               2.8B                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                            70
                                                                               6.9B
                                                                               12B
                                                            65                                                                                                                                                                                   65
                                                                         0              5        10        15                                         20        25        30         35                                                                   0         5        10          15       20   25   30       35
                                                                                                           Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                     Epochs (t)


                                                                               (a) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θt q                                                                                                                                                     (b) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q

                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70M
                                                           90                                                                                                                                                                                    80                                                                 160M
              (θt+k − θt , θt − θt−k ) for k = 1 (in ◦ )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    410M
                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.4B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.8B


                                                                                                                                                                                                         (θt − θ0 , θT − θ0 )
                                                           70                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.9B
                                                           60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12B

                                                                         Scale                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                           50                 70M
                                                                              160M


                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                           40                 410M
                                                                              1.4B                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                           30
                                                                              2.8B
                  6


                                                                              6.9B
                                                           20
                                                                              12B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                     0              5        10       15                                         20            25        30         35                                                                        0         5      10        15       20   25   30       35
                                                                                                       Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                         Epochs (t)


             (c) =pθt`k ´ θt , θt ´ θt´k q, for k “ 1                                                                                                                                                                                                             (d) =pθt ´ θ0 , θT ´ θ0 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                                                                                                                                Apex Angle at Initialization 6 (θt − θ0 , θ1 − θ0 )


                                                       90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       88
                                                                                                                Scale
                                                       85
                       (θt+1 − θt , θt − θ0 )


                                                                                                                             70M
                                                                                                                             160M                                                                                                      86
                                                       80                                                                    410M
                                                                                                                             1.4B                                                                                                                                                                                Scale
                                                                                                                             2.8B                                                                                                      84                                                                          70M
                                                       75                                                                    6.9B                                                                                                                                                                                  160M
                                                                                                                             12B
                          6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   410M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       82                                                                          1.4B
                                                       70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.8B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6.9B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80                                                                          12B
                                                       65
                                                                 0              5           10        15                                   20                  25        30         35                                                                        0     5         10         15       20   25   30       35
                                                                                                       Epochs (t)                                                                                                                                                                         Epochs (t)


                                                                 (e) =pθt`1 ´ θt , θT ´ θ0 q                                                                                                   (f) Apex Angle at Initialization =pθt ´
                                                                                                                                                                                               θ0 , θ1 ´ θ0 q


                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                                 Apex Angle at Origin 6 (θt , θ0 )


                                                                                                                                                     60


                                                                                                                                                     40                                                                                                                      Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  160M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  410M
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                           1.4B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.8B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.9B
                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           12B

                                                                                                                                                           0         5         10         15                                20                                25        30     35
                                                                                                                                                                                           Epochs (t)


                                                                                                                      (g) Apex Angle at Origin =pθt , θ0 q

     Figure 72: Angular measures of the Trajectory for GPT-NeoX trained on the Pile dataset


                                                                                                                                                                                          51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    L AYERWISE -T RAJECTORY M APS


                                    (a) query-key-value, bias


                                   (b) query-key-value, weight


                                         (c) dense, bias


                                        (d) dense, weight


                                     (e) dense-4h-to-h, bias


                                    (f) dense-4h-to-h, weight

Figure 73: Layerwise Trajectory Maps, grouped by layer type, for the 14M GPT-NeoX model trained
on the Pile dataset.


                                               52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         (a) dense-h-to-4h, bias


                                        (b) dense-h-to-4h, weight


        (c) embed-in, weight (d) embed-out, weight (e) final-layer-norm, (f) final-layer-norm,
                                                   bias                  weight


                 (g) input-layernorm, bias                   (h) input-layernorm, weight


             (i) post-attention-layernorm, bias          (j) post-attention-layernorm, weight

Figure 74: Layerwise Trajectory Maps, grouped by layer type, for the 14M GPT-NeoX model trained
on the Pile dataset.


                                                   53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.1    Q,K,V T RAJECTORY M APS ACROSS S CALES


                                            (a) 14 M


                                           (b) 160 M


                                            (c) 1.4 B


                                            (d) 12 B

      Figure 75: Trajectory maps of Q,K,V layers become homogenized over increasing scale.


                                               54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   T RAJECTORY M APS FOR G ROKKING
In grokking (Power et al., 2022), we have that the performance on test samples significantly lags
behind the training performance. Below, we look at the trajectory maps in this setting, considering
the experimental setup of https://github.com/teddykoker/grokking. We can observe


                     (a) Upto about 1500 steps                (b) Upto about 2000 steps


                     (c) Upto about 4000 steps              (d) Upto the end of training.

Figure 76: Trajectory maps during the course of learning. Grokking (Power et al., 2022), or sudden
increase in test accuracy while training accuracy is already at a ceiling, occurs where the trajectory
map also shows a transition point.

in Figure 76 that:

       • Upto about 1500 steps: Everything is pitch blue. No directional exploration, test accuracy
         remains, more or less, random.
       • Upto about 2000 steps: Some directional movement starts to happen, and some initial signs
         of improvement in test performance.
       • Upto about 4000 steps: Transition point for directional exploration. Test performance visibly
         improves.

We think that without (appropriate) directional exploration, the training converges to a
‘lazy’/‘shortcut’/‘dead-end’ like solutions. Moreover, we believe that being ‘lazy’ in the direc-
tional sense is highly intertwined with being ‘lazy’ in the sense of feature learning (Chizat et al.,
2020). Besides, the above experiments show that the resemblance with the lazy regime is more than
an analogy. Kumar et al. (2024) have shown that grokking can be seen as the transition from the lazy
to the non-lazy (rich) training regime. In particular, we find that the precise part of the training, where
the test accuracy first shows a marked growth is also the part where the directional exploration starts
to happen.


                                                    55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     P UTTING D IRECTIONAL R EDUNDANCY TO T EST


Figure 77: Comparison of training only batch norm parameters with training entire last layer
(readout) parameters.

The presented results, and that in the main section, have been averaged over 3 seeds. The standard
deviation is never more than 0.05 (for the batchnorm training, even less), and hence it is difficult to
make it out in the plots and has been omitted.

J.1   C OMPARISON WITH ( DISCRETIZED ) T RAJECTORY M AP


Figure 78: Trajectory Map and the corresponding decapacitation test via tuning only batch-norm
parameters. Here we discretize the trajectory map to 10 color levels to facilitate comparison.


                                                  56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K      E FFECT OF DIFFERENT LEARNING RATE SCHEDULES
In order to ensure that our broader trajectory map results are not sensitive to the particular choice
stepwise learning rate schedule, we run a study for three other learning rate schedules: cosine, linear
decay, and polynomial decay with power p2q. We run this comparison both without and with an initial
warmup for 5 epochs to the base learning rate of 0.1. Besides, to facilitate an easier comparison,
we discretize the plots to 10 color levels. These resulting trajectory maps are illustrated below in
Figures 80, 81, and the learning rate schedules plus the train/test loss are depicted in the Figure 83.


      (a) Learning Rate Schedules            (b) Train Loss                     (c) Test Loss

Figure 79: Visualization of different learning rate schedules and the accompanying train and test loss
curves (in the non-warmup case of Figure 80).

K.1     T RAJECTORY M APS

Without Warmup


Figure 80: Comparison of trajectory maps for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet across different learning
rate schedules.


K.1.1     W ITH WARMUP FOR 5 EPOCHS


Figure 81: Comparison of trajectory maps for ResNet50 trained on ImageNet across different
learning rate schedules.

Importantly, we find that the larger nature of the trajectory map is highly similar across the different
schedules, despite minor variations. This demonstrates that our claims about directional similarity
are robust to the choice of learning rate schedules.


                                                  57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K.2   A NGLE BETWEEN SUCCESSIVE EPOCHS

We also investigate the effect of different learning rate schedules on the angles formed between
successive epochs, and, in particular, how it varies in the presence or absence of momentum and
weight decay. Said differently, this is analogous to the setting of Figure 4(a), but where we swap out
stepwise learning rate schedule for cosine, linear, and polynomial (degree 2) schedules. These results
are located in the Figure 82.


                    (a) Cosine                                        (b) Linear


                                       (c) Polynomial (degree 2)

Figure 82: Effect of different learning rate schedules on the angle between successive epochs. We
find that as in Figure 4(a), a significant part of the training shows obtuse angles between the updates
(as marked by the part above the dashed gray lines), and which tend to be higher in the setting of
having both momentum and weight decay, like seen previously.


                                                  58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L     E FFECT OF T RAJECTORY G RANULARITY
L.1   T RAJECTORY M APS WITH FINER GRANULARITY

We run our prototypical ResNet50 experiments at 2ˆ and 4ˆ granularities, each of which amounts
to having 2 and 4 evenly spaced checkpoints for every epoch. This results in an overall (including
initialization) 181 and 361 checkpoints, as opposed to 91 checkpoints considered previously. The
below-mentioned comparisons show that our results at the granularity of 1ˆ are produce highly
similar trends as seen with the finer granularity.
The above holds both for the visualizations of trajectory maps as well as angular hallmarks such as
angle between successive checkpoints.


                                (a) Trajectory Maps with 10 color levels


                                (b) Trajectory Maps with 20 color levels

Figure 83: Visualization of different learning rate schedules and the accompanying train and test loss
curves (in the non-warmup case of Figure 80).


L.2   A NGLE BETWEEN SUCCESSIVE E POCHS


                                                  59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 84: Direct comparison of building trajectory maps that are at (4ˆ) finer granularity than
previously used. Hyperparameter settings are identical between the two, i.e., momentum is 0.9 and
weight decay is 0.0001.


                   (a) 4ˆ granularity                           (b) 1ˆ granularity

Figure 85: Effects of Momentum and Weight Decay at different granularities. The right figure is
the same as the one in the main text. 1ˆ granularity refers to a checkpoint every epoch; while 4ˆ
granularity would mean a checkpoint every quarter of an epoch.


                                               60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L.3   F INE -G RAINED VIEW INTO THE FIRST EPOCH


           (a) Trajectory Map of the first Epoch        (b) Angle between each of the adjacent steps

Figure 86: Trajectory map and Angle between checkpoints take at fine intervals during the first epoch.
The first epoch contains 5004 steps, and so for the left subfigure, we consider checkpoints after every
18 steps which suffices here since still finer granularity will make the already high resolution only
marginally more high resolution. Hence the trajectory map comprises of a total of 279 checkpoints
(including the initialization). As far as the right subfigure is concerned, here we process every single
step to yield a detailed view of the steps in the first epoch. The particular setting shown are for our
prototypical setting with momentum 0.9 and weight decay 0.0001.


M     A NGLE BETWEEN SUCCESSIVE E POCHS FOR VERY LARGE BATCH SIZE
      TRAINING


                   (a) Batch Size: 16384                             (b) Batch Size: 256

    Figure 87: Angle between successive epochs for networks trained with different batch sizes.


                                                   61
