Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ANKING - AWARE ADAPTER FOR
TEXT- DRIVEN IMAGE ORDERING WITH CLIP

    Wei-Hsiang Yu1      Yen-Yu Lin1      Ming-Hsuan Yang2     Yi-Hsuan Tsai3
 1
    National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 UC Merced 3 Atmanity Inc.


                                             A BSTRACT
         Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) have made significant progress
         in downstream tasks that require quantitative concepts such as facial age estimation
         and image quality assessment, enabling VLMs to explore applications like image
         ranking and retrieval. However, existing studies typically focus on the reasoning
         based on a single image and heavily depend on text prompting, limiting their
         ability to learn comprehensive understanding from multiple images. To address
         this, we propose an effective yet efficient approach that reframes the CLIP model
         into a learning-to-rank task and introduces a lightweight adapter to augment CLIP
         for text-guided image ranking. Specifically, our approach incorporates learnable
         prompts to adapt to new instructions for ranking purposes and an auxiliary branch
         with ranking-aware attention, leveraging text-conditioned visual differences for
         additional supervision in image ranking. Our ranking-aware adapter consistently
         outperforms fine-tuned CLIPs on various tasks and achieves competitive results
         compared to state-of-the-art models designed for specific tasks like facial age esti-
         mation and image quality assessment. Overall, our approach primarily focuses on
         ranking images with a single instruction, which provides a natural and generalized
         way of learning from visual differences across images, bypassing the need for
         extensive text prompts tailored to individual tasks. The source code is available at
         https://github.com/uynaes/RankingAwareCLIP


1     I NTRODUCTION
Human perception can handle multiple images simultaneously, performing tasks like semantic
categorization, e.g., counting cats in an image, and abstract evaluations, e.g., image quality, aesthetics,
and facial age. This ability is critical for comprehending the relationships between objects and
concepts across images and is essential to effective reasoning and decision-making. In machine
learning, learning-to-rank (LTR) algorithms are designed to investigate these relationships among
items based on their relevance to a given context. LTR has shown remarkable success in various
domains, including information retrieval (Chen et al., 2021) and document ranking (Cao et al., 2007).
The emergence of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) has sparked
a growing interest in adapting pre-trained VLMs to understand specific image attributes (Ke et al.,
2023; Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;d). However, prior research has primarily focused on
single-image reasoning (see Figure 1a), potentially hindering the model’s ability to explore complex
relationships across images. In this paper, we aim to equip the pre-trained CLIP to rank multiple
images based on various text queries, thereby facilitating a wide range of tasks from semantic
understanding (e.g., object counting) to abstract attribute estimation (e.g., image quality assessment).
To this end, we introduce a ranking-aware adapter that aims to provide text-visual embeddings with a
sense of visual relevance to a given text query, which is lightweight and effective for learning image
ordering tasks (see Figure 1b).
A straightforward approach to adapt VLMs to a target task is to conduct instruction tuning with
pre-defined text queries followed by post-processing for ranking. For instance, Paiss et al. (2023)
pre-define the text query to include the number of objects like “three cats” for each image. In this
manner, the CLIP model can be fine-tuned using contrastive objectives for counting, and then images
are sorted based on their predicted counts. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2022) effectively addresses the
depth estimation task by defining an object’s proximity from “close” to “far.” Other approaches
augment the CLIP text encoder with additional learnable prompts to capture ordinal relationships


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       Text embedding
          Multi-prompts with                               Latent Space
          enumerated numbers                                                                           Modulated ordinal relations
                                                                                                       Visual embedding
           A photo of 1 cats.
             A photo of 2 cats.
               A photo of 3 cats.
                                                                                           CLIPImage
                                 Modulation
                                                                                                                     Image I1

                      CLIPText

                                                          (a) Prior Work
                                                                                                    Latent Space
          Single rank-related prompt
           Sort images by the number                                  Ranking-aware
                                              CLIPText
           of cats.                                                      Adapter

                                                                  (         ,          )
           Image I1                                                                                           Rank magnitude

           Image I2                                               (          ,         )
                                              CLIPImage
               …


                                                                  (          ,         )
           Image Ii
                                                                     text-conditioned
                                                                  visual embedding pairs      Embedding of rank-related prompt

                                                             (b) Ours                         Text-conditioned visual embedding



Figure 1: Comparisons with prior work. (a) Prior works require generating caption combinations
covering numbers of bins from N1 , N2 , ..., Ni with the task-related target, such as “cat,” paired with
each image (e.g., I1 , I2 ). In addition, text modulation is necessary to map these numerical values
into an ordinal latent space for contrastive learning. (b) Our method streamlines the ranking process
through a learning-to-rank framework. A pre-trained CLIP model encodes images and a single
rank-related prompt. A lightweight, ranking-aware adapter then generates text-conditioned visual
embedding pairs and their relational differences. By optimizing the relational differences among
pairs, our approach learns the visual relevance to the given text query.
and align these prompts with image embeddings (Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023d). However,
aligning visual embeddings with text embeddings for ranking may be suboptimal since it is difficult to
enumerate and learn all prompts to represent the spectrum of ranks, especially for data in long-tailed
distributions. While some methods achieve satisfactory results through task-specific pre-training and
custom decoders, their specialized decoders often limit their adaptability to other ranking tasks.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose an LTR framework incorporating a lightweight
ranking adapter for the pre-trained CLIP model. This framework involves: 1) Transforming the
paired image-text contrastive objective to an LTR objective by directly pairing a list of images with
their scores alongside text guidance; 2) Introducing a ranking-aware adapter comprising a regression
branch for ranking score prediction and an ordinal branch for pairwise data order supervision; and 3)
Developing an attention mechanism to extract relative feature responses for a pair of images, thereby
constructing relative visual embeddings conditioned by queried text prompts.
We evaluate our method on four tasks spanning diverse numerical concepts, including facial aging
estimation (Samek et al., 2017), object count sorting (Singh et al., 2024), image quality/aesthetics
assessment (Hosu et al., 2020; Murray, Naila and Marchesotti, Luca and Perronnin, Florent, 2012),
and dating historical colored images (Palermo et al., 2012). Our approach consistently performs
favorably against CLIP baselines and state-of-the-art methods in terms of ranking and retrieval
qualities, even though these competing methods are fine-tuned for target tasks. Instead of focusing on
enhancing CLIP’s text encoder, our method unifies different ranking tasks in one framework followed
by a lightweight adapter with a ranking-aware attention module to capture text-conditioned image
differences, directly contributing to learning the distinction across ranking scores.
The main contributions of this work are as follows: 1) We introduce a general ranking-related text
prompt and integrate learning-to-rank into the CLIP model using a lightweight adapter for multi-
image ranking. 2) We propose a ranking-aware attention module to facilitate feature learning for
the ranking purpose across images conditioned on the given text. 3) Without requiring additional
task-specific pre-training, we validate our method on various ranking tasks in benchmark datasets
against fine-tuned CLIP baselines and other task-specific approaches, providing insight toward a
unified framework for image ranking tasks.


                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK

Contrastive vision-language models. Learning and aligning multiple modality-specific representa-
tions from large-scale image-text datasets have significantly advanced the performance of numerous
multi-modal tasks (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2021; Pham et al., 2023; Radford
et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024). CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), a pio-
neering vision-language model (VLM), aligns visual and textual encoders via a pairwise contrastive
objective and excels at zero-shot classification. Due to their robust and general representations, VLMs
are widely adopted as foundational models for a variety of downstream tasks, such as segmentation
(Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022; Rao et al., 2022), detection (Wu et al., 2023), and dense prediction (Auty
& Mikolajczyk, 2023; Hu et al., 2024). While CLIP effectively captures global information, its
training objective, matching image content to sentences, hinders its ability to discern relationships
across images. Several approaches are proposed to address this issue, such as task-dependent decoder
training (Jiang et al., 2023; Ke et al., 2023) and fine-tuning with task-specific image-caption pairs
(Liang et al., 2023; Paiss et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;b). While these approaches augment VLMs
with additional relational knowledge, they often necessitate task-specific modifications to model
architectures or data preprocessing, limiting their generalizability to diverse downstream tasks.
In this paper, we introduce a framework that empowers CLIP to rank a set of images based on the
attribute specified by a given text, such as ranking images based on object counts, facial aging, or
visual qualities, without requiring any task-specific pre-processing or model modifications. Our
method enables the model to learn differences from randomly paired images and correlate them with
their ranking distances, thereby enhancing ranking performance and achieving promising results
compared to task-specific methods.
Learning-to-rank. Learning-to-rank (LTR) is pivotal in training models to effectively sort a list
of items, making it essential to information retrieval and recommendation systems that strive to
present the most relevant items in response to queries (Cao et al., 2007). LTR has a broad spectrum
of applications, such as person/face re-identification (Chen et al., 2017; 2021), artwork retrieval
(Yemelianenko et al., 2023), and storytelling evaluation (Hsu et al., 2022). LTR models are typically
trained using ranked lists of items, associated queries, and relevance scores, such as click-through
data, user preference scores, or similarities. Ranking objectives such as pairwise Hinge loss, triplet
loss (Schroff et al., 2015), or listwise ranking loss (Burges et al., 2005) are commonly employed
to optimize LTR models. While classification predicts discrete categories and regression predicts
continuous values for individual items, LTR focuses on cross-item comparisons based on their relative
relevance to a query. This emphasis on relative relevance encourages models to learn quantitative
representations that distinguish between items based on a given query.
Recent works like OrdinalCLIP (Li et al., 2022), L2RCLIP (Wang et al., 2023d), and the concurrent
work NumCLIP (Du et al., 2024) combine CLIP with LTR for ordinal regression tasks such as facial
age estimation and image dating. They focus on designing the text encoder to map numerical labels
to a continuous space for improved image-text alignment. In this work, we also combine CLIP and
LTR for ranking tasks but focus on optimizing text-conditioned image embedding distances between
paired images to enhance ranking, a promising yet unexplored area in visual understanding.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

This paper proposes a method to equip a pre-trained VLM, e.g., CLIP, with ranking a set of images
based on a given textual query, such as one particular object count, abstract concept, or subjective
preference. Figure 2 provides an overview of our framework, where we formulate this task as a
learn-to-rank problem and derive a lightweight adapter with a ranking-aware attention module to
extract relative feature responses across images so that the model can rank images.
3.1   L EARNING - TO -R ANK F ORMULATION

A straightforward approach to teach VLMs for image scoring based on textual queries is to yield
prompts by associating images with potential numerical indices, such as “A photo of [0, 1,
2, 3, ...] cats.” for object counting (Paiss et al., 2023) or “A photo of [1, 2, 3,
...] years old face.” for age estimation (Wang et al., 2023d). However, enumerating
all numerical indices is impractical and computationally infeasible when dealing with large or


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Query                                                     Ranking-aware
                                                                              Cross-Attention
   Image I1
                                                                            Transformer Encoder
                                                                                                                              Adapter
   Image I2                         CLIP
                                    Image
      …                            Encoder
                                                                                        …                    Regression Head            LReg
   Image Ii
                                                                                          text-conditioned visual embedding 𝑧𝑖′


                                                    …
                              patch embedding 𝑧𝑖
                                                                                                                       …
                                                                                 …               …
                                                                                                             relational tokens q
                                                                                 …               …
                                                                                                                     Relational Ranking-
                                    CLIP


                                                                                        …
        “Sort images by                                                                                               aware Attention


                                                        …
                                    Text                                         …               …
      the number of cats.”                                  Key/Value
                                   Encoder
                                                                                            ′
                                                                        pairwise embedding 𝑧𝑖𝑗 = [𝑧𝑖′ ; 𝑧𝑗′ ])           Ranking Head
          Frozen


                                                        …
                             text embedding with
          Trainable          learnable text tokens wi                    Auxiliary Ranking Branch                              LRank



Figure 2: Framework overview. We encode the given images and the query caption using the
pre-trained CLIP model. The proposed ranking adapter compiles text-conditioned visual embedding
{zi′ } via the transformer cross-attention mechanism, where patch embeddings {zi } serve as queries
and text embeddings {wi } act as key-value pairs. The ranking adapter comprises two heads: the
regression and ranking heads. The former predicts image ranking scores using features of individual
images. The latter employs a ranking-aware attention mechanism to explore relative feature responses
across images upon which these images are ranked.

even uncertain index ranges. Furthermore, tasks like object counting and facial age estimation
frequently exhibit long-tail data distributions, making discrete captions less balanced. For continuous
scoring targets like image preference or colorfulness estimation, discretizing scores into bins can be
helpful (Hu et al., 2024; Auty & Mikolajczyk, 2023). However, determining an appropriate number
of bins and cutoffs remains challenging and may vary depending on the applications.
To address these challenges of ranking images based on text guidance, we design a universal instruc-
tion template for all images containing keywords such as “Sort images by the number of
[cats].” and use their query-related values as our learning targets. Then, we adopt an objective to
optimize the model for image ranking rather than pairing each image with all potential text queries.

3.2    R ANKING A DAPTER WITH R ELATIONAL ATTENTION

The proposed method aims to augment CLIP for sorting images based on a given textual expression,
where our model comprises a frozen CLIP backbone and a lightweight adapter. The adapter is
composed of a cross-attention encoder and two decoders: one is a regression head for predicting
single-image ranking scores, and the other is derived with pairwise supervision for cross-image
ranking. Figure 2 depicts our proposed method.
Vision-language backbone. We employ a frozen pre-trained CLIP model as our feature extractor.
To accommodate various tasks that may require either local or global image features (such as sorting
by object counts or image brightness), we discard the pooling layers as suggested in Paiss et al.
(2023) and Rao et al. (2022). This retains the image token embedding zi ∈ Rp×d , i ∈ {1, 2, ..., B},
where P = 100 denotes the number of patch tokens and B is the batch size, and the text embedding
wi ∈ Rt×d , where t = 77 is the number of text tokens. Both image and text embeddings share
a latent dimension of d = 768. Besides, given that our text prompts are formulated for ranking,
which differs from the original captions, we append the additional t′ = 32 text tokens to adapt to the
ranking-related text prompts.
Adapting CLIP to image sorting with the ranking-aware adapter. Inspired by Yu et al. (2022),
we utilize cross-attention to integrate textual information into image tokens to enhance their contextual
richness for accurate image ranking. Specifically, each encoding block in our design includes
a self-attention layer for image tokens, followed by a cross-attention layer where image tokens
serve as queries and text tokens as key-value pairs. Linear layers are then used for embedding
                      ′
projection Rd 7→ Rd , where d′ = 512. This structure is repeated twice to effectively fuse text and
image embeddings, resulting in the text-conditioned visual embedding zi′ . Subsequently, the output


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           text-conditioned visual
           embedding 𝒛′𝒊
                   …                                    Value

                                                                                          attention matrix (A)
                                                                                                                                       Subtraction
                                  …               …


                                                                                                                                                        …
                                                                                                                     MatMul
                                                                     MatMul & Scale &          …           …
                                                                                                                                                            (M x d’)


                                        …


                                                                                                …



                                                                                                            …
                                                              Key        Softmax
                                  …               …
                                                                              Query           (1 ~ p)   (p+1 ~ 2p)
                                                                                                                              MatMul                 Average &
                        pairwise embedding 𝒛′𝒊𝒋 = [𝒛′𝒊 ; 𝒛′𝒋 ]                …                Ai          Aj                                          FFN
                   …
                                                                    relational tokens q                                                Pairwise difference 𝑶𝒊,𝒋
           text-conditioned visual
           embedding 𝒛𝒋′



Figure 3: Relational ranking-aware attention. First, the text-conditioned visual embeddings of
two images {zi′ } and {zj′ } are concatenated to form a pairwise embedding {zij        ′
                                                                                         }. This pairwise
embedding is used as the key in the attention mechanism, with relational tokens {q} serving as the
query. The resulting attention matrix A is split into two parts, {Ai } and {Aj }, corresponding to the
attention assigned to each image. Using these matrices, the attention outputs, {Oi } and {Oj } are
computed with {zi′ } and {zj′ } as values. Finally, the pair’s difference is computed through subtraction,
averaged over relational tokens, and processed by an FFN to generate the pairwise difference Oi,j .
embedding zi′ is routed to two parallel branches. The first branch is a feed-forward sub-network
(FFN) regressor that directly predicts the ranking score. The second branch is an auxiliary ranking
module with a relational-aware attention mechanism, which characterizes the discrepancies between
an image pair, aligning with their corresponding ranking score differences.
Relational ranking-aware attention. Given a pair of images, this attention mechanism is designed
to identify and highlight the visual discrepancies that correlate with their respective ranking scores.
As depicted in Figure 3, the visual-text embeddings of two images are concatenated to form a pairwise
embedding, which is subsequently processed through an attentional pooling (Lee et al., 2019).
Specifically, given two images Ii and Ij , we concatenate their embeddings, zi′ and zj′ , from the
                                                                                                    ′
                                                                            ′
cross-attention transformer encoder to yield a pairwise representation: zij   = [zi′ ; zj′ ] ∈ R2p×d , ij ∈
{1, 2, ..., B 2 }, where p is the number of patch tokens, and d′ is the embedding dimension.
                                                                                          ′
We then initialize the relational tokens q ∈ RM ×d , where M is the number of tokens, as the queries.
                                   ′
The concatenated embedding zij       acts as key-value pairs. This allows us to generate relational
representations. The attention matrix A is calculated using scaled dot-product attention via
                                                                    q · (ki ⊕ kj )T             q · KT
                               A = Softmax(                               √         ) = Softmax( √ ),                                                                  (1)
                                                                            d′                      d′
                                                          ′
              ′
where K = zij   = [zi′ ; zj′ ] ∈ R2p×d acts as keys. After computing A, it is divided into two parts: Ai
and Aj , corresponding to the attention applied to zi′ and zj′ , respectively. Here, zi′ and zj′ serve as
values, denoted as Vi and Vj for the second dot-product operation:
                                   Oi = Ai · Vi and Oj = Aj · Vj .                                    (2)

Finally, the relative difference between the outputs, Oi and Oj , is computed:
                                              PM
                                                      (Oi,m − Oj,m )
                                Oi,j = F F N ( m=1                     ),                   (3)
                                                         M
where Oi,m is aggregated responses from image i with the m-th relational token. The pairwise
difference Oi,j is averaged over M relational tokens and passed through a feed-forward network,
yielding an one-dimensional value for the pairwise ranking objective.
Unlike conventional attention mechanisms that process images individually, our proposed relational
attention aggregates distinct features between a pair of images. The resulting features capture differ-
ences between images and hence are discriminative, leading to more accurate ranking predictions.
Training objective and loss functions. To optimize the model for both accurate ranking and score
prediction, we combine two complementary loss functions: a regression loss and a pairwise ranking
loss. The regression branch predicts the ranking score for each image individually, and we employ
Smooth L1 loss to minimize the difference between the predicted score si and the ground truth yi :
                                      1
                                         (y − si )2 ,     if |yi − si | < 1,
                             Lreg = 2 i                                                            (4)
                                       |yi − si | − 0.5, otherwise.

                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This encourages precise alignment between predicted scores and the query-based ground truth values,
particularly penalizing large errors.
The pairwise ranking branch focuses on relative ordering, using a pairwise ranking loss to ensure that
for any two images, e.g., when yi > yj , the model is is derived by the following loss function:
                                                X
                          Lrank (y, Oi,j ) =             max(0, 1 − Oi,j ).                        (5)
                                             {(i,j)|yi >yj }

This loss directly optimizes the model’s ability to capture the correct relative differences between
image pairs, which is crucial for ranking tasks.
Finally, we combine the two objectives into a unified loss function:
                                        L = αLreg + Lrank .                                        (6)
where α is a hyperparameter (set to 0.2 in our experiments) to balance the importance of the regression
and ranking objectives. By jointly optimizing both individual scores and pairwise ranking consistency,
our method ensures robust performance across various ranking tasks.

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
4.1   TASKS AND DATASETS

Facial age estimation. Facial age estimation predicts the age of a given face. We use the Adience
dataset (Samek et al., 2017), which includes 13, 027 images labeled across 8 age groups, following the
data split from Wang et al. (2023d). We use the text prompt “sort images by the person’s
age group.” for this task.
Historical colored image dating. The historical colored image dataset (Palermo et al., 2012) is a
widely-used benchmark for predicting the decade of a given historical colored image, consisting of
1, 325 images labeled across 5 decades ranging from the 1930s to the 1970s. We follow the standard
ordinal regression setting as that in Wang et al. (2023d). The text prompt we use is “sort images
by the taken date of the photo.” for this task.
Image quality and aesthetics assessment. For ranking images based on subjective preference
and objective properties, we employ the KonIQ-10k dataset (Hosu et al., 2020) for assessing image
qualities and the Aesthetic Visual Analysis (AVA) dataset (Murray, Naila and Marchesotti, Luca and
Perronnin, Florent, 2012) for evaluating image aesthetics, using the task prompt “sort images
by the image quality of [Property].”. In addition to user voting or mean opinion
score (MOS), we include other image quality attributes such as colorfulness, contrast, and brightness.
We evaluate models using the official splits, which have 2, 015 and 19, 930 test images in the
KonIQ-10k and AVA datasets, respectively.
Object count sorting. We evaluate the performance of scoring images according to the quantity
of queried objects using the text prompt instruction, “sort images by the number of
[Category].”. The COCO-REM dataset (Singh et al., 2024), an annotation revised version of the
COCO dataset, serves as the test bed. We work on the 80 categories of the COCO dataset, comprising
118, 287 training and 5, 000 testing images.
Evaluation metrics. We evaluate facial age estimation and historical image dating using mean
absolute error (MAE) and accuracy for comparison with prior works. We assess performance using
Pearson’s linear correlation coefficient (PLCC) and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (SRCC)
for image quality assessment and object count sorting.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL SETTING

We use CLIP with ConvNeXt-L, containing a ConvNext-Large (Liu et al., 2022) image encoder
with the image resolution set to 320 × 320 and the hidden dimension to d1 = 768, as well as a
transformer-based text encoder of 12 layers with w = 77 text tokens and the hidden dimension set
to d2 = 768. The model weights pre-trained on the LAION-5B dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022)
are adopted and frozen for both the image and text encoders. To adapt our model to the given text,
we concatenate learnable prompts s′ of size 32 to the text embedding produced by the CLIP text


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Results on facial age estimation and histor- Table 2: Results on object count sorting.
ical colored image dating. The mean and standard For BLIP-2, Flamingo, InstructBLIP, and
deviation are listed. We take numbers from Wang et al. VLM-VLIA, we follow the text prompts for
(2023d) for the results of the reference methods.      object counting as specified in their studies.
                      Adience                        HCI                   Method                   Fine-     PLCC (↑)    SRCC (↑)
 Method       Accuracy (%)    MAE          Accuracy (%) MAE                                         tuning
 Zero-shot                                                                 BLIP-2                               0.284       0.252
             43.3 (3.6)     0.80 (0.02)    26.1 (0.6)    1.48 (0.03)
 CLIP                                                                      Flamingo (10-shot)                   0.033       0.031
 CoOp        60.6 (5.5)     0.50 (0.08)    51.9 (2.6)    0.76 (0.06)       InstructBLIP                         0.509       0.485
 OrdinalCLIP 61.2 (4.2)     0.47 (0.06)    56.4 (1.7)    0.67 (0.03)       VLM-VILA                             0.558       0.507
 L2RCLIP     66.2 (4.4)     0.36 (0.05)    67.2 (1.6)    0.43 (0.03)
 NumCLIP         -               -         69.6 (2.0)    0.35 (0.03)       Zero-shot CLIP                       0.026       0.001
                                                                           CountingCLIP
 InstructBLIP 63.7          0.41           30.9          0.96                                         ✓         0.251       0.422
                                                                           Paiss et al. (2023)
 Ours         65.2 (2.9)    0.36 (0.03) 72.8 (2.6) 0.32 (0.03)             Ours                       ✓         0.624       0.557



Table 3: Results on the IQA/IAA task. We report the PLCC and SRCC of the mean opinion score
(MOS) to compare with baselines and the state-of-the-art methods. Note that MUSIQ (Ke et al., 2021)
only serves as the reference purpose since it is a purely vision-based method optimized for this task.
We take numbers from Ke et al. (2023) for the results of the reference methods.
                                                                                       KonIQ-10k                 AVA Dataset
 Method                                Task-related pertaining   Fine-tuning    PLCC (↑)         SRCC (↑)    PLCC (↑)    SRCC (↑)
 Purely vision-based (task-specific)
 MUSIQ Ke et al. (2021)                                                ✓          0.924           0.937       0.726       0.738
 VLM-based (task-specific)
 VILA-P Ke et al. (2023)                          ✓                                -                -         0.657       0.663
 VILA-R Ke et al. (2023)                          ✓                    ✓         0.919            0.932       0.774       0.774
 CLIP (fine-tuned)                                                     ✓         0.245            0.216       0.162       0.160
 InstructBLIP Dai et al. (2023)                                                  0.211            0.163       0.229       0.226
 CLIP-IQA Wang et al. (2023c)                                                    0.695            0.727       0.420       0.415
 CLIP-IQA+ Wang et al. (2023c)                                         ✓         0.895            0.909       0.677       0.587
 Hentschel et al. (2022)                                               ✓           -                -         0.731       0.741
 Ours                                                                  ✓         0.919            0.911       0.760       0.747



encoder. Following Jiang et al. (2023), we discard the pooling and projection of the visual encoder,
leaving p = 100 patch tokens as inputs to our ranking adapter. The ranking adapter consists of a
cross-attention transformer encoder with two encoding blocks, followed by two parallel branches:
1) a regression head with two multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) blocks and 2) a ranking head with
contrastive ranking-aware attention using M = 16 relational tokens and three MLP blocks.
We take a random horizontal flipping as data augmentation and resize the images to 320×320 without
cropping. We implement the ranking adapter upon the OpenCLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021) framework
and optimize the model using a combination of Smooth L1 loss and Hinge loss with an AdamW
optimizer at a learning rate of 1e−5, weight decay of 0.01, and batch size of 64. We use 220k steps
for object counts sorting and 144k steps for image-quality assessment, facial age estimation, and
dating historical image tasks. We conduct all experiments on one NVIDIA RTX-3090Ti GPU.

4.3     Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

In the following, we evaluate the efficacy of our method by comparing it with baseline models on
four quantitative tasks with various challenges.
Facial age estimation and historical colored image dating. We evaluate our method against
zero-shot CLIP and four existing approaches for facial age estimation and historical color image
(HCI) dating. The benchmarks include CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022), OrdinalCLIP (Li et al., 2022),
L2RCLIP (Wang et al., 2023d), and the concurrent NumCLIP (Du et al., 2024). As shown in
Table 1, our approach, which leverages visual differences between images, achieves competitive
performance on facial age estimation in the Adience dataset, rivaling methods focusing on text
embedding modulation. Note that while our method performs slightly lower than L2RCLIP, the
standard deviation indicates our approach’s stability over L2RCLIP. We also validate our model on the
UTKFace dataset, where it outperforms other approaches (see Table 7 in Appendix A.1). Moreover,


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Facial age estimation (Adience)                                                             Facial age estimation (UTKF)


                              Predict elder                     Predict younger                                        Predict elder                     Predict younger
                                      Dating historical images                                                                  Image aesthetics assessment


                      Predict closer to 1970s                Predict closer to 1930s                               Predict more favorable           Predict less favorable
               Image quality assessment (photography quality)                                                        Image quality assessment (brightness)


                      Predict higher quality                 Predict lower quality                                     Predict brighter                   Predict darker


Figure 4: Qualitative examples of our model. We visualize the ranking performance on facial age
estimation, dating historical images, and image quality and aesthetics assessment.
     Object count sorting task                        by orange                                                                        by apple
     (fine-tuned)
         CLIP


                      GT=15            GT=6          GT=13            GT=9             GT=3              GT=43        GT=0            GT=0        GT=2           GT=2
         Ours


                                                  by cat                                                           by boat
     (fine-tuned)
         CLIP


                      GT=7             GT=3           GT=4             GT=2                   GT=3          GT=7        GT=20            GT=1
         Ours


     IQA/IAA task                             by mean opinion score (MOS)                                                           by image contrast
          CLIP-IQA+
         Ours


Figure 5: Qualitative examples on object count sorting and IQA/IAA. The images are sorted
from highest to lowest score according to the textual cues. The red cross (×) represents the wrong
sorting position in the list. AI artworks are generated by DALL·E 3 (Betker et al., 2023). Our method
accurately ranks images from simple to complex compositions with multiple object categories in
real photos and artworks. For image sorting based on quality properties, our method outperforms
fine-tuned CLIP-IQA (CLIP-IQA+).

our method records an MAE of 0.32 on the HCI dataset, surpassing the existing state-of-the-art by a
margin of 0.04 (more than 9% improvement). Figure 4 further demonstrates our method’s ability to
accurately rank images in various scenarios.
Object count sorting. For object count sorting, we compare our method with two CLIP baselines:
the zero-shot CLIP model and fine-tuned Count-to-Ten (Paiss et al., 2023), along with four represen-
tative VLM models — BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), InstructBLIP (Dai
et al., 2023), and VLM-VILA (Lin et al., 2024) — using visual-question-answering (VQA) protocol.
While the two CLIP baselines rely on image-text pairs to determine counts, with object numbers in
COCO-REM ranging from one to hundreds, we combine categories and numbers from 0 to 100 in
the caption during fine-tuning and inference, e.g., “A photo of {7} {cat}.” For the VLM
benchmarks, we follow the text prompts for object counting as specified in their studies and parse the
number from the generated caption. As reported in Table 2, our proposed method achieves a PLCC


                                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 4: Results of other image attributes on the AVA dataset.
                                 MOS                 Contrast            Colorfulness           Brightness
                        PLCC (↑)   SRCC (↑)    PLCC (↑)   SRCC (↑)   PLCC (↑)   SRCC (↑)   PLCC (↑)   SRCC (↑)
   CLIP (fine-tuned)     0.162         0.160   −0.058      −0.071     0.289       0.308     0.087       0.061
   CLIP-IQA              0.420         0.415   0.227       0.210      0.472       0.486     0.433       0.442
   CLIP-IQA+             0.677         0.687   0.695       0.712      0.881       0.895     0.908       0.919
   Ours                  0.760         0.747   0.951       0.946      0.973       0.966     0.981       0.979


of 0.624 and an SRCC of 0.557, which is significantly better than the original CLIP, its task-specific
fine-tuned variant, and large VLMs using the VQA protocol. Notably, our method improves by elimi-
nating the need to exhaustively enumerate object-count combinations during training and inference,
typically required in pairwise contrastive approaches.
In addition, our method supports training with multiple queries simultaneously, such as sorting
different objects (e.g., cat, dog, boat). Most CLIP-based methods struggle with this because they
require pairing numbers and queried objects simultaneously, leading to overly complex text prompts.
Figure 5 shows that our method can rank images based on the queried category for real and synthesized
images containing objects of one or multiple classes.
Image quality and aesthetics assessment. We compare our method to three existing methods for
image quality and aesthetic assessment (IQA/IAA), including the CLIP model, CLIP-IQA (Wang
et al., 2023c), and VILA (Ke et al., 2023), on two benchmarks: the KonIQ-10k and AVA datasets. In
Table 3, our method performs favorably against CLIP-IQA and its fine-tuned variant, CLIP-IQA+,
while maintaining competitive performance compared to the VILA variants that require pretraining
on task-related datasets on the AVA caption dataset (Ghosal et al., 2019) (i.e., VILA-P) and fine-tuned
with a rank adapter (i.e., VILA-R) (see Figure 5 for more visual comparisons with CLIP-IQA+).
Moreover, we explore our model’s capacity to score images based on various image attributes, includ-
ing contrast, colorfulness, and brightness. We compare the performance with CLIP and CLIP-IQA
using the AVA dataset. To fine-tune CLIP, we discretize attribute values into bins and pair images with
multiple captions describing the specific attribute values. For example, the caption “The contrast
of the image is higher than 0.1 and lower than 0.2.” matches an image
with a contrast of 0.15. For CLIP-IQA, we employ antonym prompts, such as “Good photo.”
versus “Bad photo.” for MOS, “Colorful photo.” versus “Dull photo.” for colorfulness, etc., to train
the model on each image attribute using the official repository from Wang et al. (2023c).
In Table 4, our proposed method consistently outperforms task-specific fine-tuned CLIP and CLIP-
IQA+. It suggests that our proposed method can use a single model to directly score images according
to various attributes indicated in the caption. Without needing antonym prompts or pre-trained text
embedding as anchors, our model learns quantitative knowledge from the instructions alone.

4.4    A BLATION STUDIES

Our ranking-aware attention CLIP stands out by focusing on text-driven visual differences to score
images. In this section, we examine two key components of our ranking adapter: the auxiliary ranking
branch and the design of the ranking-aware module.
Effect of the auxiliary ranking branch. We validate whether additional supervision from visual
differences enhances ranking performance. We compare three settings: (1) using only the regression
head, (2) adding a separate ranking head with embedding subtraction (zi′ −zj′ ) for ranking supervision,
                                                                     ′
and (3) applying ranking-aware attention to the paired embedding (zij   ) for the supervision.
As shown in Table 5, the regression head alone performs reasonably well (e.g., 0.402 MAE on
HCI and 0.612 PLCC on object count sorting), demonstrating that reframing the ranking tasks as a
learning-to-rank problem is effective compared to standard contrastive learning used for fine-tuning
CLIP. Adding a separate ranking head for pairwise supervision yields noticeable improvements,
particularly on the HCI dataset, highlighting the value of additional ranking supervision. Notably,
its improvement is limited in complex tasks like object count sorting, where the model requires to
focus on the queried object within a cluttered image for image scoring. Incorporating ranking-aware
attention in the ranking branch further enhances performance, with a +21.14% gain on HCI, +1.96%
in PLCC, and +3.53% in SRCC for object counting. These results indicate that additional ranking
supervision benefits image ranking tasks.

                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Ablation study on the design of the ranking adapter. The first row stands for fine-tuned
CLIP, serving as a reference.
                                                                  HCI                           Object count sorting
                                            Ranking-aware
       LTR paradigm      Ranking Head                           MAE (↓)                 PLCC (↑)                 SRCC (↑)
                                              Attention
             -                 -                  -              1.113                      0.251                  0.422
            ✓                  -                 -                0.402                     0.612                0.538
            ✓                  ✓                 -          0.355 (+11.69%)        0.619      (+1.14%)      0.536 (−0.37%)
            ✓                  ✓                 ✓          0.317 (+21.14%)        0.624      (+1.96%)      0.557 (+3.53%)


                 Table 6: Ablation study on the components of ranking-aware attention.
                                                                                                HCI          Object count sorting
    Component                           Used                            Ablated               MAE (↓)      PLCC (↑)      SRCC (↑)
    Ours                                -                               -                      0.317        0.624          0.557
    (1) Attention output computation    Oi = Ai · Vi ; Oj = Aj · Vj     O =A·V                 0.355        0.602          0.542
    (2) Output representation           Oi,j = Oi − Oj                  Oi,j = [Oi ; Oj ]      0.347        0.609          0.540
    (3) Attention mechanism             Cross attention                 Self attention         0.339        0.621          0.545


Ablation study on the design of ranking-aware attention. Several designs can potentially enable
the attention module to capture the visual differences between image pairs. We validate our design by
swapping components within the ranking-aware module individually.
In Table 6, we ablate (1) the split dot-product (Ai · Vi − Aj · Vj ) by merging it into A · V ; (2) We
compare explicit subtraction with concatenate for embedding fusion: (Oi − Oj vs. [Oi ; Oj ]); (3) We
assess attentional pooling against self-attention for computing the attention matrix.
As shown in Table 6, both the split dot-product and explicit subtraction of output embeddings are
essential, leading to improvements in MAE, PLCC, and SRCC. Using a merged dot-product for
attention outputs may confuse the model about response sources, leading to performance degradation.
Regarding the comparison between concatenation and explicit subtraction of output embeddings, our
results show that explicit subtraction performs better, likely because it aligns more naturally with
the ranking task. Finally, we observe that using cross-attention to aggregate responses from image
pairs is more efficient regarding performance and GPU memory usage. In contrast, self-attention
consumes about twice the GPU memory (due to the initial dot-product operation, Q · K) and delivers
worse performance. This result suggests that self-attention, which requires calculating relationships
between all elements across image pairs, may lead to a higher computational burden and increased
complexity, making training convergence more difficult.

5      C ONCLUSIONS
This work presents an efficient and scalable framework for text-guided image ranking. By reframing
CLIP’s image-text contrastive learning into a learning-to-rank task and introducing a ranking-aware
attention mechanism, our model effectively captures text-driven visual differences between image
pairs without relying on task-specific fine-tuning or curated datasets. Experiments show the effective-
ness of our approach, surpassing CLIP baselines and achieving results comparable to state-of-the-art
models tailored for specific tasks. Overall, our work highlights the potential of integrating VLMs
with ranking tasks, utilizing text-guided visual distinctions for the sense of quantitative concepts.
Limitations and future works. Our ranking module can be trained on diverse text prompts covering
single and multi-task properties. For example, it can sort images based on criteria such as the number
of cats and image quality with a single model. As shown in Table 10 (Appendix B.3), our approach
achieves performance on par with models trained for individual tasks. While our method shows
convincing results in ranking images by two attributes simultaneously (Appendix E), the lack of
ground truth for multi-attribute rankings complicates evaluation. Besides, as we adapt CLIP to rank
images by specified queries, our method retains its category-specific bias, hindering its performance
on open-vocabulary tasks like counting “objects of whatever categories.” The pairwise nature of
our ranking-aware attention limits its compatibility with triplet-based ranking losses, such as the
triplet or ranked list losses. Future research directions include exploring strategies and datasets for
multi-attribute and open-vocabulary image ranking. Additionally, incorporating diverse ranking
losses beyond pairwise comparisons could improve the model’s robustness and adaptability.


                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) under
grants 112-2221-E-A49-090-MY3, 111-2628-E-A49-025-MY3, and 113-2634-F-006-002.

R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford,
  Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob L. Menick,
  Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski,
  Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karén Simonyan. Flamingo: a Visual
  Language Model for Few-Shot Learning. In NeurIPS, 2022. 3, 8
Dylan Auty and Krystian Mikolajczyk. Learning to Prompt CLIP for Monocular Depth Estimation:
  Exploring the Limits of Human Language. In ICCV Workshop, 2023. 3, 4
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving Image Generation with Better Captions. Computer
  Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf, 2023. 8
Christopher J. C. Burges, Tal Shaked, Erin Renshaw, Ari Lazier, Matt Deeds, Nicole Hamilton, and
  Gregory N. Hullender. Learning to Rank Using Gradient Descent. In ICML, 2005. 3
Zhe Cao, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, Ming-Feng Tsai, and Hang Li. Learning to Rank: From Pairwise
  Approach to Listwise Approach. In ICML, 2007. 1, 3
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, A. J. Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan Puigcerver,
  Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish V. Thapliyal, James
  Bradbury, and Weicheng Kuo. PaLI: A Jointly-Scaled Multilingual Language-Image Model. In
  ICLR, 2023. 3
Yang Chen, Yong-Jin Liu, and Yu-Kun Lai. Learning to Rank Retargeted Images. In CVPR, 2017. 3
Yiqiang Chen, Stefan Duffner, Andrei Stoian, Jean-Yves Dufour, and Atilla Baskurt. List-wise
  Learning-to-Rank with Convolutional Neural Networks for Person Re-identification. Machine
  Vision and Applications, 2021. 1, 3
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-
 language models with instruction tuning. In NeurIPS, 2023. 7, 8, 14
Yao Du, Qiang Zhai, Weihang Dai, and Xiaomeng Li. Teach clip to develop a number sense for
  ordinal regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03574, 2024. 3, 7
Koustav Ghosal, Aakanksha Rana, and Aljosa Smolic. Aesthetic Image Captioning From Weakly-
  Labelled Photographs. In ICCV Workshop, 2019. 9
Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. LVIS: A Dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance
  Segmentation. In CVPR, 2019. 19
Simon Hentschel, Konstantin Kobs, and Andreas Hotho. CLIP knows image aesthetics. Frontiers
  Artif. Intell., 2022. 7
V. Hosu, H. Lin, T. Sziranyi, and D. Saupe. KonIQ-10k: An Ecologically Valid Database for Deep
   Learning of Blind Image Quality Assessment. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2020. 2, 6
Chi-Yang Hsu, Yun-Wei Chu, Vincent Chen, Kuan-Chieh Lo, Chacha Chen, Ting-Hao Huang, and
  Lun-Wei Ku. Learning to Rank Visual Stories From Human Ranking Data. In ACL, 2022. 3
Xueting Hu, Ce Zhang, Yi Zhang, Bowen Hai, Ke Yu, and Zhihai He. Learning To Adapt CLIP for
  Few-Shot Monocular Depth Estimation. In WACV, 2024. 3, 4


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan
  Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773. 7
Ruixiang Jiang, Lingbo Liu, and Changwen Chen. CLIP-Count: Towards Text-Guided Zero-Shot
  Object Counting. In ACM MM, 2023. 3, 7
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross B. Girshick. CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In CVPR, 2017. 14
Junjie Ke, Qifei Wang, Yilin Wang, Peyman Milanfar, and Feng Yang. MUSIQ: Multi-scale Image
  Quality Transformer. In ICCV, 2021. 7
Junjie Ke, Keren Ye, Jiahui Yu, Yonghui Wu, Peyman Milanfar, and Feng Yang. VILA: Learning
  Image Aesthetics from User Comments with Vision-Language Pretraining. In CVPR, 2023. 1, 3, 7,
  9, 14
Wonjae Kim, Bokyung Son, and Ildoo Kim. ViLT: Vision-and-Language Transformer Without
 Convolution or Region Supervision. In ICML, 2021. 3
Maksim Kuprashevich and Irina Tolstykh. Mivolo: Multi-input transformer for age and gender
 estimation. CoRR, 2023. 14
Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam R. Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set
  transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In ICML,
  2019. 5
Chunyi Li, Zicheng Zhang, Haoning Wu, Wei Sun, Xiongkuo Min, Xiaohong Liu, Guangtao Zhai,
  and Weisi Lin. AGIQA-3K: An Open Database for AI-Generated Image Quality Assessment.
  CoRR, 2023a. 19
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, 2023b. 8
Wanhua Li, Xiaoke Huang, Zheng Zhu, Yansong Tang, Xiu Li, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Ordinalclip:
 Learning rank prompts for language-guided ordinal regression. In NeurIPS, 2022. 2, 3, 7
Dingkang Liang, Jiahao Xie, Zhikang Zou, Xiaoqing Ye, Wei Xu, and Xiang Bai. CrowdCLIP:
  Unsupervised Crowd Counting via Vision-Language Model. In CVPR, 2023. 1, 3
Ji Lin, Hongxu Yin, Wei Ping, Pavlo Molchanov, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Song Han. VILA: On
   Pre-training for Visual Language Models. In CVPR, 2024. 3, 8
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A ConvNet for the 2020s. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03545, 2022. 6
Timo Lüddecke and Alexander S. Ecker. Image Segmentation Using Text and Image Prompts. In
  CVPR, 2022. 3
Murray, Naila and Marchesotti, Luca and Perronnin, Florent. AVA: A Large-scale Database for
 Aesthetic Visual Analysis. In CVPR, 2012. 2, 6
Roni Paiss, Ariel Ephrat, Omer Tov, Shiran Zada, Inbar Mosseri, Michal Irani, and Tali Dekel.
  Teaching CLIP to Count to Ten. In ICCV, 2023. 1, 3, 4, 7, 8
Frank Palermo, James Hays, and Alexei A. Efros. Dating historical color images. In ECCV, 2012. 2,
  6
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Golnaz Ghiasi, Kenji Kawaguchi, Hanxiao Liu, Adams Wei Yu, Jiahui
  Yu, Yi-Ting Chen, Minh-Thang Luong, Yonghui Wu, Mingxing Tan, and Quoc V. Le. Combined
  scaling for zero-shot transfer learning. Neurocomputing, 2023. 3


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, A. Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
  Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In ICML, 2021. 1, 3
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Guangyi Chen, Yansong Tang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Jie Zhou,
  and Jiwen Lu. DenseCLIP: Language-Guided Dense Prediction with Context-Aware Prompting.
  In CVPR, 2022. 3, 4
Wojciech Samek, Alexander Binder, Sebastian Lapuschkin, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Understanding
 and comparing deep neural networks for age and gender classification. In ICCV, 2017. 2, 6
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. FaceNet: A Unified Embedding for Face
  Recognition and Clustering. In CVPR, 2015. 3
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jitsev.
  LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In
  NeurIPS, 2022. 6
Amanpreet Singh, Ronghang Hu, Vedanuj Goswami, Guillaume Couairon, Wojciech Galuba, Marcus
 Rohrbach, and Douwe Kiela. FLAVA: A Foundational Language And Vision Alignment Model.
 In CVPR, 2022. 3
Shweta Singh, Aayan Yadav, Jitesh Jain, Humphrey Shi, Justin Johnson, and Karan Desai. Bench-
  marking Object Detectors with COCO: A New Path Forward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18819,
  2024. 2, 6
Alex Jinpeng Wang, Pan Zhou, Mike Zheng Shou, and Shuicheng Yan. Position-guided Text Prompt
  for Vision-Language Pre-training. In CVPR, 2023a. 1, 3
Hualiang Wang, Yi Li, Huifeng Yao, and Xiaomeng Li. CLIPN for Zero-Shot OOD Detection:
 Teaching CLIP to Say No. In ICCV, 2023b. 3
Jianyi Wang, Kelvin C. K. Chan, and Chen Change Loy. Exploring CLIP for Assessing the Look and
   Feel of Images. In AAAI, 2023c. 7, 9
Rui Wang, Peipei Li, Huaibo Huang, Chunshui Cao, Ran He, and Zhaofeng He. Learning-to-
  rank meets language: Boosting language-driven ordering alignment for ordinal classification. In
  NeurIPS, 2023d. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 15
Xiaoshi Wu, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. CORA: Adapting CLIP for Open-Vocabulary
  Detection with Region Prompting and Anchor Pre-Matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13076,
  2023. 3
Tetiana Yemelianenko, Iuliia Tkachenko, Tess Masclef, Mihaela Scuturici, and Serge Miguet. Learn-
  ing to Rank Approach for Refining Image Retrieval in Visual Arts. In ICCV Workshop, 2023.
  3
Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, and Yonghui Wu.
   CoCa: Contrastive Captioners are Image-Text Foundation Models. TMLR, 2022. 3, 4
Zhang, Zhifei, Song, Yang, and Qi Hairong. Age progression/regression by conditional adversarial
  autoencoder. In CVPR, 2017. 14
Renrui Zhang, Ziyao Zeng, Ziyu Guo, and Yafeng Li. Can Language Understand Depth? In ACM
  MM, 2022. 1
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. IJCV, 2022. 7


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E VALUATE ON OTHER DATASETS
A.1   FACIAL AGE ESTIMATION ON THE UTKFACE DATASET.

Table 7 shows additional results on facial age estimation using UTKFace dataset (Zhang et al., 2017).
Following the preprocessing and data split described in Kuprashevich & Tolstykh (2023), we train our
ranking-aware adapter for 20k steps with a batch size of 64, a learning rate of 5e − 5, and a weight
decay of 0.01. Our method outperforms MiVOLO (Kuprashevich & Tolstykh, 2023), designed to
predict a person’s age based on facial or full-body images.

Table 7: Facial Age Estimation Results on the UTKFace Dataset. We take numbers from Kupra-
shevich & Tolstykh (2023) for the results of the reference methods.

                                    Method                MAE (↓)
                                    CORAL                   5.39
                                    Randomized Bins         4.55
                                    MWR                     4.37
                                    MiVOLO                  4.23
                                    Ours                    3.83


A.2   O BJECT COUNT SORTING ON ON CLEVR DATASET.

The CLEVR dataset (Johnson et al., 2017) is often used to assess complex relational understanding,
such as answering questions like “Are there an equal number of large things and metal spheres?”
in a visual question-answering context. Here, we focus on a simple yet general counting task by
counting instances that match the queried attribute. Specifically, we train and evaluate the model’s
ranking ability based on the counts of three attributes: color (8 colors), material (2 materials), and
shape (3 shapes), using a single model. For example, we use the prompt “Sort images by the
number of objects in red.” to order images by the number of red objects. To the best of
our knowledge, no existing benchmark aligns with our setting, so we use CLIP and InstructBLIP (Dai
et al., 2023) for comparison. As demonstrated in Table 8, our approach effectively ranks images
based on the queried attributes, outperforming both the CLIP baseline and InstructBLIP. Figure 6
further illustrates the quantitative results for queries based on different attributes.

B     M ORE EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1   O BJECT COUNT SORTING RELATIVE TO SPECIFIC COUNTS

Sorting images based on the counts of a queried object is a straightforward way to assess model
performance. However, our method is viable for sorting images by relevance to other specified counts
of a queried object.
To validate this, we conduct an experiment where, during training, we randomly sample a reference
count n and adjust the target values to reflect the distance between the actual object count and n. For
instance, given a batch with images containing [0, 3, 5, 10] dogs and a reference count of 4, the target
values for ranking become [4, 1, 1, 6].
Figure 7 shows that with a query of “0 dogs,” images without dogs are ranked highest, followed
by images with 2, 4, and 8 dogs. Similarly, for queries like “3 dogs” or “6 dogs,” the sorting
results match our expectations.

B.2   C OMPARISONS WITH GENERAL V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

General-purpose vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in solving
tasks via a visual-question-answering paradigm. In this study, we evaluate their performance on
ranking tasks, specifically testing InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023) across all tasks and VILA-VLM (Ke
et al., 2023) on the object count sorting task (Table 2). The text prompt used for each task is as
follows:


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 8: Object Count Sorting Results on the CLEVR Dataset.

                                                  Color               Material         Shape
      Method               Backbone        PLCC      SRCC           PLCC    SRCC    PLCC          SRCC
      CLIP (baseline)      ConvNext-L      0.263      0.258         0.267   0.256   0.255         0.247
      InstructBLIP         ViT-g/14        0.194      0.170         0.332   0.315   0.584         0.548
      Ours                 ConvNext-L      0.992      0.836         0.992   0.981   0.993         0.966



   color
 in yellow
              n=6            n=5            n=4               n=3            n=2            n=1


 color in
  purple
              n=6            n=2            n=1               n=1            n=0            n=0


 shape in
   cube
              n=4            n=4            n=3               n=3            n=2            n=2


material in
  metal
              n=7            n=6            n=3               n=2            n=2            n=0


Figure 6: Quantitative examples of querying objects by different attributes. Images are ordered
from high matching score to low matching score according to related query attributes.


       • Object count sorting: “How many {category} in the image? Answer in
         a number.”
       • Image quality assessment:        “How is the photography quality of the
         image? Answer in a number from 1 to 10.”
       • Facial age estimation: “How old is the person in the image? Answer
         in a number.”
       • Historical colored image dating: “When was this image taken (from 1930s
         to 1970s)? Answer in a number.”

For facial age estimation and HCI datasets, where ground truth labels are ordinal labels, we post-
process the generated text into bins as defined by Wang et al. (2023d). As shown in Table 9, while
InstructBLIP performs well in facial age estimation, it struggles with tasks such as image quality
assessment and determining a photo’s decade.

B.3    T RAINING THE RANKING ADAPTER ACROSS MULTIPLE TASKS

Our method uses a learning-to-rank framework, leveraging text-driven visual differences for image
ranking, which enables training across multiple tasks with diverse text queries. As shown in Table 10,
the model trained on multiple tasks simultaneously achieves competitive performance compared
to those trained on individual tasks. While there is a trade-off between task generalization and
task-specific optimization — where diverse queries could slightly reduce individual task performance
— this is balanced by the model’s flexibility and its ability to handle multiple attributes across various


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Sort images by its relevance to 0 dog.                                                   Sort images by its relevance to 0 cat.


 n.dog=0       n.dog=0        n.dog=2             n.dog=4            n.dog=9             n.cat=0              n.cat=0            n.cat=0            n.cat=3         n.dog=7


 Sort images by its relevance to 3 dog.                                                   Sort images by its relevance to 3 cat.


 n.dog=4       n.dog=2        n.dog=0             n.dog=0            n.dog=9             n.cat=3              n.cat=0            n.cat=0            n.cat=0         n.dog=7


 Sort images by its relevance to 6 dog.                                                   Sort images by its relevance to 6 cat.


 n.dog=9       n.dog=4        n.dog=2             n.dog=0            n.dog=0             n.cat=7              n.cat=3            n.cat=0            n.cat=0         n.dog=0


Figure 7: Quantitative examples of queried by specific category relevant to specific counts.
Images are ordered from high matching score to low matching score with respect to the text query.


                                        Table 9: Comparison with general VLM methods.

                                                                  Object count sorting                           KonIQA-10k                         Adience              HCI
     Method                      Backbone                         PLCC              SRCC                      PLCC               SRCC                 MAE                MAE
     CLIP (baseline)             ConvNext-L                       0.251                0.422                   0.245             0.216                  0.80             1.48
     InstructBLIP                ViT-g/14                         0.509                0.485                   0.211             0.163                  0.41             0.96
     Ours                        ConvNext-L                       0.624                0.557                   0.919             0.911                  0.36             0.32


Table 10: Comparison between training on individual tasks and simultaneous training on
multiple tasks. Red and blue numbers denote the top two scores.

                                                              HCI              Adience                  KonIQ-10k                           Object count sorting
            Training on                                     MAE (↓)            MAE (↓)             PLCC (↑)             SRCC (↑)           PLCC (↑)           SRCC (↑)
            individual (HCI)                                  0.31              1.50                0.013                0.030             −0.069             −0.046
            individual (Adience)                              2.25              0.36                0.044                0.061             −0.001             0.036
            individual (KonIQ-10k)                            2.57              2.05                0.919                0.911             0.047              0.064
            individual (Object count sorting)                 2.99              4.09                0.044                0.065             0.624              0.557
            mixed                                             0.36              0.43                0.881                0.876              0.657              0.575


Table 11: Ablation for the different number of relational tokens in the ranking-aware module.

                                                            HCI                KonIQ-10k                    Object count sorting
                                        #tokens             MAE           PLCC           SRCC               PLCC                 SRCC
                                           1            0.321          0.9182          0.9104               0.6003           0.5211
                                           4            0.343          0.9172          0.9087               0.6197           0.5483
                                           9            0.321          0.9173          0.9087               0.6167           0.5451
                                          16            0.313          0.9194          0.9107               0.6242           0.5571


domains. This offers a broader quantitative understanding across diverse scenarios and enables us to
explore image ranking by multiple attributes simultaneously.


B.4        E FFECT OF THE NUMBER OF RELATIONAL TOKENS IN RANKING - AWARE ATTENTION

Table 11 presents an ablation study on the impact of using different numbers of relational tokens
M in the ranking-aware attention module of our ranking adapter. The results indicate that M = 16
yields the best average performance, and we use this as the default setting for all other experiments.

                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 12: Ablation for the different visual backbones and image resolution.

                                                  Object count sorting   KonIQA-10k (MOS)   HCI    Adience
        Backbone     #params   Image resolution   PLCC         SRCC      PLCC     SRCC      MAE     MAE
        ViT-B/16      87M           224           0.574        0.497     0.929    0.911     0.45    0.39
        ConvNext-B    89M           224           0.546        0.480     0.926    0.904     0.44    0.39
        ConvNext-L   198M           224           0.592        0.520     0.920    0.900     0.41    0.40
        ConvNext-L   198M           320           0.624        0.557     0.919    0.911     0.32    0.36


B.5   E FFECT OF DIFFERENT VISUAL BACKBONE AND IMAGE RESOLUTION

Table 12 presents the effect of using different visual encoders and image resolutions among different
tasks. The results demonstrate that our proposed method performs well across different backbones
and image resolutions, with larger backbones and higher resolutions yielding improved performance.

C     C HALLENGES AND FAILURE C ASES

Although the COCO-REM dataset refines the annotations of the COCO dataset, labeling densely
packed objects remains challenging, often resulting in incorrect counts. A “crowded” flag is used to
indicate densely packed objects. Figure 8 displays several challenging cases for our ranking adapter.
Our model accurately assigns higher scores to images with a “crowded” flag for the object count
sorting task, indicating accurate counts far exceeding the annotated counts. Such a “crowded” flag
is typical in categories such as “Person”, “Food”, and “Animals”, etc. This result highlights the
advantage of using a ranking paradigm for quantitative comprehension, as it better tolerates noisy
labels without directly pairing incorrect values with images. However, our model struggles with
identifying icons or paintings as objects, such as cats painted on a bus or apples on a tablecloth, as in
Figure 8(a).
In the image quality/aesthetics assessment task in Figure 8(b), the model’s ranking results closely align
with subjective “MOS” scores. Nonetheless, some images with similar content receive significantly
different subjective scores, while our model will have similar scores to these images, such as the
flower examples in Figure 8(b).

D     M ORE Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

As shown in Figure 9, we evaluate our ranking adapter on unseen categories using the LVIS dataset,
which includes more categories than the COCO dataset. The model maintains its ability to rank target
objects, such as butterflies, when the target categories are not coupled with others in the dataset.
Performance drops drastically for categories like deer, which often appears with zebra or giraffe, or
lemon, which is frequently found with apple or orange. Moreover, our model struggles with counting
objects in images taken with a depth of field, such as those containing pillows.
For image aesthetics assessment, we apply our ranking adapter to the AGIQA-3k dataset, which
includes generated artworks from various image generative models using the same prompt. As shown
in Figure 10, we sample five images from the highest to lowest MOS at the same interval, finding that
our model shows high agreement with subjective scores.

E     Q UERY BY M ULTIPLE ATTRIBUTES

Our proposed method can rank images on different tasks and with various attributes, making evalu-
ating its performance with multiple attributes intriguing. However, combining two attributes into a
single caption can cause issues: 1) it is difficult to determine which attribute the model focuses on
more, and 2) how to determine the ground truth is unclear. Still, we explore the potential of our pro-
posed method by evaluating images on the AVA dataset and AGIQA-3k dataset qualitatively. When
combining multiple attributions, we use separate captions for each attribute to generate individual
scores, normalize these scores, and then multiply them to rank images by both attributes. As shown in
Figure 11, the top-5 and bottom-5 images retrieved by our method are highly reasonable. Additionally,


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           by cat                                           by person


 Ground
  Truth
          n=9      n=2         n=2         n=1           n=26        n=14         n=11      n=1
   Ours


                          by apple                                          by bottle
Ground
 Truth


          n=194    n=11        n=1         n=1           n=30        n=18         n=14      n=6
  Ours


                                      (a) Object Count Sorting Task
                                                 AVA dataset
Ground
 Truth
  Ours


                                                 KonIQ-10k
Ground
 Truth
  Ours


                                     (b) Image Quality/Aesthetics Task

Figure 8: Examples of challenging cases.. The top row shows images ordered by annotated counts,
and the bottom row shows images ordered by our model. a) For images in the COCO-REM dataset,
icons (e.g., cat painting on the bus) may confuse the model, whereas it accurately scores crowded
objects as seen in the examples of “Person”, “Apple”, and “Bottle”. b) For the MOS, as the general
order is similar, some images that have similar patterns (e.g., flowers) may have different preference
scores.
when retrieving images based on an object category and an image property, the results align well with
the query. By adjusting the weight given to different attributes, it is possible to tailor the retrieval
results to favor one attribute over the other, highlighting the potential for future applications.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           By butterfly                                   by deer


          Ground
           Truth
            Ours


                              by egg                                     by lemon
          Ground
           Truth
            Ours


                             by pillow                                 by helicopter
          Ground
           Truth
            Ours


Figure 9: Examples on the LVIS dataset (Gupta et al., 2019). Evaluation of our model on examples
from unseen categories during training. The top row shows images ordered by annotated counts, and
the bottom row shows images ordered by our model.



                   Painted portrait of intense woman,
                              anime style                         Everything is a dream
         Ground
          Truth
          Ours


                        A cosmic universe               A colour portrait of a king, realistic style
         Ground
          Truth
          Ours


                        Panda chef in a kitchen                Logo design of a full moon
         Ground
          Truth
          Ours


Figure 10: Examples on AGIQA-3k (Li et al., 2023a). Comparison of AI-generated artworks in the
AGI3Q dataset based on MOS. The top row shows images ordered by subjective scores from high to
low, and the bottom row shows images ordered by our model.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     MOS / Colorfulness
                                                             Top-5 retrieval


                                                             Last-5 retrieval


                       MOS / Contrast
                                                             Top-5 retrieval


                                                             Last-5 retrieval


                    Contrast / Colorfulness
                                                             Top-5 retrieval


                                                             Last-5 retrieval


Figure 11: Queried by multiple IQA attributes. The scatter plot shows the normalized scores of two
attributes, images with those normalized values above the median highlighted in red and those below
in blue. Examples for the top-5 and last-5 retrievals of MOS/Colorfulness, MOS/Contrast,
and Contrast/Colorfulness.



      AVA
     Dataset



 AGIQA-3k



                                                 (a) MOS / Person


      AVA
     Dataset


 AGIQA-3k


                                              (b) Colorfulness / Person

Figure 12: Queried by multiple attributes across tasks. Examples for the top-5 images retrieved
using two attributes: (a) by MOS and by the number of “person” and (b) by Colorfulness and
by the number of “person”, on the AVA and AGIQA-3k datasets.



                                                    20
