Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RAINING - FREE C AMERA C ONTROL FOR V IDEO G EN -
ERATION

 Chen Hou, Zhibo Chen
 University of Science and Technology of China
 {houchen@mail.,chenzhibo@}ustc.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
         We propose a training-free and robust solution to offer camera movement con-
         trol for off-the-shelf video diffusion models. Unlike previous work, our method
         does not require any supervised finetuning on camera-annotated datasets or self-
         supervised training via data augmentation. Instead, it is plug-and-play with most
         pretrained video diffusion models and can generate camera-controllable videos
         with a single image or text prompt as input. The inspiration for our work comes
         from the layout prior that intermediate latents encode for the generated results,
         thus rearranging noisy pixels in them will cause the output content to relocate
         as well. As camera moving could also be seen as a type of pixel rearrange-
         ment caused by perspective change, videos can be reorganized following spe-
         cific camera motion if their noisy latents change accordingly. Building on this,
         we propose CamTrol, which enables robust camera control for video diffusion
         models. It is achieved by a two-stage process. First, we model image layout
         rearrangement through explicit camera movement in 3D point cloud space. Sec-
         ond, we generate videos with camera motion by leveraging the layout prior of
         noisy latents formed by a series of rearranged images. Extensive experiments
         have demonstrated its superior performance in both video generation and cam-
         era motion alignment compared with other finetuned methods. Furthermore, we
         show the capability of CamTrol to generalize to various base models, as well
         as its impressive applications in scalable motion control, dealing with compli-
         cated trajectories and unsupervised 3D video generation. Videos available at
         https://lifedecoder.github.io/CamTrol/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As a more appealing and content-richer modality, videos differ from images by including an extra
temporal dimension. This temporal aspect provides increased versatility for depicting diverse and
dynamic movements, which can be decomposed into object motion, background transitions, and per-
spective changes. Recent years have witnessed the rapid development and splendid breakthroughs
of video generation with text prompts or images as input instructions (Li et al., 2023; Hong et al.,
2022; Ho et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2024; Blattmann et al., 2023a; Brooks et al.,
2024; Ge et al., 2023; Fei et al., 2023), demonstrating the immense potential of diffusion models to
synthesize realistic videos. While these video generation models have made progress in generating
videos with highly dynamic objects and backgrounds (Zeng et al., 2024; Blattmann et al., 2023a; Li
et al., 2023), most of them fail to provide camera control for the generated videos.
The difficulty of controlling camera motion in videos arises primarily from two aspects. The initial
challenge lies in the inadequacy of annotated data, as most video annotations lack detailed descrip-
tions, particularly about the camera movements. As a result, video generation models trained on
these data often fail to interpret text prompts related to camera motions and generate correct outputs.
One solution to mitigate the data insufficiency problem is to mimic videos with camera movements
through simple data augmentation (Yang et al., 2024a). However, these methods can only handle
simple camera motions like zoom or truck, and have trouble dealing with more complicated ones.
The second challenge is the extra finetuning required for camera control and its inherent limitations.
As camera trajectories could be sophisticated, they sometimes cannot be accurately elaborated us-
ing naive text prompts alone. Common solutions (Wang et al., 2023; He et al., 2024) proposed


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to embed camera parameters into diffusion models through learnable encoders and perform exten-
sive finetuning on large-scale datasets with detailed camera trajectories. However, such datasets as
RealEstate10k (Zhou et al., 2018) and MVImageNet (Yu et al., 2023) are highly limited in scale
and diversity due to the difficulty associated with data collection; in this way, these finetuning meth-
ods demand substantial resources but exhibit limited generalizability to other types of scenes. Lack
of annotations and the constraints of finetuning make camera control a challenging task in video
generations.
In this work, we attempt to address these issues through a training-free solution to offer camera con-
trol for off-the-shelf video diffusion models. We begin by introducing two core observations under-
pinning the idea that video diffusion models can achieve camera movement control in a training-free
manner. First, we find that base video models could produce results with rough camera moves by
integrating specific camera-related text into input prompts, such as camera zooms in or camera pans
right. This simple implementation, though not very accurate and always leading to static or wrong
motions, shows the natural prior knowledge learned by pretrained models about following different
camera trajectories. The other observation is the effectiveness of video models in adapting to 3D
generation tasks. Recent works (Voleti et al., 2024; Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023) find
that leveraging pretrained video models as initialization helps drastically improve the performance
of multi-view generations, demonstrating their strong ability to handle perspective change. The two
crucial observations reveal the hidden power of video models for camera motion control. Therefore,
we seek to find a way to activate this innate ability, as it already exists in the model itself.
We propose CamTrol, which offers camera control for off-the-shelf video diffusion models in a
training-free but robust manner. CamTrol is inspired by the layout prior that noisy latents possess
for the generation results: As pixels in noisy latents change their positions, corresponding rearrange-
ment will also occur in the output, leading to layout modification. Considering camera moves can
also be seen as a type of layout rearrangement, this prior can serve as an effective hint, providing the
video model with information about specific camera motions. Specifically, CamTrol consists of a
two-stage procedure. In stage I, explicit camera movements are modeled in 3D point cloud represen-
tation and produce a series of rendered images indicating specific camera movements. In stage II,
the layout prior of noisy latents is utilized to guide video generations with camera movements. Com-
pared with previous works, CamTrol requires no additional finetuning on camera-annotated datasets,
nor does it need self-supervised training based on data augmentation. Extensive experiments have
demonstrated its superior performance in both video generation quality and camera motion align-
ment against other finetuned methods. Furthermore, we show CamTrol’s capability to generalize to
various base models, as well as its impressive applications in scalable motion control, dealing with
complicated trajectories and unsupervised 3D video generation.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Camera Control for Video Generation While methods aiming to control video foundation mod-
els continue to emerge (Ma et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023), there are few works
exploring how to manipulate the camera motion of generated videos. Earlier works (Hao et al.,
2018) control motion trajectory via warping images through densified sparse flow and pixel fusion.
Similar ideas also appear later in Chen et al. (2023) and Yin et al. (2023). Apart from utilizing optical
flow, two main techniques for implementing video camera control are self-supervised augmentation
or additional finetuning. Yang et al. (2024a) disentangles object motion with camera movement and
incorporates extra layers to embed camera motions, where the model is trained in a self-supervised
manner by augmenting input videos to simulate simple camera movements. He et al. (2024) and
Wang et al. (2023) train additional camera encoders and integrate the outputs into the temporal at-
tention layers of U-Net. Guo et al. (2023) learns new motion patterns via LoRA (Hu et al., 2021)
and finetuning with multiple reference videos.

Noise Prior of Latents in Diffusion Model One of the most natural advantages of diffusion mod-
els comes from its pixel-wise noisy latents formed during the denoising process. These latents have
a strong causal effect on the output and directly determine what the result looks like, meanwhile hav-
ing robust error resilience as they are perturbed by Gaussian noise across different scales. Numerous
works have exploited the convenience of this noise prior to attain controllable generation, such as
image-to-image translation (Meng et al., 2021), pixel-level manipulation (Nichol et al., 2022), im-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      input image 𝑰𝟎                                                             𝑽𝟎   inversion                                     output video 𝑽
     and text prompt 𝒑                                                                                  timestep 𝒕
                               3D Point Cloud Reconstruction
                                                                                 I                N                                        N
            I

    𝒑: A corgi playing
                                                                                 I                                                         N
         ukulele…
                                                                𝑃"%$
                            𝑃"#$
                                                                                 I                                                         N
            D                                𝑃"                                                            text prompt 𝒑
                                                                 rendering
                                   Camera Trajectory [𝐾, 𝑃" ]                    I                         Video Foundation Model          N
         depth
       estimation


                                                                                                                                            …
                                                                                 …


                                                                                                  …
                         stage I: camera motion modeling                                              stage II: noise prior guidance


Figure 1: Pipeline of CamTrol. In stage I, camera movements are modeled through explicit 3D
point cloud. In stage II, the layout prior of noisy latents is utilized to guide video generation.


age inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022) and semantic editing (Choi et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2024).
Recent research has shown that, although sampled from a Gaussian distribution, the initial noise of
the diffusion process still has a significant influence on the layout of generated content (Mao et al.,
2023). In other works, noise prior is used to guarantee temporal consistency between video frames
(Luo et al., 2023), or to trade off between fidelity and diversity of image editing (Kim et al., 2022).

Video Model for 3D Generation Similar to how most video generation models use the ground-
work laid by image foundation models (Blattmann et al., 2023b; Esser et al., 2023; Singer et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2023), the training of 3D generation models also relies heavily on pretrained 2D
video models (Voleti et al., 2024; Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Han
et al., 2024). These methods either finetune with rendered videos directly (Blattmann et al., 2023a;
Chen et al., 2024; Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2024; Han et al., 2024), or add camera embedding as an
extra condition for each view (Voleti et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023). Video foundation models have
been shown to be particularly beneficial in generating consistent multi-view rendering of 3D objects,
demonstrating their inherent and abundant prior knowledge for handling camera pose change.


3       T RAINING - FREE C AMERA C ONTROL FOR V IDEO G ENERATION

CamTrol takes two stages to activate the innate camera control ability hidden in foundation models.
In Sec. 3.1, we will describe how to model explicit camera movement for video generation. In
Sec. 3.2, we will elaborate on video motion control with the guidance of noise layout prior.

3.1       C AMERA M OTION M ODELING

To activate pretrained video diffusion models’ ability to deal with camera perspective changes, hints
of camera motion should be injected into the diffusion model in a proper way. While simply con-
catenating camera trajectories with text prompts is incomprehensible to the original model, previous
works (Wang et al., 2023; He et al., 2024) introduce additional embedders to encode camera pa-
rameters and finetune with limited annotated data (Zhou et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2023), which are
data-hungry yet lack generalization ability. Other methods (Yang et al., 2024a) construct camera
motions by self-supervised augmentations, but can only handle a few easy camera controls. Thus,
we seek a more efficient and robust way to guide the model towards being camera-controllable.
Considering that video perspective changes are originally caused by camera movements in 3D space,
we leverage 3D representation to provide generation models with explicit motion hints. Specifically,
we choose point cloud as the intermediate representation, in which we can easily manipulate cam-
era poses to simulate diverse movements. An additional benefit that point cloud brings is its data
efficiency: By utilizing inpainting techniques, only one single input image is required for the entire
point cloud reconstruction. This eliminates the need of large-scale finetuning.


                                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Point Cloud Initialization We start by lifting pixels in the input image plane into 3D point cloud
space. In practice, the input image can be either user-defined or created by image generators like
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). Given an input image I0 ∈ R3×H×W , we first estimate its
depth map D0 using the off-the-shelf monocular depth estimator ZoeDepth (Bhat et al., 2023). By
combining the image and its depth map, we initialize the point cloud P0 as:
                                       P0 = ϕ([I0 , D0 ], K, P0 ),                                     (1)
where ϕ denotes the mapping function from RGBD to 3D point cloud, K and P0 represent camera’s
intrinsic and extrinsic matrices set by convention (Chung et al., 2023) as they’re usually intractable.

Camera Trajectories To get consistent images from multiple views, we model the camera motion
as a trajectory of extrinsic matrices {P1 , ..., PN −1 }, each including a rotation matrix and a transla-
tion matrix representing camera pose and position. At each step i, we project the point cloud back to
the camera plane using ψ and get a rendered image with perspective change: Ii = ψ(Pi , K, Pi ). By
computing the extrinsic matrices of different movements, we obtain a series of camera motions in-
cluding zoom, tilt, pan, pedestal, truck, roll, and rotation, enabling flexible camera movements. De-
tailed definitions of these movements are provided in Appendix B. Basic trajectories are combined
to produce hybrid camera movements, adding cinematic appeal to the generated videos. Further-
more, benefiting from explicit camera motion modeling, our method can support trajectories with
precise extrinsics, which means it can generate videos with arbitrarily complex camera motions.

Multi-view Consistency When perspective changes, holes can appear as some areas are unoc-
cupied within the point cloud. To obtain more reasonable results, we employ image inpainting
(Rombach et al., 2022) to fill the gaps in new renderings, with a mask distinguishing the known
points from the nonexistent ones. This operation ensures coherence between the known and novel
views in 2D space. After inpainting, the image is lifted back into 3D space and gradually completes
the whole point cloud. During this process, points between adjacent views may become misaligned
since the depth estimator only estimates relative depth, leading to inconsistencies in 3D point cloud
and rendered images. To avoid this situation, we adopt depth coefficient optimization (Chung et al.,
2023) at each step of the camera movement, formed as:
                                                                                 !
                                         X
                        di = argmin            ϕ([Ĩi , dD̃i ], K, Pi ) − Pi−1       ,                 (2)
                                  d       M


where Ĩi and D̃i refer to the inpainted image and the corresponding depth map, respectively, di
denotes the depth coefficient to be optimized, and M refers to the overlapping region between Pi
and Pi−1 , as other areas are not shared for calculating ℓ1 loss.
Thus, we get a set of images that correspond to the input and indicate specific camera movements:

                          {I0 , ..., IN −1 } = {ψ(Pi , K, Pi )|i ∈ [0, N − 1]} .                       (3)

3.2   L AYOUT P RIOR OF N OISE

With camera motion modeling, we obtain a sequence V0 = {I0 , ..., IN −1 } ∈ RN ×3×H×W of ren-
dered images adhering to a specific camera trajectory. Note that the quality of rendered images is not
perfect since a single input image only leads to sparse point cloud reconstruction. Moreover, these
renderings are static, thus they cannot be used directly as video frames. To form an ideal video, we
need to find a way that satisfies three requirements: 1) camera motions should be maintained; 2) the
video should be enriched with more dynamics; and 3) quality imperfection should be compensated.

Camera Motion Inversion Recent work on diffusion models has demonstrated the strong control-
lability of their noisy latents (Meng et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2023), the causality and error-resilience
they possess with respect to the final output make them a convenient yet powerful tool for con-
trollable generation in diffusion models. Particularly for initial noise, even when sampled from a
Gaussian distribution, it still has significant influence on the layout of the generated image (Mao
et al., 2023). For instance, if all pixels in initial noise shift to the right by a certain distance, it is

                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Gaussian(nearly)                        Camera Motion                                Image
                                                  Inversion                                  Distribution


                                                                                             Video
      specific                                                                               Distribution
      layout change
                                                                                          video with
                                                  Video
                                                                                          camera motion
                                                 Generation
             𝑡0 = 𝑇      More diversity                          More fidelity      𝑡0 = 0
                         Less fidelity                           Less diversity
                      latents of            gaussian latents               latents of
                      arranged images       with layout change             video frames


Figure 2: Transition of samples between two distinct distributions. As the layout-arranged im-
ages are inverted by adding random noise, the distribution of their noisy latents will gradually con-
verge to that of their video counterpart (green area), eventually forming a nearly Gaussian latent
with specific layout change. This information is then inherited during the generation process. The
inversion step determines the trade-off between video diversity and motion fidelity.


likely that the generated output reflects a similar shift. This reminds us that the impact of camera
movement on images can also be interpreted as a type of layout rearrangement, where pixels change
their positions due to viewpoint change. In a similar way, videos can be reorganized following
camera motion if their noisy latents change accordingly.
Inspired by this, we first construct a series of noisy latents indicating specific camera movements. It
can be done intuitively by employing diffusion’s inversion process on the rendered image sequence
V0 . Latent at timestep t0 can be calculated as follows, where ᾱt is the variance of the scheduler:
                                   p             p
                            Vt0 = ᾱt0 V0 + 1 − ᾱt0 ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I),                               (4)
Because the rendered images V0 share common pixels in certain regions, their latents are also
correlated to each other in a way reflecting pixel movement. Moreover, by introducing random
noise, blank spaces and flawed regions in V0 can be adaptively completed, providing the video
model with more possibilities to generate and correct them.

Video Generation After camera motion inversion, noisy latents representing camera movements
are then passed through the backward process of the video diffusion model, leveraging their layout
controllability to guide video generation. Using prior knowledge of the base model, the generation
process also infuses the video with rational dynamic information. In this way, explicit camera move-
ments are injected into the video diffusion model in an appropriate, training-free fashion. Starting
from noisy motion latents at timestep t0 , the generation step can be represented as:
                           √         (t)
                                              ! q
          √          Vt − 1 − αt ϵθ (Vt )                            (t)
  V̂t−1 = αt−1                √                 + 1 − αt−1 − σt2 ϵθ (Vt ) + σt ϵ, t ∈ [1, t0 ] . (5)
                                αt
Here ϵθ denotes the video model for noise prediction and σt determines whether the denoising
process is deterministic or probabilistic. We set σ = 1 to encourage diversity in generation process.

Trade-off Between Fidelity and Diversity Leveraging noise prior guidance in diffusion models
could lead to a trade-off between generation fidelity and diversity (Meng et al., 2021; Hou et al.,
2024), where results that are more faithful to the guidance tend to degrade in generation quality. In
this task, similar circumstances also occur, as the model is required to be guided by some imperfect
renderings while generating a reasonable video. The key factor in balancing the trade-off problem
lies in the choice of t0 . When a smaller t0 is applied, the generated output bears more resemblance to
original guidance V0 , but lacks rationality and dynamics to be an appealing video. Instead, a larger
t0 leads to better-generated videos but makes them less aligned with the desired camera motion.
Empirically, we find that a smaller t0 works better for motions with moderate intensity, and for
those with relatively drastic movements, a larger t0 shows preferable performance. The process of
stage II is illustrated in Fig. 2.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative comparisons. Our method attains comparable performance with finetuned
methods in both video generation quality and camera motion alignment.
                                   Video Quality                      Motion Accuracy
  Method
                       FVD ↓ FID ↓ IS ↑ CLIP-SIM ↑ ATE ↓ RPE-T ↓ RPE-R ↓
    SVD                         1107.93           68.51   7.21          0.3095      4.23      1.79       0.021
    MotionCtrl+SVD              810.59            69.03   7.17          0.3076      4.19      1.07       0.012
    CameraCtrl+SVD              951.80            67.59   6.82          0.3138      4.22      1.17       0.013
    CamTrol+SVD                 778.46            68.06   7.05          0.3110      4.17      1.07       0.010
    Reference                      -                -       -              -        3.60      0.89       0.008

    A bedroom with a large bed and a television
          Reference                    SVD                 MotionCtrl            CameraCtrl          CamTrol


Figure 3: Qualitative comparisons with finetuned methods. CamTrol’s outputs align well with
complex trajectories from the reference video, while others fail to capture subtle changes in camera
pose. We provide videos in the supplementary materials for clearer comparison.


4      E XPERIMENTS

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Implementation Details We compare our method with state-of-the-art works including MotionC-
trl (Wang et al., 2023) and CameraCtrl (He et al., 2024). To ensure a fair comparison, we employ
SVD (Blattmann et al., 2023a) as base model for all methods. SVD is originally trained at a res-
olution of 576 × 1024, but SVD-based CameraCtrl only supports 320 × 576. Since changing the
original resolution results in suboptimal generation quality, we use 576 × 1024 for MotionCtrl and
CamTrol, then resize the outputs to 320 × 576 to calculate metrics. For all methods, the number
of frames and the decoding size of SVD are set to 14. We use 25 steps for both the inversion and
generation processes.

Evaluation Details In the quantitative evaluation, FVD (Unterthiner et al., 2018), FID (Heusel
et al., 2017) and IS (Saito et al., 2020) are used to assess video generation quality, and CLIPSIM
(Wu et al., 2021) quantifies the similarity between the generated video and the input prompt. For
camera motion accuracy, we adopt ParticleSFM(Zhao et al., 2022) to estimate camera trajectories
from generated videos, with the use of Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) to measure their differences
from the ground truth. Relative Pose Error (RPE) is calculated to assess how well the relative mo-
tions between consecutive frames match the expected ones, including their translation (RPE-T) and
rotation component (RPE-R). Specifically, we randomly sample 500 prompt-trajectory pairs from
RealEstate10k (Zhou et al., 2018), and use them as references for calculating FVD and FID. Since
SVD is an image-to-video model, we generate the first frames using Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) based on text prompts. We also provide the results produced by vanilla SVD as a ref-
erence. For camera motion accuracy, we provide the evaluations on ground truth videos as a lower
bound of these metrics.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Table 2: Computational analysis of inference process, evaluated under unified settings.
                                         SVD MotionCtrl CameraCtrl CamTrol (t0 = 15)
                Max GPU memory(MB)                   11542    31702   26208                   11542
                                pre-process               -     -       -                        56
                Time (s)
                                 inference               11    32      42                         8

              A backyard with a patio and an umbrella.
  Reference


                                                                                                 Zoom Out

                                                                         A person , black shirt, is typing on a keyboard...
 MotionCtrl
 CameraCtrl
 CamTrol


                                      (a) general scenes                                   (b) dynamics


Figure 4: Generalization comparisons. CamTrol can avoid domain collapse that arises from over-
fitting on certain datasets and adapt to more general scenes (Left), meanwhile preserving video’s
dynamics while adhering to desired camera movements (Right).


4.2           C OMPARISONS WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ART M ETHODS

Quantitative Evaluation Quantitative evaluations are shown in Table 1. In the table, the best re-
sults are in bold, and the second best are underlined. The performance of vanilla SVD (without mo-
tion control) is denoted as SVD, while the lower bound for motion metrics, provided by ground truth
videos, is denoted as Reference. In terms of video quality, CamTrol attains performance comparable
to methods finetuned on the RealEstate10k dataset. For motion accuracy, CamTrol also achieves the
lowest score in ATE and RPE-T/R. The quantitative evaluations demonstrate CamTrol’s ability to
generate videos with both accurate camera motion and high visual quality.

Qualitative Analysis Qualitative comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 3. The reference trajectory in-
cludes zoom, pan, and roll. While MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl fail to capture subtle camera motions,
resulting in simple pan movements, CamTrol is able to follow the complex trajectory and generate
videos with correct motion. We also evaluate the generalizability of different methods in generating
more general scenes and dynamic content. The results are shown in Fig. 4. Since both MotionCtrl
and CameraCtrl are finetuned on limited scenes (i.e., real estate videos) with static content, they have
difficulty generalizing to other scenes, such as videos in non-realistic styles or videos that include
people. As illustrated in Fig. 4, their motion controls in both situations are misaligned with the in-
tended movements. Furthermore, finetuning on such datasets leads to a loss of dynamics, which is a
crucial element in video generation. In comparison, CamTrol preserves most of the prior knowledge
from video base models, enabling it to handle general scenes as well as generate dynamic content.
Relevant videos are available in the supplementary materials.

Computational Analysis We provide the computational analysis in Table 2, including the maxi-
mum GPU memory required and the processing time for all methods during inference. Evaluations
are conducted under unified settings. We test at a resolution of 576 × 320 with 25 generation steps.
The number of frames and the decoding size of SVD are set to 14. As a training-free method,


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       +′camera rotates around it.’                                +‘camera zooms out’.


                               +CamTrol                                                 +CamTrol
    A cute                                                Young wizard
 ceramic cat,                                            swings the wand,
      …                                                         …


Figure 5: Comparison with base model. Controlling camera motion via prompt engineering rarely
succeeds. Instead, CamTrol offers robust control to video’s camera movements.

           3d model bulky purple mecha with missiles …       A majestic mountain range under the cloak of night …
Before
After


Figure 6: Effectiveness of layout prior. Layout prior guidance compensates for the voids (Left)
and static elements (Right) in point cloud.


CamTrol requires no extra GPU memory during the inference process compared to the base model.
This saves 10-20GB of GPU memory compared to other methods under the same circumstances,
allowing it to run on a single RTX 3090. The major consumption of CamTrol comes from rendering
multi-view images. Since this process is temporally sequential, i.e., t0 → t1 → t2 , a more par-
allelized approach may improve time efficiency. The results for 576 × 1024 resolution and more
detailed settings can be found in the Appendix.


4.3      A BLATION S TUDY

Comparison to Base Model To demonstrate that the changes in camera motion are attributed to
our method rather than the innate capability of the video model, we conduct an ablation study to
evaluate its effectiveness. We add prompts describing specific camera movements (e.g. zooms out)
and let the video model interpret them on its own. The results are presented in Fig. 5. It can be
observed that, even when provided with prompts indicating how the camera should move, the base
model fails to produce correct results. In contrast, CamTrol is able to implement the designated
motion control without any instructions from text prompts. In Table 1, the comparisons with vanilla
SVD also demonstrate CamTrol’s effectiveness.


Effectiveness of Layout Prior We conduct an ablation study to validate the effectiveness of layout
prior guidance, demonstrating its necessity in two aspects: the completeness of missing areas and
the dynamics of the generated video. In Fig. 6, we showcase frames before and after applying noise
prior guidance. As camera pose changes, there are regions left unfilled in the point cloud, leading to
blank spaces in rendered images (left part); Additionally, due to the static nature of point cloud, the
rendered images remain stationary (right part). Layout prior guidance compensates for these flaws,
ultimately producing videos with inpainted gaps and natural dynamics.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Table 3: Quantitative effect of t0 .
                                            Video Quality                         Motion Accuracy
             t0
                            FVD ↓          FID ↓ IS ↑ CLIP-SIM ↑ ATE ↓ RPE-T ↓ RPE-R ↓
             t0 = 20       1079.88         68.52       7.14    0.3100                4.17           1.09           0.012
             t0 = 15       778.46          68.06       7.05    0.3110                4.17           1.07           0.010
             t0 = 10       754.14          67.98       7.00    0.3107                4.13           1.02           0.008

              Child in jeans and boots walking in the woods…                   Figurine of Superman raise his arms, on a base…
  𝑡0 = 25


                                                                   scale I
  𝑡0 = 15


                                                                   scale II
                                                                   scale III
  𝑡0 = 5


Figure 7: Effect of t0 . Larger t0 encourages                   Figure 8: 3D rotation videos at different mo-
dynamics while smaller t0 preserves camera                      tion scales. CamTrol supports camera move-
movements (Pedestal Down).                                      ments across multiple scales.


Effect of Timestep t0 t0 is a crucial factor that influences the trade-off between generated video’s
diversity and its faithfulness to camera motion requirements. To investigate its effect on the output,
we conduct experiments with various t0 values, the relevant results are shown in Fig. 7. As illus-
trated, videos generated with smaller t0 tend to conform better to camera motion requirements, but
suffer from decreased dynamics; On the other hand, larger t0 leads to more plausible generations
but fails to meet camera’s requirements, since the latents at these timesteps carry more random-
ness. We also provide quantitative evaluations for different t0 values in Table 3. As t0 decreases,
CamTrol produces videos resembling static, camera-moving scenes (which have lower FVD as we
use RealEstate10k as the reference videos) with higher accuracy in motion control.

Generalization to Diverse Situations Our proposed CamTrol can be seamlessly integrated into
various scenarios, accommodating different base models, resolutions, and generation lengths, all in
a training-free style. We present visual results of its applications under different settings, including
CogVideoX (Yang et al., 2024b) (diffusion transformer model, 720 × 480 resolution, 49 frames) and
VideoFusion (Luo et al., 2023) (decomposed diffusion process, 128 × 128 resolution, 16 frames), in
Fig. 10. Our approach remains effective when applied to alternative video base models, resolutions,
and generation lengths, demonstrating its strong robustness and generalizability.

4.4         F URTHER A PPLICATIONS

3D Rotation Videos One of the main advantages of our method is that it can generate videos
with rotating movements and produce outputs similar to those of 3D generation models (Voleti
et al., 2024; Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2024). While these 3D models require large-scale training on 3D
datasets and can only handle inputs in specific styles, our approach is capable of dealing with any
type of image and achieving this in a completely zero-shot manner. An example is shown in Fig. 8.

Hybrid and Complex Camera Movements By combining basic camera trajectories,
CamTrol can support hybrid camera movements and produce videos with cinematic appeal. In
addition, explicit motion modeling equips CamTrol with the ability to handle trajectories of precise
extrinsics, allowing it to generate videos with arbitrarily complicated camera movements. Relevant
results can be found at https://lifedecoder.github.io/CamTrol/.


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  A snow-capped mountain peak towers above a tranquil alpine lake, mirrored perfectly in its glassy surface.


                                                     Zoom In                        Pan Left                             Tilt Up



                     Input


                                                    Zoom Out                        Pan Right                           Tilt Down


Figure 9: Multi-trajectory video generation. CamTrol is able to generate videos with different
camera motions for the same scene.

             A detailed wooden toy ship sails on blue carpet that mimics sea…                  Vaporwave synthwave style Los Angeles street…
 Rotate CW


                                                                                    Tilt Up
             An elderly man sits at the water‘s edge, engrossed in his artwork…                  A construction worker looking down at city…


                                                                                    Zoom Out
 Hybrid


                                     (a) CogVideoX-2b                                                   (b) VideoFusion


Figure 10: Applied to CogVideoX (Yang et al., 2024b) and VideoFusion (Luo et al., 2023).
CamTrol can be plug-and-play under various situations, accommodating different base models, dif-
ferent resolutions, different generation lengths, all in a training-free manner.


Multi-trajectory Video Generation One natural application of our method is to generate multi-
trajectory videos for a single scene. Since the point cloud remains fixed once the reconstruction
has finished, the spatial consistency between different trajectories is guaranteed, making it easy to
produce multiple camera-moving videos of the same scene. We demonstrate this application in Fig.
9. More results on multi-trajectory video generation can be found in the supplementary materials.

Camera Motion at Different Scales CamTrol supports camera movements at controllable scales.
By specifying different magnitudes of the camera’s extrinsic matrix, the rendered images will ex-
hibit varying degrees of motion, resulting in videos with distinct scales of camera movements. This
further demonstrates the powerful controllability of CamTrol and provides a new pathway for cus-
tomized camera control of video generation. We provide relevant visualization in Fig. 8.

5            C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a training-free and robust method CamTrol to offer camera control for
off-the-shelf video diffusion models. It consists of a two-stage procedure, including explicit camera
motion modeling in 3D point cloud space and video generation utilizing the layout prior of noisy
latents. Compared to previous works, CamTrol does not require additional finetuning on camera-
annotated datasets or self-supervised training via data augmentation. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate its superior performance in both generation quality and motion alignment against other
state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we show the ability of CamTrol to generalize to various
scenarios, as well as its impressive applications including unsupervised generation of 3D video,
scalable motion control, and dealing with complicated camera trajectories.


                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Shariq Farooq Bhat, Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, Peter Wonka, and Matthias Müller. Zoedepth: Zero-
  shot transfer by combining relative and metric depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12288, 2023.
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023b.
T Brooks, B Peebles, C Homes, W DePue, Y Guo, L Jing, D Schnurr, J Taylor, T Luhman, E Luh-
  man, et al. Video generation models as world simulators, 2024.
Tsai-Shien Chen, Chieh Hubert Lin, Hung-Yu Tseng, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Motion-
  conditioned diffusion model for controllable video synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14404,
  2023.
Zilong Chen, Yikai Wang, Feng Wang, Zhengyi Wang, and Huaping Liu. V3d: Video diffusion
  models are effective 3d generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06738, 2024.
Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Con-
  ditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14367–14376, 2021.
Jaeyoung Chung, Suyoung Lee, Hyeongjin Nam, Jaerin Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Luciddreamer:
  Domain-free generation of 3d gaussian splatting scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13384, 2023.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Germani-
  dis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7346–7356, 2023.
Hao Fei, Shengqiong Wu, Wei Ji, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Empowering dynamics-
  aware text-to-video diffusion with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13812,
  2023.
Ruoyu Feng, Wenming Weng, Yanhui Wang, Yuhui Yuan, Jianmin Bao, Chong Luo, Zhibo Chen,
  and Baining Guo. Ccedit: Creative and controllable video editing via diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.16496, 2023.
Songwei Ge, Seungjun Nah, Guilin Liu, Tyler Poon, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, David Jacobs,
  Jia-Bin Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yogesh Balaji. Preserve your own correlation: A noise prior for
  video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 22930–22941, 2023.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
  Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image dif-
  fusion models without specific tuning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Junlin Han, Filippos Kokkinos, and Philip Torr. Vfusion3d: Learning scalable 3d generative models
  from video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12034, 2024.
Zekun Hao, Xun Huang, and Serge Belongie. Controllable video generation with sparse trajectories.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7854–
  7863, 2018.
Hao He, Yinghao Xu, Yuwei Guo, Gordon Wetzstein, Bo Dai, Hongsheng Li, and Ceyuan
  Yang. Cameractrl: Enabling camera control for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.02101, 2024.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868, 2022.
Chen Hou, Guoqiang Wei, and Zhibo Chen. High-fidelity diffusion-based image editing. In Pro-
  ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 2184–2192, 2024.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.
Xin Li, Wenqing Chu, Ye Wu, Weihang Yuan, Fanglong Liu, Qi Zhang, Fu Li, Haocheng Feng,
  Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang. Videogen: A reference-guided latent diffusion approach for
  high definition text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00398, 2023.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04761, 2023.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10209–10218, 2023.
Ze Ma, Daquan Zhou, Chun-Hsiao Yeh, Xue-She Wang, Xiuyu Li, Huanrui Yang, Zhen Dong, Kurt
  Keutzer, and Jiashi Feng. Magic-me: Identity-specific video customized diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.09368, 2024.
Jiafeng Mao, Xueting Wang, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Guided image synthesis via initial image editing
   in diffusion model. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp.
   5321–5329, 2023.
Luke Melas-Kyriazi, Iro Laina, Christian Rupprecht, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Oran Gafni,
  and Filippos Kokkinos. Im-3d: Iterative multiview diffusion and reconstruction for high-quality
  3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08682, 2024.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Masaki Saito, Shunta Saito, Masanori Koyama, and Sosuke Kobayashi. Train sparsely, generate
 densely: Memory-efficient unsupervised training of high-resolution temporal gan. International
 Journal of Computer Vision, 128(10-11):2586–2606, 2020.

Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16512, 2023.

Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.

Vikram Voleti, Chun-Han Yao, Mark Boss, Adam Letts, David Pankratz, Dmitry Tochilkin, Chris-
  tian Laforte, Robin Rombach, and Varun Jampani. Sv3d: Novel multi-view synthesis and 3d
  generation from a single image using latent video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12008,
  2024.

Zhouxia Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xintao Wang, Tianshui Chen, Menghan Xia, Ping Luo, and Ying
  Shan. Motionctrl: A unified and flexible motion controller for video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.03641, 2023.

Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and
  Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.14806, 2021.

Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu,
  Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion
  models for text-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 7623–7633, October 2023.

Shiyuan Yang, Liang Hou, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, Xiaodong Chen,
  and Jing Liao. Direct-a-video: Customized video generation with user-directed camera movement
  and object motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03162, 2024a.

Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang,
  Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models
  with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072, 2024b.

Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Jie Shi, Houqiang Li, Gong Ming, and Nan Duan. Drag-
  nuwa: Fine-grained control in video generation by integrating text, image, and trajectory. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.08089, 2023.

Xianggang Yu, Mutian Xu, Yidan Zhang, Haolin Liu, Chongjie Ye, Yushuang Wu, Zizheng Yan,
  Chenming Zhu, Zhangyang Xiong, Tianyou Liang, et al. Mvimgnet: A large-scale dataset of
  multi-view images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 9150–9161, 2023.

Yan Zeng, Guoqiang Wei, Jiani Zheng, Jiaxin Zou, Yang Wei, Yuchen Zhang, and Hang Li. Make
  pixels dance: High-dynamic video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.

Wang Zhao, Shaohui Liu, Hengkai Guo, Wenping Wang, and Yong-Jin Liu. Particlesfm: Exploiting
 dense point trajectories for localizing moving cameras in the wild. In European Conference on
 Computer Vision, pp. 523–542. Springer, 2022.

Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
  Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09817, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       M ORE R ESULTS ON C AMERA C ONTROL
We present additional qualitative results of CamTrol on our demo page:
https://lifedecoder.github.io/CamTrol/
This demo page includes CamTrol-generated videos including basic camera motions (including
Zoom, Tilt, Pan, Pedestal, Truck, Roll, Rotate, Hybrid, Complicated, detailed definitions are in
Appendix B), hybrid motions (Zoom In first, then Pedestal Up, Zoom Out + Pedestal Up + Truck
Left + Tilt Down + Pan Right), and complicated motions generated from precise camera extrinsics
(extracted from RealEstate10k (Zhou et al., 2018)).
In addition, it contains 3D rotation videos generated unsupervised from video base models (both
objects and scenes). These outputs share similarities with those of 3D generation models, as they all
exhibit in a turning-table-like way, with the camera rotating around objects. The difference here is
that the 3D model, as trained on specific datasets, can only generate outputs in certain styles, e.g.,
single static object with no background. Instead, our model can handle arbitrary images as input
and generate rotating videos with appropriate dynamics. From this perspective, our method could
be seen as an infinite source of 3D data. By employing our method with stronger backbones, video
foundation models could truly become the largest source of 3D data, as they should be.
Furthermore, it contains additional results discussed in ablation studies, e.g., controlling camera
motions at different scales, and the effectiveness of using layout prior compared with the raw output
given by the video base model.

B       D EFINITIONS OF BASIC C AMERA M OTIONS
We refer to the terminology in cinematography to describe different camera motions, the definitions
of each type are detailed in Table 5.
To obtain consistent images from multiple views, we set camera motion as a trajectory of extrinsic
matrices {P1 , ..., PN −1 }, each consisting of a rotation matrix and a translation matrix, representing
the camera pose and position. For hybrid motions, CamTrol supports both spatial (i.e., performing
several basic motions simultaneously) and temporal (i.e., concatenating basic motions sequentially)
combinations. In the case of complicated trajectories, one can directly use precise parameters for
camera’s extrinsic matrix as input to control video’s motion. Additionally, if these parameters are
not available, a reference video with corresponding move can also serve as input. With the help of
SFM algorithms (e.g., COLMAP 1 , ParticleSFM (Zhao et al., 2022)), camera motion can be easily
estimated and used for imitation. In this sense, CamTrol can also be seen as an unsupervised method
to achieve video motion transfer.

C       V ISUAL C OMPARISONS WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ARTS
Sec. 3 showcases some qualitative comparisons between CamTrol and different state-of-the-art ap-
proaches. For better visualization and comparison, we provide more video results in the supplemen-
tary materials.

D       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
For text prompt input, we use Stable Diffusion v2-1 2 or Stable Diffusion XL 3 to generate the initial
image. The inpainting model we apply is Stable Diffusion inpainting model proposed by Runway
4
  , and the backward step of inpainting is set to 25. We use ZeoDepth 5 as depth estimation model.
The classifier-free guidance scale follows the default setting of the base models themselves. We use
    1
      https://github.com/colmap/colmap
    2
      https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1
    3
      https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0
    4
      https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting
    5
      https://github.com/isl-org/ZoeDepth


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 4: Computational analysis of on 576 × 1024.
                                        SVD MotionCtrl CameraCtrl CamTrol (t0 = 15)
           Max GPU memory(MB)              34236        71096            -               34236
                         pre-process         -             -             -                 149
           Time (s)
                          inference         32            54             -                  22


Table 5: Definitions of camera motions. We adopt the terminology from cinematography to de-
scribe different camera movements.
  Camera Motion         Directions                        Definition
                                  In
            Zoom                                      Camera moves towards or away from a subject.
                                  Out
                                  Up
             Tilt                                  Rotating the camera vertically from a fixed position.
                                 Down
                                 Left
             Pan                                  Rotating the camera horizontally from a fixed position.
                                 Right
                                  Up
          Pedestal                                      Moving the camera vertically in its entirety.
                                 Down
                                 Left
            Truck                                     Moving the camera horizontally in its entirety.
                                 Right
                             Clockwise
             Roll                                Rotating the camera in its entirety in a horizontal manner.
                            Anticlockwise
                             Clockwise
           Rotate                                          Moving the camera around a subject.
                            Anticlockwise

           Hybrid           Combinations           Spatial and temporal combinations of basic motions.

        Complicated            Arbitrary          Camera extrinsic matrices or reference videos as input.



SVD’s default setting of 6 fps for video generation, and process reference videos to 6 fps for FVD
and FID calculations. The complete procedure of CamTrol is elucidated in Algorithm 1.
For computational analysis, we set both the number of frames and the decoding size to 14, and the
generation steps to 25. We do not apply xformers in any of the approaches. The computational
analysis at 576 × 1024 resolution is shown in Table 4. SVD-based CameraCtrl only supports a
resolution at 320 × 576.


E        C HOICE OF 3D R EPRESENTATION

In Sec. 3.1, we designate point cloud as the intermediate 3D representation for explicit camera
motion modeling. Doubts may arise as to why we do not use a more complex 3D representation
which might be more useful. Here we take the most prevalent 3D representation–3D Gaussian
Splatting 6 , as an example to elaborate on the benefits of using point cloud in three aspects:
Firstly, concerning the input, point cloud is able to construct the entire scene from one single input
image combining techniques of depth estimation and inpainting. GS, though also an explicit 3D
representation, requires optimization based on images from different views, which means it is neither
capable of handling single input image, nor can it leverage 2D inpainting to gradually complete the
scene.
    6
        https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/


                                                          15
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 1: Training-free camera control for video generation
     Input: Text prompt p, camera motion P, input image I0 (optional).
     // Stage I: Camera Motion Modeling:
 1 for i=1,...,N-1 do
 2     Ĩi = inpainting(Ii−1 , Pi , p) ;
 3     D̃i = depth(Ĩi ) ;
 4     while not converged  Pdo
 5          di = argmind       M ϕ([Ĩi , dD̃i ], K, Pi ) − Pi−1
 6    end
 7    Pi = ϕ([Ĩi , di D̃i ], K, Pi ) ;
 8    Ii = ψ(Pi , K, Pi ) ;
 9 end

     // Stage II: Layout Prior Generation:
                 N −1
10 V0 ← {Ii }i=0 ;
11 Sample random noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) ;
                           √             √
12 Motion inversion Vt0 ←    ᾱt0 V0 + 1 − ᾱt0 ϵ ;
13 for t=t0 ,...,1 do
                            √
                   √                 (t)
                        Vt − 1−αt ϵθ (Vt )     p                 (t)
14     Vt−1 ← αt−1              √
                                  αt         +   1 − αt−1 − σt2 ϵθ (Vt ) + σt ϵ
15   end



     Secondly, from the aspect of time, point cloud can directly lift 2D points onto 3D spaces, while
     3DGS demands optimization for each scenario. As a training-free approach, our method takes al-
     most no time to generate a video after multi-view images are acquired, but would need more time if
     3DGS were applied.
     Lastly, from the task itself, the goal of stage I is not to precisely reconstruct the 3D scene but rather
     to offer a rough layout guidance. In this context, rendered images from point cloud are sufficiently
     qualified, and no further refinement of the 3D reconstruction is necessary.
     From the analysis, point cloud is quite qualified serving as a rough layout guidance in a relatively
     quick speed, without any further optimization or redundant multi-view images as input. The use of
     point cloud allows our algorithm to be completely training-free, while still being able to produce
     camera-moving videos quickly with only one single image or text prompt as input.

     F     D ETAILS ABOUT G ENERATING 3D ROTATION V IDEOS

     3D generation models (Voleti et al., 2024; Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
     2024; Han et al., 2024) are trained on highly-regulated 3D datasets, these datasets are hard to collect,
     and include only a limited variety of data types (e.g., single static objects with no background). As
     a consequence, 3D generation models exhibit a very constrained output distribution and can only
     produce results in certain styles. CamTrol avoids these problems of arduous data collection, labori-
     ous finetuning, and output collapse by utilizing the layout prior hidden in video foundation models.
     Not only does it require no training, but this advantage also benefits CamTrol from inheriting most
     of the prior knowledge inside video foundation models, such as the diversity of scenarios, the dy-
     namics of moving objects, temporal consistency, etc. Thus, CamTrol is able to generate dynamic
     3D content, both objects and scenes, in a totally unsupervised and training-free manner, this is what
     other methods cannot achieve yet.
     Compared with regulated datasets, the problem of processing wild pictures in 3D is that some of
     the parameters are unknown. In Sec. 3.1, we mentioned that the camera intrinsic matrix K and the
     initial extrinsic matrix P0 are set by convention, as they are usually intractable. Another crucial
     parameter concerning 3D video generation is the distance between the camera and the content of


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


input image (denoted as f ), note that input image could be synthetic or real. Considering that most
camera rotations are performed around the center point, we extract a patch from the very center of
the input image, conduct depth estimations on it, and define the distance f as the average depth. The
rotation and translation matrices of camera movement can be formed as:

                            cos θi      − sin θi
                                        0                    f sin θi
                              "                  #      "               #
                       Ry =   0         1  0       , t=         0         ,
                            sin θi      0cos θi            f − f cos θi
                                                                                                   (6)
                                     1 X
                          where f =              D(x0 + j, y0 + k).
                                    |P |
                                             (j,k)∈P


Here, i ∈ [0, N − 1] and θi refer to the rotation angle around the y axis at step i, D denotes the
depth estimation of the image, and P represents the patch around the central point (x0 , y0 ). In our
experiment, we choose (j, k) ∈ [−10, 10] as the size of the patch.

G    M OTION B LUR , P ROBLEMS AND S OLUTIONS
Videos produced by CamTrol need to satisfy certain camera movements, and some drastic per-
spective changes might cause visible trails, recognized as motion blur of objects or scenes. This
phenomenon will appear to be more indispensable when the video base model has a relatively small
generation length (e.g., 16 frames) as well as the motion scale becomes larger (e.g., tilt up by 60
degrees or more). To avoid blur issues when controlling video camera motion, we propose several
solutions as follows:

      1. According to the analysis above, the blur issue is caused by limited generation frames and
         large camera movements, thus the most intuitive solution is to either reduce motion scale or
         use a more capable generation model. For severe perspective changes, the optimal approach
         would involve employing video foundation models that support larger generation lengths
         (e.g., CogVideoX (Yang et al., 2024b) supports generating videos with 49 frames). This
         allows the model to manage motions of equivalent magnitude while experiencing a smaller
         moving range between adjacent frames, thereby bringing effective alleviation to the blur
         problem.
      2. One can also stack the results of multiple generations to form a complete output, i.e., treat-
         ing the last frame of the previous generation as the starting frame for the next and integrat-
         ing them as a whole. This approach is more suitable when using an image-to-video (I2V)
         base model. Since most open-source video foundation models are text-to-video (T2V), one
         may consider increasing the step of camera motion inversion t0 , which guarantees more
         fidelity towards input images’ content (and motion).
      3. Besides the above two approaches, applying frame interpolation to the output is also a
         common and convenient choice. Many off-the-shelf frame interpolation models are open-
         source and can be found on GitHub.
      4. Lastly, if the video length cannot be altered, it may be necessary to increase the fps of the
         generated videos for better visual quality. Although a larger frame rate leads to a shorter
         video duration, it simultaneously makes the visual persistence brought by motions less
         pronounced, which reduces blur visually.

In our experiments, we take the raw output in all settings.


                                                  17
