Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPROVING SEMANTIC UNDERSTANDING IN SPEECH
LANGUAGE MODELS VIA BRAIN - TUNING

 Omer Moussa1              Dietrich Klakow2               Mariya Toneva1
 1                                                       2
  Max Planck Institute for Software Systems               Saarland University
 {omoussa, mtoneva}@mpi-sws.org                           dietrich.klakow@lsv.uni-saarland.de



                                            A BSTRACT

         Speech language models align with human brain responses to natural language to
         an impressive degree. However, current models rely heavily on low-level speech
         features, indicating they lack brain-relevant semantics which limits their utility as
         model organisms of semantic processing in the brain. In this work, we address this
         limitation by inducing brain-relevant bias directly into the models via fine-tuning
         with fMRI recordings of people listening to natural stories–a process we name
         brain-tuning. After testing it on 3 different pretrained model families, we show
         that brain-tuning not only improves overall alignment with new brain recordings
         in semantic language regions, but also reduces the reliance on low-level speech
         features for this alignment. Excitingly, we further show that brain-tuning leads to
         1) consistent improvements in performance on semantic downstream tasks and 2)
         a representational space with increased semantic preference. Our results provide
         converging evidence, for the first time, that incorporating brain signals into the
         training of language models improves the models’ semantic understanding. We
         make the code available at https://github.com/bridge-ai-neuro/brain-tuning.


1    I NTRODUCTION
It is an exciting time for the cognitive neuroscience of language with the rise of language models
which have been shown to align with (i.e. predict) brain activity evoked by natural language to
impressive and unprecedented degrees (Wehbe et al., 2014; Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe,
2019; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Caucheteux & King, 2022; Goldstein et al., 2022; Karamolegkou et al.,
2023). Researchers aim to use language models as model organisms (Toneva, 2021) of reading
and listening in the brain to learn more about the underlying information processing that leads to
brain-like representations of language.
However, recent work has questioned whether current popular speech language models can fully
serve this role, as their alignment with semantic brain regions was shown to be mostly due to low-
level speech features, indicating that speech language models lack brain-relevant semantics (Oota
et al., 2024a). Given that most large brain recording datasets are of speech-evoked language (LeBel
et al., 2023; Nastase et al., 2021; Deniz et al., 2019; Momenian et al., 2024), having speech models
with improved brain-relevant semantics is important to provide better model organisms for auditory
language processing. The lack of brain-relevant semantics in speech models (Oota et al., 2024a)
may also be related to their incomplete downstream semantic understanding. (Choi et al., 2024).
To bridge the gap between language understanding in speech models and the human brain, we pro-
pose to augment pretrained speech model training directly with brain recordings in a process we
call brain-tuning (see Fig.1a for illustration of the training approach). We then evaluate the resulting
brain-tuned speech models in three distinct ways (see Fig.1c for an illustration of the evaluation ap-
proach): 1) alignment with new brain recordings in semantic regions of the brain, which we expect
to significantly increase if brain-tuning successfully induces brain-relevant semantics, 2) effect of
low-level features, such as Tri-Phones and Articulation, on the alignment with these semantic re-
gions, which we expect to significantly decrease if brain-tuning successfully induces brain-relevant
semantics 3) downstream performance on tasks that are helped by semantic understanding, which we
expect to significantly improve if the brain-relevant semantic understanding induced by the brain-
tuning is also useful for downstream semantic tasks.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We brain-tune three popular speech language models using the largest available fMRI dataset,
recorded when participants listened to natural stories. Across all models, we find that brain-tuning
1) significantly improves alignment with new fMRI recordings in semantic brain regions, 2) sig-
nificantly reduces the impact of low-level features on this alignment, and 3) significantly improves
downstream performance on tasks that are helped by semantic understanding. We show that these
results hold when comparing the brain-tuned models to their pretrained counterparts, and to two
additional strong baselines (i.e. brain-tuning with block-permuted fMRI data, and fine-tuning using
representations from a larger speech model).
Our results provide converging evidence that augmenting speech models with brain signals from
listening to natural language improves semantic understanding in speech models. Excitingly, our
findings indicate for the first time that improving alignment with semantic understanding in the
brain also translates to downstream gains for the models. We will make all models and code publicly
available, and hope that the improved speech models our work provides will contribute to a better
understanding of listening in the brain.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

      1. We provide an approach to fine-tune pretrained speech models using fMRI recordings of
         people listening to natural stories, and validate it across three popular model families.
      2. We conduct extensive analyses to understand the impact of this fine-tuning on the speech
         model representations and behavior.
      3. For the first time, we show that improving alignment with the brain has a substantial and
         significant downstream benefit for an AI model.


2     R ELATED W ORK

Our work is most closely related to that of Schwartz et al. (2019), who fine-tune one pretrained text-
based language model (BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)) using fMRI and MEG recordings of participants
reading a chapter of a book. We instead focus on speech models, validate our method across three
model families, and conduct comprehensive analyses to reveal that brain-tuning improves semantic
understanding in speech language models for the first time. Separately, a growing literature inves-
tigates the alignment between human brains and pretrained language models. A number of studies
have shown a degree of alignment between language-evoked brain activity with text-based language
models (Wehbe et al., 2014; Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux & King,
2022; Jat et al., 2019; Abdou et al., 2021; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Toneva et al., 2022a;b; Antonello
et al., 2021; Oota et al., 2022; Merlin & Toneva, 2022; Aw & Toneva, 2023; Oota et al., 2024b;
Lamarre et al., 2022; Antonello et al., 2024), and with speech-based language models (Millet et al.,
2022; Vaidya et al., 2022; Tuckute et al., 2023; Oota et al., 2023; 2024a; Chen et al., 2024). Our
approach of brain-tuning pretrained language models is complementary and can be used in addition
to previous methods for analyzing the alignment between language models and brain activity.


3     M ETHODS

3.1   S PEECH L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We build on three popular pretrained transformer-based speech language model families:
Wav2vec2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020), HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021), and Whisper (Radford et al., 2023).
We chose versions of these models that have comparable sizes (∼90M parameters), the same num-
ber of encoder layers (12), and the same embedding size (768). Wav2vec2.0 and HuBERT are
self-supervised models that are trained to predict representations of masked portions of the input.
They both divide the input into tokens of 20ms and then use a CNN feature extractor. We use the
base architectures which are trained on ∼960 hours of audio. Whisper, unlike Wav2Vec2.0 and Hu-
BERT, is trained in a weakly supervised manner, using 680K hours of paired audio-text data and has
an encoder-decoder architecture. Contrary to HuBERT and Wav2Vec2.0, Whisper takes a fixed 30s
input and then converts it to log-mel spectrograms. We fine-tune only the Whisper encoder for two
reasons: 1) to keep the model of comparable size to the other two models, and 2) since the encoder


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         TR-aligned                                                                                                                                 fMRI Response


                                         Feature Extractor
                           Audio                                                 Transformer Layers


                                                                                                                  ...


                                                                                                                                                     FC Layer
                                                                                                                                           Pooling
                                                                                                                                                                    Voxel Masking


                                                                                                                                  ...
                                                      ❄️
                                                                                                                                                                        Loss
                                                                                 layer 1   layer 2      layer 3
                                                                                                                    🔥   layer L

                                                                                                                                  Output             🔥
                                           Freeze                                             Fine-tune                           tokens                        Predicted fMRI Response



                                                                                   (a) Proposed brain-tuning approach

         Get Representations                    Estimate Brain Alignment
              Speech Model
                           Transformer
             Extractor


                                                                             Original              True fMRI Response
              Feature


                                                                         alignment (          )
 Input
 Audio
                                                             (     )

                                                                                                       Low-level
                                                                             (               )          Impact


              Extract                                                                              True fMRI Response


            Low Level                          (                         )
                                                                                 Residual
             Features                                                        alignment (       )

              Linear Function
           of Low-Level Feature                              residuals



(b) Approach to estimate brain alignment and low-
level feature impact                                                                                                              (c) Evaluation strategy and expected outcomes

Figure 1: Training and Evaluation Approaches. (a) Brain-tuning approach for a given speech model;
(b) Evaluation of brain alignment and low-level feature impact on the brain alignment; (c) Types of
evaluation and expected outcomes if brain-tuning successfully improves semantic understanding in
speech models: increase of alignment with semantic brain regions, decrease of impact of low-level
features on this alignment, and increase in downstream performance on semantic tasks.


is expected to represent lower-level information than the decoder, it is a good testbed for whether
brain-tuning can induce semantic understanding.

3.2      NATURALISTIC B RAIN DATASET AND DATA P REPROCESSING

We use the largest public dataset of fMRI recordings (LeBel et al., 2024) for brain-tuning. The
dataset contains fMRI recordings for 8 participants listening to 27 short stories from the Moth Radio
Hour podcast for a total of 6.4 hours of audio per participant (11, 543 fMRI images (TRs) with
TR = 2.0045s). To fine-tune a model using fMRI recordings, we need to build a paired dataset of
fMRI recordings and the corresponding audio snippets that were presented to the participants. We
follow previously proposed approaches for this (Oota et al., 2024a; Vaidya et al., 2022; Antonello
et al., 2024; Schwartz et al., 2019). Specifically, we first partition the audio input by utilizing a
sliding window of length T seconds with a stride W seconds. This way, at each time t in the audio,
a window of length [t − T, t] seconds is provided as input to the speech model. We use T = 16s
and W = 0.1s. We next align the stimulus presentation rate with the slower fMRI acquisition rate
by downsampling using a 3-lobed Lanczos filter. Lastly, we account for the slowness of the fMRI
hemodynamic response by modeling it as a finite response filter with 10 seconds (5 TRs). These
steps result in an audio-fMRI paired dataset that can be used for brain-tuning or evaluation.
Estimated noise ceiling. Noise in fMRI data can impair brain-tuning and evaluation, so it is impor-
tant to estimate the “noise ceiling” of each voxel in the fMRI recordings. We estimate the voxel-wise
noise ceiling for all participants’ fMRI data based on the preferred method by the original dataset pa-
per (LeBel et al., 2023), which leverages within-participant repetitions of the same story. This noise
ceiling value estimates the amount of explainable variance in the brain signal, ranging from 0 to 1.
We use this estimated noise ceiling to filter noisy voxels and to normalize the brain alignment during
evaluation. We use a filtration threshold of 0.4, in line with the findings of Antonello et al. (2024).
After filtering voxels with low noise ceiling, there remain 30, 000 to 50, 000 voxels per participant.


                                                                                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The final brain-tuning voxel set contains voxels from late language regions and the auditory cortex.
Note that because the late language regions are much larger than the auditory cortex, the number of
included voxels from the late language regions is naturally much greater (as shown in Fig.13).

3.3     B RAIN - TUNING S PEECH M ODELS

Brain-tuning approach. Given an input audio and its corresponding fMRI response, obtained via
the method in Section 3.2, we aim to fine-tune a pretrained speech model with the fMRI responses
(i.e., brain-tune the model). Specifically, we fine-tune the model to reconstruct the fMRI responses
corresponding to the voxels with high noise ceiling (> 0.4). The approach is illustrated in Fig.1a.
To this end, we add a pooling layer and a projection head on top of the output tokens. The projection
head predicts the fMRI response from the pooled model tokens. More formally, given the o1 ....oN
output tokens, we have a function H, that predicts fMRI targets such that H(o1 : oN ) = FC (P (o1 :
oN )), where P is an average pooling function and FC is a linear function. The training objective is
a reconstruction loss (L2 loss) between the outputs of H and the fMRI voxels. We freeze the feature
extractor and backpropagate the loss to fine-tune the projection head and the transformer layers.
Training details. We used a base learning rate of 5×10−5 and 10−4 respectively for the transformer
layers and the linear projection head. Both had a linear decay scheduler for the learning rate with a
warmup period for 10% of the epochs. The 27 fMRI stories are split into a training set (24 stories), a
validation set (2 stories), and a held-out test set (1 story). The training is stopped when the validation
loss saturates or begins to diverge. Since the number of voxels differs for each participant, this
fine-tuning process is done separately for each fMRI participant. We apply this approach to the 3
pretrained models: Wav2vec2.0, HuBERT, and the Whisper encoder.

3.3.1    C OMPARISON M ODELS

In addition to comparing the brain-tuned models to the corresponding pretrained ones, we further
train several additional baselines for comparison. We briefly summarize these baselines and their
purpose below, and provide more details about each baseline in Appendix D.2.
Random brain-tuned. This baseline aims to test how the addition of any fMRI data impacts model
performance. This baseline uses the same fine-tuning process as in Fig.1a, but instead of using the
matched fMRI responses for the input stimulus, it uses block-permuted fMRI responses.
Big spoken language model-tuned (BigSLM-tuned). This baseline tests the importance of having
fMRI responses as the training targets. We replace the fMRI targets for the input stimuli with
representations for the same stimuli obtained from a BigSLM. We use Whisper Medium (800M
parameters) as the BigSLM and use a concatenation of all its decoder layers’ representations.
Stimulus-tuned. This baseline tests whether tuning with the fMRI signal results in additional gains
over simply further tuning only using the stimulus audio. Stimulus-tuned models have been pre-
viously found to outperform pretrained models specifically for brain alignment (Merlin & Toneva,
2022), but their performance on downstream tasks has not been investigated.
Text language model-tuned (LM-tuned). We expect that current text LMs encode richer semantics
than current speech LMs, so this baseline tests the importance of added semantics for model perfor-
mance. For tuning, we use representations from two pretrained text LMs (GPT2 and LLama2). We
leverage LM-tuned models to detect which downstream tasks benefit from more semantics.
In the main paper, we focus on two of these baselines–Random Brain-tuned and BigSLM-tuned–
and provide results from the remaining baselines in Appendix D.2. Briefly, stimulus-tuned models
perform similarly to pretrained models and substantially worse than brain-tuned models on the tested
downstream tasks. LM-tuned models improve over the pretrained models on two downstream tasks,
the same ones where brain-tuning leads to the biggest gains over the pretrained models. This further
supports our conclusions that brain-tuning improves semantic understanding in speech models.

3.4     E VALUATION

We evaluate multiple aspects of the brain-tuned models and illustrate our evaluation strategy in
Fig.1c. If brain-tuning successfully improves semantic understanding in speech models, we expect


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that brain-tuned models will align better with semantic language regions in new brain recordings,
have impact of lower low-level features on the alignment with these regions, and have improved
downstream performance on semantic tasks.

3.4.1   B RAIN A LIGNMENT
To compare brain alignment for a model before (i.e., the pretrained version) and after brain-tuning,
we compute the normalized brain alignment using standard voxel-wise encoding models and report
it for language- and speech-related brain regions. For each region, we statistically test whether
brain-tuning leads to significantly better alignment.
Normalized brain alignment. We estimate standard voxel-wise encoding models to evaluate the
brain alignment of a model representation (Antonello et al., 2024; Vaidya et al., 2022; Oota et al.,
2024a). We carry out this voxel-wise encoding as shown in the original alignment branch in Fig.1b.
The audio data is processed as detailed in Section 3.2, then a voxel-wise encoding function h is
learned using ridge regression on the training portion of the dataset. The prediction performance
of this encoding function is computed over the held-out testing portion of the dataset via Pearson
correlation. For a voxel v, we define ρv (the alignment for voxel v) as the Pearson correlation
between the predictions of h and the corresponding brain responses for this voxel across all held-out
data samples. Lastly, we define the normalized brain alignment B for a brain region of V voxels as:
                                             1 X 1
                                       B=                 ρv                                      (1)
                                            |V |     NCv
                                                 v∈V
where NCv is the noise ceiling for voxel v. This serves as a standardized measure for alignment
between a model and different brain regions since it is computed relative to the estimated explainable
variance in the brain region.
Parsing language and primary auditory regions. To make the normalized brain alignment com-
parison focused on language and primary auditory regions, we use FreeSurfer v7 to project the
participants’ data, and then we use the human cerebral cortex parcellation atlas from (Glasser et al.,
2016) to parse the regions of interest (ROIs). We focus mainly on the late language regions (e.g., in-
ferior frontal gyrus, angular gyrus, anterior and posterior temporal lobes, and middle frontal gyrus)
and the primary auditory regions. The full ROI list and their functions is provided in Appendix A.1.
Significance testing. To test whether the brain-tuned models have significantly different alignment
than the pretrained ones, we use the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. We indicate significant differences
(corresponding to p-value < 0.05) with an asterisk *.

3.4.2   I MPACT OF L OW- LEVEL F EATURES ON B RAIN A LIGNMENT
Previous work showed that the alignment of pretrained speech models with late language regions
is mostly due to low-level features (Oota et al., 2024a), which is undesirable. We further set out to
test the impact of low-level features on the brain-tuned models’ alignment with the brain. To enable
comparisons with previous work, we estimate the low-level feature impact on brain alignment using
the same approach as in Oota et al. (2024a). Intuitively, the impact of a specific low-level feature
is estimated by comparing the brain alignment of a model before and after this low-level feature is
computationally removed from the model. If, after removal of the low-level feature, the alignment
is significantly lower than the original one, the low-level feature is said to have high impact on the
brain alignment. We illustrate this process in Fig.1b and provide details about this method below.
Low-level features. We focus on four low-level speech features: Power Spectrum (the time-varying
power spectrum across frequency bands), Di-Phones & Tri-Phones (adjacent pairs and triples of
phonemes), and Articulation (articulatory characteristics of the phonemes). These features cover
different stages of speech and are considered to be non-semantic features. The specifics of obtaining
these features from the audio are detailed in (Oota et al., 2024a) and Appendix A.3.
Low-level feature impact. First, given a low-level feature of the input audio, a linear function
F learns to predict the representations of the model from this feature. Then, the predicted model
representations are subtracted from the true representations, and the brain alignment of this residual
is estimated via a standard encoding model (Section 3.4.1). We define the low-level impact R as:
                                                   Bo − Br
                                        R = 100 ·                                                  (2)
                                                      Bo

                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Bo and Br correspond to the original and residual brain alignments. R represents the percent-
age drop in alignment due to the removed low-level feature. Large R means that much of the original
alignment was due to the low-level feature. To test for significant differences between models, we
perform the same statistical tests as described in Section 3.4.1.

3.4.3    D OWNSTREAM TASKS
To test whether improving brain-relevant semantics via brain-tuning also improves semantic under-
standing in models, we evaluate our models on a range of downstream tasks at different semantic
levels. We also test the semantic vs. phonetic preference of the models’ representations.
Downstream tasks. We choose tasks with several semantic difficulties, namely: automatic speech
recognition (ASR), phonetic sentence type prediction, sequence understanding, phonemes predic-
tion, word identity prediction, and emotion recognition. We use standard datasets for these tasks:
TIMIT (Garofolo, 1993), Crema-D (Cao et al., 2014), Speech Commands (Warden, 2018), and
SLURP (Bastianelli et al., 2020). All datasets were not seen by the model during brain-tuning.
Appendix B details further information about the datasets and the formulations for each task. We
consider emotion recognition to be the least semantic as tone and prosodic information are highly
predictive of emotions in speech (Singh & Gupta, 2023). Phonemes and word prediction are mod-
erate in semantic difficulty, and the rest are high in semantic difficulty as they require understanding
beyond single-word/phone decoding. Additionally, to have a more empirical guide on which task
we expect a model with improved semantic understanding to perform better on, in Appendix D.2
we provide downstream results from the text LM-tuned baselines. We observe that text LM-tuned
models benefit two tasks in particular: phonetic sentence type prediction and phonemes prediction,
suggesting that these two tasks can benefit most from semantics.
Downstream evaluation. To perform downstream analysis, we add a linear projection head f ,
where the input is the layer representation and the output is task-specific (e.g., which phonemes
were present, which word was present, etc). Each task performance is evaluated on held-out data,
provided by each dataset, and an aggregate performance metric is reported. Except for ASR, all tasks
use linear probes across layers and are evaluated using the F1-score on a held-out test set. Since
they are classification tasks, we also report an additional Naive classifier as a comparison baseline
that predicts the majority class for the given task. For ASR, we fine-tune the whole transformer
model, calculate the Word Error Rate (WER) on the held-out test set, and report (1 − WER) as the
performance accuracy metric.
Semantic-phonetic preference. Previous work has shown that speech models’ representations are
consistently more phonetic than semantic across all layers (Choi et al., 2024). They also show that
even in a seemingly semantic task such as Intent Classification (IC), the models rely on phonetic not
semantic features to do the task. We further test the semantic-phonetic preference of our models,
using the same method as Choi et al. (2024), which we detail in Appendix C. Briefly, the method
tests the representation distance between a set of words, their phonetic neighbors (e.g. “divine” and
“divide”), and their semantic neighbors (e.g. “divine” and “god”). A model for which phonetic
neighbors are closer than semantic ones is said to have a phonetic preference.


4     R ESULTS

4.1     B RAIN A LIGNMENT WITH H ELDOUT DATA

We estimate the normalized brain alignment described in Section 3.4.1 separately for two important
language-related areas of the brain: the late language regions and the primary auditory regions.
The late language regions are thought to support semantic language processing, while the primary
auditory regions support mostly lower-level processing related to the speech signal (Deniz et al.,
2019). For each of the three model families, we evaluate the normalized brain alignment for the
pretrained and brain-tuned versions, along with the alignments of two main comparison baselines–
BigSLM-tuned and Random Brain-tuned (see Section 3.3.1).
In Fig.2a and 2b, we show the normalized brain alignment averaged across voxels, layers, and par-
ticipants for all models. We observe that brain-tuning significantly improves alignment with late
language regions for the self-supervised models (Wav2vec2.0 and HuBERT), with an increase of


                                                   6
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Pretrained        BigSLM-tuned                 Brain-tuned                         Sig different from pretrained
                         0.40             Late Language Regions                                                      0.40           Primary Auditory Regions
Normalised Brain Alignment


                                                                                            Normalised Brain Alignment
                         0.35                                                                                        0.35
                         0.30                                                                                        0.30
                         0.25             *                 *                                                        0.25
                         0.20                                                                                        0.20
                         0.15                                                                                        0.15
                         0.10                                                                                        0.10
                         0.05                                                                                        0.05
                         0.00     Wav2Vec2.0       HuBERT          Whisper                                           0.00   Wav2Vec2.0      HuBERT            Whisper
      (a) Normalized alignment for late language regions                                                        (b) Normalized alignment for primary auditory

                                                            Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                                                  0.2                                                         0.2


                                               (c) Difference in brain alignment due to brain-tuning of Wav2vec2.0

      Figure 2: (a), (b) Mean normalised brain alignment for different brain areas. Error bars indi-
      cate the standard error across participants, with * indicating significantly different alignment from
      pretrained. Brain-tuning significantly improves alignment with late language regions for the self-
      supervised models. (c) Voxel-wise differences in brain alignment between brain-tuned and pre-
      trained Wav2vec2.0 for a representative participant. Higher alignment is observed in semantic areas.


      30% over the corresponding pretrained models. This gain in alignment with late language regions
      can also be seen on the level of individual voxels (Fig.2c for Wav2vec2.0 and one representative par-
      ticipant; the brain maps for the remaining participants are shown in Appendix F.2). In contrast, the
      two comparison models–BigSLM-tuned and Random Brain-tuned (see Appendix Fig.6 for Random
      Brain-tuned results)–lead to lower brain alignment than the pretrained models. This suggests that the
      gain from the brain-tuned models is due to incorporating the correct fMRI signal that corresponds
      to the audio input. We do not observe significant gains for Whisper in the late language regions or
      for any of the model families in the primary auditory regions.
      The result that brain-tuning improves the alignment of two of the pretrained models with semantic
      late language regions, and not with less semantic regions, such as the primary auditory cortices, sug-
      gests that brain-tuning may improve the brain-relevant semantics in at least some speech language
      models. We test this further in the next sections.

       4.2                      E FFECT OF L OW- LEVEL F EATURES ON B RAIN A LIGNMENT

      We further test the dependence on low-level features of the observed gain in brain alignment due
      to brain-tuning. Fig.3a and b present the impact of low-level features on the brain alignment across
      model families (averaged over voxels, layers, low-level features, and participants).


                                                                                      7
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Pretrained        BigSLM-tuned                  Brain-tuned                 Sig different from pretrained
               40            Late Language Regions                                                  40             Primary Auditory Regions
               35                                                                                   35
Low-level Impact


                                                                                     Low-level Impact
               30                                                                                   30
                             *                  *
               25                                                                                   25
                                                                   *
               20                                                                                   20
               15                                                                                   15
               10                                                                                   10
                5                                                                                    5
                0    Wav2Vec2.0        HuBERT            Whisper                                     0    Wav2Vec2.0         HuBERT           Whisper
               (a) Low-level impact in late language regions                                (b) Low-level impact in primary auditory regions
                                                     Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                                     50                                                       50



                                          MFG                                           PrCu                           MFG
                                                                       PrCu

                                        IFG
                                                                                                                           IFG
                                                              AG
                                       IFGOrb       AC                                                                  IFGOrb
                                                                                                         AG   AC


                                   (c) Difference in low-level impact due to brain-tuning of Wav2vec2.0

    Figure 3: (a), (b) Mean impact of low-level speech features (percentage drop in brain alignment) for
    different regions. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean across participants, and * denotes
    significantly lower low-level impact than in the pretrained model. All models have significantly
    lower low-level impact in late language regions. (c) Voxel-wise differences in low-level impact
    between brain-tuned and pretrained Wav2vec2.0 for a representative participant.


    We observe that brain-tuning reduces the impact of low-level features on alignment with late lan-
    guage regions across all model families, including Whisper, which did not originally show improve-
    ments in the total brain alignment in these regions (Fig.2a). The comparison models once again do
    not account for the improvements due to brain-tuning. Similarly to before, for all models, brain-
    tuning leads to no significant changes related to the primary auditory regions. These observations
    also hold on the voxel-level (Fig.3c for Wav2Vec2.0 and one representative participant; see Ap-
    pendix F.3 for the remaining participants). Moreover, brain-tuning can also make up for scale: we
    observe that a brain-tuned smaller model (HuBERT small) is similarly aligned with late language
    regions as a substantially larger pretrained model of the same family (HuBERT large), while having
    lower impact of low-level features on this alignment (see Appendix A.2 for more details).
    Overall, these results indicate that brain-tuning’s gain in alignment with the late language areas is
    not merely in the magnitude but also in its nature, as the reliance on low-level features for alignment
    with semantic regions is reduced. Next, we investigate if the induced brain-relevant semantics via
    brain-tuning also lead to improvement in semantic understanding of the models.

    4.3             D OWNSTREAM P ERFORMANCE

    We next investigate the models’ semantic understanding via their performance on downstream tasks
    (detailed in Section 3.4.3), and their semantic-phonetic preference (detailed in Appendix C).


                                                                              8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Naive Classifier                  Random Brain-tuned                     Pretrained            BigSLM-tuned                   Brain-tuned
           0.8
                                                                  0.7                                              0.7
           0.7
                                                                  0.6                                              0.6
           0.6
ASR Accuracy
                                                                  0.5                                              0.5
           0.5


                                                           F1-Score


                                                                                                            F1-Score
                                                                  0.4                                              0.4
           0.4
           0.3                                                    0.3                                              0.3

           0.2                                                    0.2                                              0.2

           0.1                                                    0.1                                              0.1

           0.0                                                    0.0                                              0.0
                    Wav2Vec2.0            HuBERT                        Wav2Vec2.0       HuBERT   Whisper                Wav2Vec2.0   HuBERT       Whisper

  (a) Automatic Speech Recognition                          (b) Phonetic Sentence-type Predic- (c) Sequence Understanding on
  (ASR)                                                     tion                               SLURP
           0.7                                                    0.7                                              0.7

           0.6                                                    0.6                                              0.6

           0.5                                                    0.5                                              0.5
F1-Score


                                                           F1-Score


                                                                                                            F1-Score
           0.4                                                    0.4                                              0.4

           0.3                                                    0.3                                              0.3

           0.2                                                    0.2                                              0.2

           0.1                                                    0.1                                              0.1

           0.0                                                    0.0                                              0.0
                 Wav2Vec2.0      HuBERT      Whisper                    Wav2Vec2.0       HuBERT   Whisper                Wav2Vec2.0   HuBERT       Whisper

                 (d) Phonemes Prediction                     (e) Command Word Idt. Prediction                            (f) Emotions prediction

  Figure 4: Downstream task performance for different models. Brain-tuned models’ performance is
  the mean and STE across participants. Brain-tuned models show consistent improvement over the
  baselines, with the biggest gains in more semantic tasks.



  Performance on downstream tasks. Fig.4 presents the models’ performances on popular down-
  stream tasks that require different levels of semantic understanding. The brain-tuned performance
  is averaged across layers and participants, except for ASR where the performance is only averaged
  across participants since evaluations are done only once per model. We observe that brain-tuning
  boosts the performance of the pretrained models for all model families across all tested downstream
  tasks, with the exception of emotion prediction, in which the performance improves slightly for
  one model family and decreases slightly for the other two (Fig.4f). The brain-tuned models also
  generally outperform the BigSLM-tuned baselines, with the exception of the emotion prediction
  task. Most notably, brain-tuning leads to the most consistent gains above the BigSLM-tuned and
  pretrained baselines for those tasks where fine-tuning with representations from text-based language
  models is also helpful (Fig.10; Appendix D.2). This provides additional evidence that brain-tuning
  is most beneficial for tasks where improved semantic understanding is helpful.
  General trends in downstream performance. We observe a few trends in all downstream tasks:
  (1) the BigSLM-tuned models perform on par or better than the pretrained ones, indicating that
  the BigSLM-tuned model is a meaningful baseline. (2) Generally, the pretrained, brain-tuned, and
  BigSLM-tuned models perform better than the Random Brain-tuned baselines, which indicates that
  permuting fMRI targets does not lead to improvement on downstream tasks. (3) The models perform
  better than naive classifiers, so substantial gains in performance cannot be attributed to random
  behavior. (4) More interestingly, the brain-tuned Whisper encoder consistently and substantially
  outperforms its pretrained and BigSLM-tuned versions, which often have close to random or naive
  performances. This shows that the substantial gain in performance is due to fine-tuning with the
  matched fMRI data.
  Change in semantic-phonetic preference. Finally, when we compare the semantic-phonetic pref-
  erence for the brain-tuned vs. pretrained models (Fig.8), we find that the preference becomes more
  semantic in the late layers for the brain-tuned models. In contrast, the pretrained models show either
  no change or a decrease in semantic preferences. This indicates that the brain-tuned models have
  reduced phonetic preference in the later layers. We elaborate on these findings in Appendix C.
  Excitingly, the consistent improvement in downstream semantic tasks and reduced phonetic prefer-
  ence in late layers is in tandem with the improvement in brain alignment with late language regions
  and the reduced impact of low-level features on this brain alignment. These results provide converg-
  ing evidence for improved semantics in the brain-tuned models.


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   D ISCUSSION

In this work, we present a method to augment speech model training directly with fMRI recordings
of people listening to natural stories and show two converging lines of evidence that this leads to
improved semantic understanding in the models.
First, two of the three tested model families have improved alignment with new brain recordings
in the semantic language regions after brain-tuning (Fig.2). For all model families, brain-tuning
also significantly reduces the impact of low-level speech features on alignment with late language
regions (Fig.3). This is a marked improvement over pretrained models, which were shown to almost
entirely rely on low-level speech features to align with semantic brain regions (Oota et al., 2024a).
Furthermore, brain-tuned models align with semantic language regions as well as larger pretrained
models while also having a lower low-level feature impact (Appendix Fig.5). This suggests that
brain-tuning has the potential to break the brain alignment plateau for speech models, which has
been shown to reach saturation around 700M parameters (Antonello et al., 2024). Brain-tuning
larger models may break this saturation and lead to substantially more alignment in the semantic
language regions, further increasing their utility as model organisms (Toneva, 2021).
Second, the brain-tuned models most substantially improve performance on downstream semantic
tasks while also maintaining performance on core speech low-level tasks (Fig.4 & Fig.9). This pro-
vides additional evidence that brain-tuning improves semantic understanding in speech models while
not negatively impacting their fundamental speech capabilities. We attribute the brain-tuned models’
balanced semantic and low-level understanding to the inclusion of voxels from both late language ar-
eas and auditory cortex during brain-tuning. We expect that if brain-tuning only considered auditory
cortex voxels, there would not be improvements in the model’s semantic understanding. Conversely,
if brain-tuning only considered late language areas voxels, the model’s speech performance would
substantially degrade. Future work can investigate these hypotheses.
Lastly, the brain-tuned models also improve their semantic preference in the late layers (Appendix
Fig.8). We further emphasize that the gain in performance and semantic preference is due to ad-
ditional training data of less than 0.7% of the original training size, which is comparable to, if not
less than, a typical fine-tuning dataset for a specific task. Yet, in the brain-tuning case, there is an
evident gain in performance and a wider generalization across multiple downstream semantic tasks.
There is also good evidence that expanding brain data and model families further will increase the
gains from brain-tuning (Appendix E.2 & E.1). Overall, to the extent of our knowledge, this is the
first work to show substantial downstream performance gains when augmenting an ML model with
brain-relevant data, across not only the speech domain but also language and vision.
Both lines of evidence show that brain-tuning not only increases the raw performance metrics but
also changes the representations of the model to rely less on low-level features when performing
a task that relies on semantics. These findings also strengthen the utility of brain alignment in
determining how semantically oriented a given model representation is. Lastly, all results signal that
there is still room for improvement in the speech models’ semantic capabilities, and we hope that
our work inspires future work that improves on our brain-tuning method.



6   C ONCLUSION

Our systematic analyses of the utility of brain-tuning on semantic brain alignment and downstream
performance reveal a parallel among the gain in brain alignment, its reduced impact of low-level
speech features, and increased downstream performance on several tasks with varying semantic
difficulty. We further observe an increase in the semantic preference of late layers of the brain-tuned
models. These exciting results provide evidence for the first time that incorporating brain signals into
the training of language models improves their semantic understanding. Future work can investigate
further refinement of the brain-tuning loss and the incorporation of additional participants and brain
datasets in the brain-tuning process. We hope that the brain-tuned models we provide will serve as
better model organisms for auditory language processing in the brain, and will inspire more work
on improving the alignment between language in machines and language in the brain.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

In this paper, we fully describe our proposed brain-tuning approach and how to evaluate it. (1) Sec-
tions 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 detail the exact model families, data processing, and fine-tuning settings and
hyper-parameters needed to carry out Brain-tuning for any given model. (2) Section 3.4, Appendix
B, Appendix C, and Appendix D.2 detail all evaluation pipelines and metrics, alongside any addi-
tional datasets or training settings and hyper-parameters needed for evaluation. (3) We will make
the code for brain-tuning and its evaluation publicly available once the paper is accepted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) - DFG Research Unit
FOR 5368 and by the CS@max planck graduate center.

R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Ana Valeria González, Mariya Toneva, Daniel Hershcovich, and Anders Søgaard.
 Does injecting linguistic structure into language models lead to better alignment with brain record-
 ings? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12608, 2021.
Richard Antonello, Javier S Turek, Vy Vo, and Alexander Huth. Low-dimensional structure in the
  space of language representations is reflected in brain responses. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:8332–8344, 2021.
Richard Antonello, Aditya Vaidya, and Alexander Huth. Scaling laws for language encoding models
  in fmri. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Khai Loong Aw and Mariya Toneva. Training language models to summarize narratives improves
  brain alignment. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020.
Emanuele Bastianelli, Andrea Vanzo, Pawel Swietojanski, and Verena Rieser. SLURP: A Spoken
  Language Understanding Resource Package. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
Houwei Cao, David G Cooper, Michael K Keutmann, Ruben C Gur, Ani Nenkova, and Ragini
  Verma. CREMA-D: Crowd-sourced emotional multimodal actors dataset. IEEE Trans. Affect.
  Comput., 5(4):377–390, October 2014.
Charlotte Caucheteux and Jean-Rémi King. Brains and algorithms partially converge in natural
  language processing. Communications Biology, 5(1):134, 2022.
Catherine Chen, Tom Dupré la Tour, Jack L Gallant, Daniel Klein, and Fatma Deniz. The cortical
  representation of language timescales is shared between reading and listening. Communications
  Biology, 7(1):284, 2024.
Kwanghee Choi, Ankita Pasad, Tomohiko Nakamura, Satoru Fukayama, Karen Livescu, and Shinji
 Watanabe. Self-supervised speech representations are more phonetic than semantic, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08619.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
  Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned lan-
  guage models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(70):1–53, 2024.
Fatma Deniz, Anwar O Nunez-Elizalde, Alexander G Huth, and Jack L Gallant. The representation
  of semantic information across human cerebral cortex during listening versus reading is invariant
  to stimulus modality. Journal of Neuroscience, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rutvik H Desai, Usha Tadimeti, and Nicholas Riccardi. Proper and common names in the semantic
  system. Brain Structure and Function, 228(1):239–254, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–
  4186, 2019.
John S Garofolo. Timit acoustic phonetic continuous speech corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium,
  1993, 1993.
Matthew F Glasser, Timothy S Coalson, Emma C Robinson, Carl D Hacker, John Harwell, Essa
 Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil, Jesper Andersson, Christian F Beckmann, Mark Jenkinson, et al. A
 multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature, 536(7615):171–178, 2016.
Ariel Goldstein, Zaid Zada, Eliav Buchnik, Mariano Schain, Amy Price, Bobbi Aubrey, Samuel A
  Nastase, Amir Feder, Dotan Emanuel, Alon Cohen, et al. Shared computational principles for
  language processing in humans and deep language models. Nature Neuroscience, 25(3):369–380,
  2022.
Xue L Gong, Alexander G Huth, Fatma Deniz, Keith Johnson, Jack L Gallant, and Frédéric E
  Theunissen. Phonemic segmentation of narrative speech in human cerebral cortex. Nature Com-
  munications, 14(1):4309, 2023.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021.
Shailee Jain and Alexander Huth. Incorporating context into language encoding models for fmri.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Sharmistha Jat, Hao Tang, Partha Talukdar, and Tom Mitchell. Relating simple sentence represen-
  tations in deep neural networks and the brain. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5137–5154, 2019.
Antonia Karamolegkou, Mostafa Abdou, and Anders Søgaard. Mapping brains with language mod-
  els: A survey. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp.
  9748–9762, 2023.
Mathis Lamarre, Catherine Chen, and Fatma Deniz. Attention weights accurately predict lan-
 guage representations in the brain. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
 EMNLP 2022, pp. 4513–4529, 2022.
Amanda LeBel, Lauren Wagner, Shailee Jain, Aneesh Adhikari-Desai, Bhavin Gupta, Allyson Mor-
 genthal, Jerry Tang, Lixiang Xu, and Alexander G Huth. A natural language fmri dataset for
 voxelwise encoding models. Scientific Data, 10(1):555, 2023.
Amanda LeBel, Lauren Wagner, Shailee Jain, Aneesh Adhikari-Desai, Bhavin Gupta, Allyson Mor-
 genthal, Jerry Tang, Lixiang Xu, and Alexander G. Huth. ”an fmri dataset during a passive natural
 language listening task”. 2024. doi: doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds003020.v2.2.0.
Gabriele Merlin and Mariya Toneva. Language models and brain alignment: beyond word-level
  semantics and prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00596, 2022.
Juliette Millet, Charlotte Caucheteux, Yves Boubenec, Alexandre Gramfort, Ewan Dunbar,
  Christophe Pallier, Jean-Remi King, et al. Toward a realistic model of speech processing in
  the brain with self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  33428–33443, 2022.
Mohammad Momenian, Zhengwu Ma, Shuyi Wu, Chengcheng Wang, Jonathan Brennan, John Hale,
 Lars Meyer, and Jixing Li. Le petit prince hong kong (lpphk): Naturalistic fmri and eeg data from
 older cantonese speakers. Scientific data, 11(1):992, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Samuel A Nastase, Yun-Fei Liu, Hanna Hillman, Asieh Zadbood, Liat Hasenfratz, Neggin Ke-
  shavarzian, Janice Chen, Christopher J Honey, Yaara Yeshurun, Mor Regev, et al. The “narra-
  tives” fmri dataset for evaluating models of naturalistic language comprehension. Scientific data,
  (1), 2021.

Subba Reddy Oota, Jashn Arora, Veeral Agarwal, Mounika Marreddy, Manish Gupta, and Bapi
  Surampudi. Neural language taskonomy: Which nlp tasks are the most predictive of fmri brain
  activity? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3220–3237, 2022.

Subba Reddy Oota, Khushbu Pahwa, Mounika Marreddy, Manish Gupta, and Bapi S Raju. Neu-
  ral architecture of speech. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.

Subba Reddy Oota, Emin Çelik, Fatma Deniz, and Mariya Toneva. Speech language models lack
  important brain-relevant semantics. ACL, 2024a.

Subba Reddy Oota, Manish Gupta, and Mariya Toneva. Joint processing of linguistic properties in
  brains and language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI, 2019. URL https:
  //cdn.openai.com/better-language-models/language_models_are_
  unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf. Accessed: 2024-11-15.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.

Martin Schrimpf, Idan Asher Blank, Greta Tuckute, Carina Kauf, Eghbal A Hosseini, Nancy Kan-
 wisher, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fedorenko. The neural architecture of language: In-
 tegrative modeling converges on predictive processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences, 2021.

Dan Schwartz, Mariya Toneva, and Leila Wehbe. Inducing brain-relevant bias in natural language
  processing models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Anant Singh and Akshat Gupta. Decoding emotions: A comprehensive multilingual study of speech
  models for speech emotion recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08713, 2023.

Mariya Toneva. Bridging language in machines with language in the brain. PhD thesis, Carnegie
 Mellon University, 2021.

Mariya Toneva and Leila Wehbe. Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in ma-
 chines) with natural language-processing (in the brain). Advances in Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems, 32, 2019.

Mariya Toneva, Tom M Mitchell, and Leila Wehbe. Combining computational controls with natural
 text reveals aspects of meaning composition. Nature Computational Science, 2(11):745–757,
 2022a.

Mariya Toneva, Jennifer Williams, Anand Bollu, Christoph Dann, and Leila Wehbe. Same cause;
 different effects in the brain. Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022b.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Greta Tuckute, Jenelle Feather, Dana Boebinger, and Josh H McDermott. Many but not all deep
  neural network audio models capture brain responses and exhibit correspondence between model
  stages and brain regions. Plos Biology, 21(12):e3002366, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aditya R Vaidya, Shailee Jain, and Alexander Huth. Self-supervised models of audio effectively
  explain human cortical responses to speech. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 21927–21944. PMLR, 2022.
Pete Warden. Speech commands: A dataset for limited-vocabulary speech recognition, 2018.
Leila Wehbe, Brian Murphy, Partha Talukdar, Alona Fyshe, Aaditya Ramdas, and Tom Mitchell.
  Simultaneously uncovering the patterns of brain regions involved in different story reading sub-
  processes. PloS One, (11), 2014.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     B RAIN A LIGNMENT

A.1   ROI S D ETAILS

The human cerebral cortex multi-modal parcellation (Glasser Atlas) has 180 labeled ROIs per hemi-
sphere(Glasser et al., 2016). It has language regions that include the following labels: Angular gyrus
(AG: PFm, PGs, PGi, TPOJ2, TPOJ3), lateral temporal cortex (LTC: STSda, STSva, STGa, TE1a,
TE2a, TGv, TGd, A5, STSdp, STSvp, PSL, STV, TPOJ1), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG: 44, 45, IFJa,
IFSp) and middle frontal gyrus (MFG: 55b) ((Oota et al., 2024a), Desai et al. (2023)). It also has the
primary auditory (A1) and the early auditory (A1, PBelt, MBelt, LBelt, RI, A4) regions.

             Comparison with HuBERT Large in Late Language Regions
                                                Pretrained Base   Pretrained Large           Brain-tuned Base
                                          0.4                                        40
                 Normalised Brain Alignment


                                                                      Low-level Impact
                                          0.3                                        30

                                          0.2                                        20

                                          0.1                                        10

                                          0.0           HuBERT                           0   HuBERT
Figure 5: Brain alignment and low-level impact comparison with pretrained HuBERT large ar-
chitecture on 3 subjects. The HuBERT base architecture performs closely to the large pretrained
architecture and is less affected by removal of low-level features


A.2   B RAIN - TUNING A LIGNMENT COMPARISON WITH BIGGER MODELS

To get a clearer idea about the improvement in brain alignment we get from Brain-tuning on late
language regions, we compare the HuBERT model’s base architectures ( 90M parameters ) both
pretrained and brain-tuned to the pretrained HuBERT large architecture (320M parameters) in Fig.5.
The pretrained large architecture has a much larger alignment in late language regions than the
pretrained base model, which is in line with the trend of increase in alignment when scaling the
model size shown in (Chung et al., 2024); however, the Brain-tuned base model is very close to
the pretrained large model’s alignment. Moreover, the low-level impact of the Brain-tuned model is
noticeably less than the pretrained large model. This is an indicator that we can explain much more in
the brain late language semantic regions with smaller models and brain-tuning bigger models might
break the plateau we see in (Antonello et al., 2024) when reaching huge model sizes. Breaking
this plateau might allow for better and more accurate computational models for speech semantic
processing in the brain.

A.3   L OW- LEVEL S PEECH F EATURES D ETAILS

Here, we detail the definition and acquisition method of the low-level speech features used in our
computation of low-level impact (namely Power Spectrum, Di-Phones & Tri-Phones, and Articula-
tion ). We obtain these features for the fMRI stories used for brain alignment computation (Section
3.4.1).
Power Spectrum. We follow the method described in (Gong et al., 2023). For each TR time (a 2s
segment), we quantify the time-varying power spectrum across 448 frequency bands. This power
spectrum is obtained by estimating the power of the sound signal between 25 Hz and 15 kHz, in 33.5
Hz bands (giving a total of 448 bands). For our experiments, we use the power spectrum features
from (Deniz et al., 2019).


                                                                      15
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Di-Phones & Tri-Phones. For a given speech utterance, DiPhones represent the adjacent pair of
      phones (e.g., [da], [aI]). For each audio segment of length 2 seconds (TR length), we have a one-hot
      encoding vector representing the presence or absence of all possible 858 diphones. The same is
      done for Tri-Phones but for triplets of phones instead of pairs. The annotations of this data were
      done using the Praat software and were obtained from the shared data by the authors of (Oota et al.,
      2024a).1
      Articulation. Phoneme articulations are the specific ways speech organs (e.g., tongue or vocal
      cord) move to produce different phonemes. They associate each phoneme with a set of properties
      that specify things like whether this phoneme makes vocal cords vibrate. We use phoneme artic-
      ulations as mid-level speech features, mapping hand-labeled phonemes to a set of 22 articulatory
      characteristics. For our experiments, we use the articulation annotations from (Deniz et al., 2019).


       A.4                         B RAIN A LIGNMENT W ITH R ANDOM B RAIN - TUNED

      We extend Fig.6 by showing the Random Brain-tuned baseline alongside the brain-tuned, pretrained,
      and BigSLM-tuned models. Fig.6b clearly shows that Random Brain-tuned models have the lowest
      brain alignment values in late language regions compared to even BigSLM-tuned baselines, and in
      the primary auditory regions, it’s also much lower than the pretrained version. This strongly indi-
      cates that randomly permuting the fMRI targets while brain-tuning the models with the same stimuli
      substantially harms the model’s alignment. Hence, having the correct fMRI targets is essential for
      the alignment results we get from the brain-tuned models.


                                  Pretrained      Random Brain-tuned   BigSLM-tuned                               Brain-tuned    Sig different from pretrained
                         0.40            Late Language Regions                                         0.40           Primary Auditory Regions
Normalised Brain Alignment


                                                                              Normalised Brain Alignment


                         0.35                                                                          0.35
                         0.30                                                                          0.30
                         0.25            *              *                                              0.25
                         0.20                                                                          0.20
                         0.15                                                                          0.15
                         0.10                                                                          0.10
                         0.05                                                                          0.05
                         0.00 Wav2Vec2.0       HuBERT        Whisper                                   0.00 Wav2Vec2.0       HuBERT         Whisper
        (a) Normalised alignment for Late Language Regions                                                 (b) Normalised alignment for Primary Auditory

      Figure 6: (a), (b) Normalized brain alignment across participants and models for different ROIs,
      where * means brain-tuned has alignment values that are statistically significantly different from
      pretrained. Random Brain-tuned baselines have much lower brain alignment than pretrained models
      in the late language and primary auditory areas.



       A.5                         L OW- LEVEL I MPACT W ITH R ANDOM B RAIN - TUNED

      We extend Fig.3 by showing the Random Brain-tuned baseline alongside the brain-tuned, pretrained,
      and BigSLM-tuned models. Fig.7 clearly shows that Random Brain-tuned models have the highest
      low-level impact (highest drop) compared to even BigSLM-tuned baselines in both late language
      regions and the primary auditory region. Even though the original normalized alignment values for
      the Random Brain-tuned models are very low to begin with, they still undergo a substantial drop
      after we remove the low-level features. Similar to the results from Fig.6, these results also indicate
      that randomly permuting the fMRI targets while brain-tuning the models with the same stimuli
      substantially harms the model’s semantics. Hence, having the correct fMRI targets is essential for
      reduced low-level impact we get in the brain-tuned models.

                             1
                                 https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/


                                                                             16
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Pretrained       Random Brain-tuned         BigSLM-tuned                    Brain-tuned     Sig different from pretrained
                                  Late Language Regions                                                Primary Auditory Regions
               50                                                                      50

               40                                                                      40
Low-level Impact


                                                                        Low-level Impact
               30                                *                                     30
                                  *
                                                                  *
               20                                                                      20

               10                                                                      10

                   0 Wav2Vec2.0         HuBERT         Whisper                             0 Wav2Vec2.0        HuBERT          Whisper
                   (a) Low-level Impact in Late Language Regions             (b) Low-level Impact in the Primary Auditory Region

    Figure 7: (a), (b) Low-level Speech Features Impact (Percentage Drop in Brain Alignment) for
    different ROIs, where * means brain-tuned has alignment values that are statistically significantly
    different from pretrained. RandomBrain-tuned baselines have a much higher low-level impact than
    pretrained models in that late language and primary auditory areas.


    B                D OWNSTREAM TASKS

    We detail here the description and dataset used for each downstream task mentioned in Section
    3.4.3.

    Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). We run an ASR fine-tuning pipeline for the self-
    supervised models (Wav2vec2.0 and HuBERT). For ASR we fine-tune the whole model to get the
    best possible performance. The rationale is to essentially see if the brain-tuning process will make it
    harder or require longer training to fine-tune the speech model for tasks like ASR. We use a version
    of TIMIT (Garofolo, 1993) for ASR to carry out this experiment. We use the CTC loss (Baevski
    et al., 2020) for both self-supervised models and calculate Word-Error-Rate (WER) as the evaluation
    metric (on the padded test-set). We then report the ASR accuracy as 1 − WER.

    Phonetic Sentence Type Prediction. The TIMIT dataset Garofolo (1993) has 3 different sentence
    types: SA (Dialect), SX (Compact), and SI (Diverse). The SA sentences are supposed to expose the
    dialectal variations of the speakers ( and are designed to span all the phonemes of American English);
    the SX sentences should provide good coverage of phones (phonetically balanced and cover a wide
    range of phonetic contexts with a small number of words). The SI sentences are anything else
    (phonetically diverse and more naturalistic). We add a classification head and we use the F1-score
    for evaluation.

    Sequence Understanding. This is very similar to Intent Classification tasks; it tests the ability to
    understand a sequence. We use the SLURP (Bastianelli et al., 2020) dataset that has audio paired
    with actions. For example, if the input is ”Wake me up at eight o’clock”, the action should be
    ”set alarm”. We have 46 possible actions and we add a linear head to predict the action and evaluate
    using the F1-score.

    Phonemes Prediction. Phoneme prediction is formulated as a multi-label classification problem,
    where the classifier predicts which of the 39 Phonemes were present in the input audio clip. We use
    the TIMIT dataset Garofolo (1993) for its phonetically rich sentences; we evaluate the test set using
    the F1-score.

    Word Identity Prediction. We want to test the model’s ability to decode words from input audio.
    To simplify this task to befit a classification head, we convert it to a classification task on the Speech
    Commands dataset (Warden, 2018) which has audio clips, each of which has only one word belong-
    ing to a set of 35 commands. The classifier predicts which of the 35 commands were said, and the
    evaluation is done using the F1-score.


                                                                       17
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Emotion Recognition.        We add a classification head for emotion recognition on the CREMA-
      D dataset Cao et al. (2014); CREMA-D has 7.4K clips from 91 actors, and six different emotions
      (Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Neutral, and Sad). The classifier predicts which of the 6 emotions is
      present and is evaluated using the F1-score.

      C                          M EASURING S EMANTIC -P HONETIC PREFERENCE
      To test if there are semantic changes to the models’ representations at a more fundamental level,
      we try to quantify how a model prefers phonetic over semantic features and compare our brain-
      tuned models to the pretrained ones. To be able to quantify this difference, we take inspiration
      from the work by Choi et al. (2024), which found that speech models have a huge bias towards
      phonetic features. This was done by constructing phonetically similar pairs and semantically similar
      pairs and then computing their similarity/ distance in the embedding space. Doing this clearly
      shows that phonetically similar words are closer than semantically similar ones in the embedding
      space (i.e., the model has strong phonetic preference ). This behavior persists across layers and
      across models. One aspect of desirable change in that behavior is to have the differences between
      phonetically and semantically similar pairs lower in the more semantic layers (both should still be
      better than random), or at least to have a clear hierarchy of that change. To do a similar but more
      curated analysis, we build a dataset of 2K words, each of word is paired with several semantically
      similar (e.g., Synonyms) and phonetically similar words (e.g., Homophones). Then, we compute the
      representational distance between them, namely semantic distance for the distance of the word to
      the synonym and phonetic distance for the distance of the word to the homophone. After that, we are
      able to compute a semantic-phonetic preference d for any given layer or model. We define d as the
      average difference between semantic and phonetic distances. Essentially, since we know phonetic
      distances are smaller from the work by Choi et al. (2024), then when d decreases it means that the
      gap between semantic and phonetic decreases (semantic is closer to phonetic) and vice versa. If
      d < 0, it means that the given layer is more semantic than it’s phonetic. Thus, comparing the values
      of d for the brain-tuned models and the pretrained ones will tell us if there is a difference in the
      phonetic preference across layers between them.

                                      Brain-tuned       Pretrained        BigSLM                                           Brain-tuned       Pretrained        BigSLM
                               0.30                                                                                0.30
Semantic-Phonetic Preference


                                                                                    Semantic-Phonetic Preference


                               0.25                                                                                0.25

                               0.20                                                                                0.20

                               0.15                                                                                0.15

                               0.10                                                                                0.10

                               0.05                                                                                0.05
                                      2       4     6         8      10      12                                             2      4     6         8      10      12
                                                    Layer                                                                                Layer
                   (a) Semantic-phonetic preference for Wav2Vec2.0                                                 (b) Semantic-phonetic preference for HuBERT

      Figure 8: Semantic-phonetic preference (d) Comparison between brain-tuned and Pretrained mod-
      els. d decreases in late layers for brain-tuned models, suggesting that the phonetic preference for
      these layers is decreased.

      Finally, when we investigate the semantic-phonetic preference d (the delta of the distances between
      semantic and phonetic features) in the brain-tuned vs. pretrained models (Fig.8), we find that d
      decreases in the late layers for the brain-tuned models, but it either increases or stays the same for
      the pretrained ones. Our findings about the pretrained model replicate those of (Choi et al., 2024).
      The findings about the brain-tuned models indicate that, unlike the pretrained models, semantic
      pairs in the late layers of these models are closer to the phonetic ones, and hence the layers are less
      phonetically dominated (i.e., the semantic preference increases and the phonetic vs semantic pref-
      erence decreases in these layers). This, together with the downstream results from Fig.4 indicates


                                                                                   18
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   that the brain-tuned models are not phonetically biased (in late layers) and that they are capable of
   performing better on both phonetic and semantic tasks.



    D                    A DDITIONAL TASKS AND BASELINES

   In this section, we extend the evaluation of brain-tuned models to include two low-level tasks,
   namely MFCC and FBANK prediction. We also add language model baseline (comparison model)
   and report its downstream and low-level performance relative to to the other models (i.e., brain-
   tuned, Pretrained and BigSLM-tuned).


    D.1                  B RAIN - TUNED LOW- LEVEL PERFORMANCE

   For MFCC prediction, we train linear probes to predict the MFCC coefficients, while for FBANK
   prediction, we train linear probes to predict the filter banks. For both tasks, we use the TIMIT dataset
   (Garofolo, 1993) and we evaluate using the R2 coefficient, averaged across layers.
   Fig.9 reports pretrained, BigSLM-tuned, and brain-tuned models’ performance on two low-level
   tasks (MFCC prediction and FBANK prediction); it shows that brain-tuned and BigSLM-tuned
   models don’t perform substantially lower than their pretrained counterparts. This indicates that
   fine-tuned models are still capable of doing these core low-level tasks just as well as their pretrained
   version. We think this evidence reduces the possibility that catastrophic forgetting happened after
   fine-tuning.


                               Pretrained         BigSLM-tuned          Brain-tuned                                           Pretrained         BigSLM-tuned       Brain-tuned
                  0.40                                                                                           0.40
                  0.35                                                                                           0.35
R-Squared Value


                                                                                               R-Squared Value


                  0.30                                                                                           0.30
                  0.25                                                                                           0.25
                  0.20                                                                                           0.20
                  0.15                                                                                           0.15
                  0.10                                                                                           0.10
                  0.05                                                                                           0.05
                  0.00                                                                                           0.00
                           Wav2Vec2.0             HuBERT                Whisper                                           Wav2Vec2.0             HuBERT             Whisper
                                                                 2                                                                                              2
                          (a) MFCC prediction mean R values                                                             (b) FBANK prediction mean R values
                  0.40                                                                                           0.40
                                                                     Brain-tuned Wav2Vec2.0
                  0.35                                               Pretrained Wav2Vec2.0                       0.35
                                                                     Brain-tuned HuBERT
                                                                     Pretrained HuBERT
                  0.30                                                                                           0.30
R-Squared Value


                                                                                               R-Squared Value


                  0.25                                                                                           0.25
                  0.20                                                                                           0.20
                  0.15                                                                                           0.15
                  0.10                                                                                           0.10                                           Brain-tuned Wav2Vec2.0
                                                                                                                                                                Pretrained Wav2Vec2.0
                  0.05                                                                                           0.05                                           Brain-tuned HuBERT
                                                                                                                                                                Pretrained HuBERT
                  0.00                                                                                           0.00
                              0.2           0.4          0.6            0.8            1.0                                   0.2           0.4          0.6         0.8           1.0
                                      Normalized Layer Depth                                                                         Normalized Layer Depth
                    (c) R2 values of MFCC prediction layer-wise                                                   (d) R2 values of FBANK prediction layer-wise

   Figure 9: Low-level task performance comparison for different models. It signifies that brain-tuned
   models didn’t lose low-level capabilities at the expense of gaining more semantics, as the averaged
   R2 values are very close and the layer-wise values are the same in early layers and slightly decreased
   in late layers.



                                                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   D ETAILS FOR C OMPARISON BASELINES

We elaborate here the comparison models introduced in Section 3.3.1 and provide a complete con-
trast for all comparison models on all downstream tasks for the Wav2Vec2.0 model family.
Random brain-tuned. In order to test how the addition of any fMRI data impacts model per-
formance, this baseline uses the same fine-tuning process for brain-tuning (Section 3.3) but with
incorrect randomly chosen fMRI targets. Instead of using the correct fMRI responses for the input
stimulus, we use block-permuted fMRI responses that correspond to different stimuli. We carry out
the fine-tuning process for each participant, and the training setup is identical to the brain-tuning
ones (i.e., the same learning rates, learning rate schedule, optimizer, and number of epochs). The
same set of voxels used in brain-tuning is also used for this baseline.
Big spoken language model-tuned (BigSLM-tuned). We aim to test the importance of having
fMRI responses as the fine-tuning targets with this baseline. To this end, we replace the fMRI target
vectors for the input stimuli with representations for the same stimuli obtained from the BigSLM
layers. This creates a proxy for the fMRI targets that is rich in meaningful spoken-language related
information. For this baseline, we utilize Whisper Medium (800M parameters) as the BigSLM and
use a concatenation of all its decoder layers’ representations. The fine-tuning objective is then to
construct the concatenated representations vectors from the BigSLM layers (instead of reconstruct-
ing the fMRI responses). We use the same training setup and the same stimulus data that were used
for brain-tuning (Section 3.3).
Stimulus-tuned. This baseline tests whether tuning with the fMRI signal results in additional gains
over simply further tuning using the stimulus audio only. This highlights any improvements in the
model performance that would be only due to training with more data. To isolate the effect of the
audio stimulus alone, we develop a model whose pre-training includes the audio stimulus used in
the fMRI data (LeBel et al., 2024). To this end, for additional pre-training on the stimulus audio
data, we use the same losses with the same weights of Wav2Vec2.0 self-supervised pre-training (the
diversity loss and the contrastive loss) (Baevski et al., 2020). This stimulus-tuned model is trained
for 200 epochs and uses a base learning rate of 2 × 10−5 with a warm-up for the first 10% of the
updates and then a linear decay schedule.
Text language model-tuned (LM-tuned). We develop two text language model-tuned baselines
to test the potential of using a text language model (LM) in a similar fashion to the BigSLM-tuned
baseline. The first one uses representations from the pretrained GPT2-Medium model (Radford
et al., 2019) which is similar in size to the BigSLM model, and the second one uses representa-
tions from Llama2-7B Parameter Model (Touvron et al., 2023) which is a much bigger and more
recent large LM. We apply a similar fine-tuning pipeline of brain-tuning with the concatenated rep-
resentations of the corresponding LM as targets. For the GPT2-Medium model, we concatenate the
representations of all layers, while for LLama2-7B one in every 3 layers is taken. We found that
LM-tuned models need more training than the BigSLM-tuned one; we train them for 200 epochs.
We report the downstream performance of these baselines (the GPT2-tuned and the Llama2-tuned)
for the Wav2Vec2.0 model family.
The stimulus-tuned model performs very similarly to the pretrained model, indicating that further
self-supervised training on these additional few hours of stimulus data doesn’t impact downstream
model performance (Fig.10). As for the LM-tuned baselines, GPT2-tuned and Llama2-tuned models
improve over the pretrained and BigSLM-tuned ones on two tasks (namely Phonemes and Phonetic
Sentence Type Prediction), with the Llama2-tuned being slightly better than the brain-tuned one
on the same two tasks. The jump from pretrained to GPT2-tuned to Llama2-tuned indicates that
more semantics lead to better performance on Phonemes and Phonetic Sentence Type Prediction
tasks. These tasks are also the ones for which brain-tuning leads to the largest improvement over
the pretrained models, further supporting our conclusions that brain-tuning can improve seman-
tic understanding in speech models. The results for the Random Brain-tuned and BigSLM-tuned
baselines are identical to Fig.4; they mainly emphasize that Random Brain-tuning hurts the model
performance and BigSLM-tuning doesn’t help strongly with the more semantic tasks.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Random Brain-tuned       Pretrained        BigSLM-tuned         Stimulus-tuned       GPT2-tuned         Llama2-tuned     Brain-tuned
            0.8                                           0.8                                            0.8
            0.7                                           0.7                                            0.7
            0.6
 ASR Accuracy                                             0.6                                            0.6
            0.5                                           0.5                                            0.5


                                                   F1 Score


                                                                                                  F1 Score
            0.4                                           0.4                                            0.4
            0.3                                           0.3                                            0.3
            0.2                                           0.2                                            0.2
            0.1                                           0.1                                            0.1
            0.0                                           0.0                                            0.0
              Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)              Phonetic Sentence-type Prediction              Seq. Understanding on SLURP
            0.8                                           0.8                                            0.8
            0.7                                           0.7                                            0.7
            0.6                                           0.6                                            0.6
            0.5                                           0.5                                            0.5
 F1 Score


                                                   F1 Score


                                                                                                  F1 Score
            0.4                                           0.4                                            0.4
            0.3                                           0.3                                            0.3
            0.2                                           0.2                                            0.2
            0.1                                           0.1                                            0.1
            0.0                                           0.0                                            0.0
                     Phoneme Prediction                         Command Word Idt. Prediction                      Emotion Prediction

Figure 10: Downstream task performance of brain-tuned models vs. all baselines for Wav2Vec2.0.
The additional baselines beyond those presented in Fig.4 are shown in blue hues. We observe that
LM-tuned baselines (GPT2-tuned and Llama2-tuned) improve over the pretrained model on tasks
where we see big improvements with brain-tuning, further supporting our conclusions that brain-
tuning can improve semantic understanding in speech models. The stimulus-tuned model performs
very similarly to the pretrained one, indicating that simply further training on the audio stimulus is
not sufficient for the gains observed from brain-tuning.


E               M ORE STUDIES ON DOWNSTREAM TASKS


E.1             D OWNSTREAM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH H U BERT L ARGE


To complement our results on the brain alignment gap between HuBERT Large and the Brain-tuned
Base version (Appendix A.2), we report here the gap between them in downstream performance
(reporting the same participants for brain-tuned models). Fig.11 shows that for HuBERT, the brain-
tuned base architecture is closing on the pretrained large architecture. In other words, we gain a
performance close to the large architecture with the same number of parameters of the base archi-
tecture (after it’s brain-tuned).


E.2             E FFECT OF M ODEL AND DATA SIZES ON B RAIN - TUNING


We study here how brain-tuning is affected when we increase the pretrained model size or decrease
the size of the data used for brain-tuning. We do this by plotting the performance improvement
with brain-tuning (brain-tuning performance − pretrained performance) across model sizes or data
sizes, for a range of downstream tasks. Fig.12 shows that as the model size increases, the gain in
performance due to brain-tuning on downstream tasks drops. When we lower the amount of data
used for brain-tuning, the gain in performance due to brain-tuning also drops. This provides a clear
signal that data size plays a key role in the positive results we see from brain-tuning.


                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Pretrained Base            Pretrained Large               Brain-tuned Base
                   0.8                                                         0.8                                             0.8
                   0.7                                                         0.7                                             0.7
                   0.6                                                         0.6                                             0.6


        ASR Accuracy
                   0.5                                                         0.5                                             0.5


                                                                        F1 Score


                                                                                                                        F1 Score
                   0.4                                                         0.4                                             0.4
                   0.3                                                         0.3                                             0.3
                   0.2                                                         0.2                                             0.2
                   0.1                                                         0.1                                             0.1
                   0.0Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)                       0.0 Phonetic Sentence-type Prediction           0.0 Seq. Understanding on SLURP
                   0.8                                                         0.8                                             0.8
                   0.7                                                         0.7                                             0.7
                   0.6                                                         0.6                                             0.6
                   0.5                                                         0.5                                             0.5
        F1 Score


                                                                        F1 Score


                                                                                                                        F1 Score
                   0.4                                                         0.4                                             0.4
                   0.3                                                         0.3                                             0.3
                   0.2                                                         0.2                                             0.2
                   0.1                                                         0.1                                             0.1
                   0.0       Phoneme Prediction                                0.0 Command Word Idt. Prediction                0.0      Emotion Prediction

Figure 11: Downstream performance comparison of pretrained HuBERT large architecture vs Brain-
tuned HuBERT base architecture. The HuBERT base architecture performs closely to the large
pretrained architecture, bridging the gap between the base and large model sizes.



                                                 Command Word Idt.                     Phonemes                    Phon. Sent. Type
                                                    Prediction                         Prediction                     Prediction
                                          20
                       % in Performance


                                          15

                                          10

                                           5

                                           0
                                               90M        317M         1B 90M            317M            1B 90M             317M           1B
                                                        Model Size                     Model Size                         Model Size
                                                    (a) Performance Improvement vs. Model Size for HuBERT
                                                 Command Word Idt.       Phonemes          Phon. Sent. Type
                                                     Prediction           Prediction          Prediction

                                          20
                       % in Performance


                                          15

                                          10

                                           5

                                           0
                                               20       50      70      100 20     50      70      100 20     50      70      100
                                                    % Brain-tuning Data        % Brain-tuning Data        % Brain-tuning Data
                                                     (b) Performance Improvement vs. Data Size for Wav2Vec2.0

Figure 12: Performance Improvement (brain-tuned − pretrained performance) across model sizes
and data sizes. We see clearly that lowering the amount of data limits the gain in performance due
to brain-tuning, and the same goes for increasing the model size while keeping the data fixed.


                                                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6     0.8       1.0


Figure 13: Voxels with Noise Ceiling values above the threshold for Participants 2 and 3. These are
the voxels that will be used for brain-tuning


F     A DDITIONAL B RAIN P LOTS FOR D IFFERENT PARTICIPANTS
Here, we show samples of noise-filtered voxels (the ones that will be used for brain tuning). More-
over, we extend the whole-brain plots (flat and lateral views) for different participants for both brain
alignment and low-level impact analyses.

F.1   H IGH NC F ILTERED VOXELS

Fig.13 shows the remaining voxels after applying the noise threshold mentioned in Section 3.2
for two participants. These are the voxels that will be used during brain-tuning. Looking at their
locations, we see that they cover a large number of semantic regions, as well as the auditory cortex.

F.2   B RAIN A LIGNMENT VOXEL - WISE DIFFERENCES

We show in Fig.14 more whole-brain analyses for the voxel-wise differences in brain alignment be-
tween brain-tuned and pretrained models for different participants. The trend we detailed in section
4.1 is also consistent with the plots below and is in line with the increase in the values of alignment in
late language regions (Fig.2a) and the insignificant change in alignment in primary auditory regions
(Fig.2b). All shown Brain plots are for the Wav2vec2.0 model family.

F.3   L OW- LEVEL I MPACT VOXEL - WISE DIFFERENCES

In Fig.15, we show more whole-brain analyses for the voxel-wise differences in low-level impact
due to brain-tuning (between brain-tuned and pretrained models) for different participants. The
trend we detailed in section 4.2 is also generally consistent with the plots below and is in line with
the increase in the values of alignment in late language regions (Fig.3a) and the insignificant change
in alignment in primary auditory regions (Fig.3b). All shown Brain plots are for the Wav2vec2.0
model family.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                 0.2                                                  0.2


                         (a) Difference in Brain Alignment for Participant 1
                                 Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                  0.2                                                0.2


                         (b) Difference in Brain Alignment for Participant 2
                                 Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                  0.2                                                0.2


                         (c) Difference in Brain Alignment for Participant 6


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                    0.2                                                0.2


                           (d) Difference in Brain Alignment for Participant 7
                                   Difference in Brain Alignment (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                    0.2                                                0.2


                           (e) Difference in Brain Alignment for Participant 8

Figure 14: Difference in brain alignment performance (measured by Pearson correlation) between
brain brain-tuned and pretrained Wav2Vec2.0 models for different participants. It shows better align-
ment of the brain-tuned model in semantic language areas.


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                  50                                                50


                         (a) Difference in low-level impact for Participant 1
                                 Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                  50                                                50


                         (b) Difference in low-level impact for Participant 2
                                 Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                  50                                                50


                         (c) Difference in low-level impact for Participant 6


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                   50                                                50


                          (d) Difference in low-level impact for Participant 7
                                  Low-level Impact Difference (Brain-tuned - Pretrained)
                                   50                                                50


                          (e) Difference in low-level impact for Participant 8

Figure 15: Difference in low-level impact brain brain-tuned and pretrained Wav2Vec2.0 models
for different participants. It shows a lower low-level impact (lower drop due to low-level feature
removal) for the brain-tuned model in semantic language areas.


                                                          27
