Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DATA - CENTRIC P REDICTION E XPLANATION VIA
K ERNELIZED S TEIN D ISCREPANCY
 Mahtab Sarvmaili, Hassan Sajjad, Ga Wu
 Department of Computer Science
 Dalhousie University
 {mahtab.sarvmaili,hsajjad,ga.wu}@dal.ca



                                             A BSTRACT

         Existing example-based prediction explanation methods often bridge test and
         training data points through the model’s parameters or latent representations. While
         these methods offer clues to the causes of model predictions, they often exhibit
         innate shortcomings, such as incurring significant computational overhead or
         producing coarse-grained explanations. This paper presents a Highly-precise
         and Data-centric Explanation (HD-Explain) prediction explanation method that
         exploits properties of Kernelized Stein Discrepancy (KSD). Specifically, the KSD
         uniquely defines a parameterized kernel function for a trained model that encodes
         model-dependent data correlation. By leveraging the kernel function, one can
         identify training samples that provide the best predictive support to a test point
         efficiently. We conducted thorough analyses and experiments across multiple
         classification domains, where we show that HD-Explain outperforms existing
         methods from various aspects, including 1) preciseness (fine-grained explanation),
         2) consistency, and 3) computation efficiency, leading to a surprisingly simple,
         effective, and robust prediction explanation solution. Source code is available at
         https://github.com/MahtabSarvmaili/HDExplain.


1    I NTRODUCTION

As one of the decisive factors affecting the performance of a Machine Learning (ML) model, training
data points are of great value in promoting the model’s transparency and trustworthiness, including
explaining prediction results, tracing sources of errors, or summarizing the characteristics of the
model (Cai et al., 2019; Anik & Bunt, 2021; Nam et al., 2022). The challenges of example-based
prediction explanation mainly come from retrieving relevant data points from a vast pool of training
samples or justifying the rationale of such explanations (Lim et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021).
Modern example-based prediction explanation methods commonly approach the above challenges
by constructing an influence chain between training and test data points (Li et al., 2020; Nam et al.,
2022; Tsai et al., 2023). The influence chain could be either data points’ co-influence on model
parameters or their similarity in terms of latent representations. In particular, Influence Function (Koh
& Liang, 2017), one of the representative, model-aware explanation methods, looks for the shift of
the model parameters (due to up-weighting each training sample) as the sample’s influence score.
Since computing the inverse Hessian matrix is challenging, the approach adapts Conjugate Gradients
Stochastic Estimation and the Perlmutter trick to reduce its computation cost. Representer Point
Selection (RPS) (Yeh et al., 2018), as another example, reproduces the representer theorem by refining
the trained neural network model with L2 regularization, such that the influence score of each training
sample can be represented as the gradient of the predictive layer. While computationally efficient,
RPS is criticized for producing coarse-grained explanations that are more class-level rather than
instance-level explanations (Sui et al., 2021) (In this paper we use the instance level explanation and
example-based explanation interchangeably.). Multiple later variants (Pruthi et al., 2020; Sui et al.,
2021) attempted to mitigate the drawbacks above, but their improvements were often limited by the
cause of their shared theoretical scalability bounds.
This paper presents Highly-precise and Data-centric Explanation (HD-Explain), a post-hoc, model-
aware, example-based explanation solution for neural classifiers. Instead of relying on data co-


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Summary of existing Post-hoc Example-based Prediction Explanation Methods that work
with deep neural networks. Practicality of the whole model explanation is measured by the feasibility
of explaining the prediction of ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10 with a single A100 GPU machine.
CIFAR-10 is a small benchmark data with 50000 training samples.
                                   Need optimization     Whole model explanation   Inference computation                  Memory/cache (of each
    Method       Explanation of
                                   as sub-routine        Theoretical   Practical   complexity bounded by                  training sample) bounded by

    Influence                      Yes (Iterative HVP                              1.Hθ−1 ∇θ L(xt , θ) approximation
    Function     Original Model    approximation)           Yes          No        2. < ∇θ L(x, θ), Hθ−1 ∇θ L(xt , θ) >   Size of model parameters
                                   Yes (L2 regularized                             1.last layer representation ft         Size of model parameters
      RPS       Fine-tuned Model   last layer retrain)       No          No        2.< αi fi , ft >                       of the last layer
                                                                                   1.∇θ L(xt , θ) approximation
    TracIn*      Original Model            No               Yes          No        2. < ∇θ L(x, θ), ∇θ L(xt , θ) >        Size of model parameters
                                                                                   1.∇xt f (xt , θ)yt 2. Closed-form
 HD-Explain      Original Model            No               Yes          Yes       kθ (x, xt ) defined by KSD             Size of data dimension
* TracIn typically requires to access the training process. Here, TracIn* refers to a special case that only use the
last training checkpoint.


influence on model parameters or feature representation similarity, HD-Explain retains the influence
chain between training and test data points by exploiting the underrated properties of Kernelized
Stein Discrepancy (KSD) (Liu et al., 2016) between the trained predictive model and its training
dataset. Specifically, we note that the Stein operator augmented kernel uniquely defines a pairwise
data correlation (in the context of a trained model) whose expectation on the training dataset results
in the minimum KSD (as a discrete approximation) compared to that of the dataset sampled from
different distributions. By exploiting this property, we can 1) reveal a subset of training data points
that provides the best predictive support to the test point and 2) identify the potential distribution
mismatch among training data points. Jointly leveraging these advantages, HD-Explain can produce
explanations faithful to the original trained model.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows: 1) We propose a novel example-based
explanation method. 2) We propose several quantitative evaluation metrics to measure the correctness
and effectiveness of generated explanations. 3) We perform a thorough evaluation comparing several
existing explanation methods across a wide set of classification tasks.
Our findings conclude that HD-Explain offers fine-grained, instance-level explanations with re-
markable computational efficiency, compared to well-known example-based prediction explanation
methods. Its algorithmic simplicity, effective performance and scalability enables its deployment to
real world scenarios where transparency and trustworthiness is essential.


2       P RELIMINARY AND R ELATED W ORK

2.1       P OST- HOC C LASSIFIER E XPLANATION BY E XAMPLES

Post-hoc Classifier Explanation by Examples (a.k.a prototypes, representers) refers to a category of
classifier explanation approaches that pick a subset of training data points as prediction explanations
without accessing the model training process. Its research history spans from the model-intrinsic
approach (see survey Molnar (2020)) to the recent impact-based approach (Li et al., 2020).
Model-inherent approaches (Molnar, 2020) refer to machine learning models that are considered
interpretable such as k-nearest neighbor (Peterson, 2009) or decision tree; For a given test data
point, similar data points on the raw feature space can be efficiently selected as explanations through
the inherent decision making mechanism of the self-explanatory machine learning models. In fact,
attracted by their inherent explanatory power, multiple well-known works attempted to compile
complex black-box models into self-explanatory models for enabling prediction explanation (Frosst
& Hinton, 2017), while computationally inefficient.
To unlock the general explanatory power applicable to black-box models, multiple later studies
suggested to fall back to statistics-based solutions, looking for prototype samples that represent data
points that either are common in the dataset or play critical roles in data distribution. MMD-critic (Kim
et al., 2016) and Normative and Comparative explanations (Cai et al., 2019) are the well-known
examples in this category. Unfortunately, those approaches are often with strong assumption of good


                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prototypes (which often overlook the characteristics of trained models) (Li et al., 2020), making their
prediction explanations general to the training dataset rather than a trained model instance.
Recently, influence-based methods have emerged as the prevailing technique in model explanation (Li
et al., 2020; Nam et al., 2022; Bae et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023a). Influence function (Koh & Liang,
2017), as one of the earliest influence-based solutions, bridges the outcome of a prediction task
to training data points by, first, evaluating training data’s influence on the model parameters and,
then, estimating how model parameter changes affect prediction. Similarly, Representative Point
Selection (RPS) (Yeh et al., 2018) builds such an influence chain by fitting the representation theorem,
where the weighted product between the representations of test and training samples comes into play.
Concerning the computational overhead of previous work, the later solution TracIn (Pruthi et al.,
2020) proposed a simple approximation of the influence function via a first-order Taylor expansion
(essentially Neural Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018)), successfully discarding the inverse Hessian
matrix from the influence chain formulation. BoostIn (Brophy et al., 2023) further extends TracIn
and is dedicated to interpreting the predictions of gradient-boosted decision trees. RPS-LJE (Sui
et al., 2021), on the other hand, alleviated the inconsistent explanation problem of RPS through Local
Jacobian Expansion. In the latest publication (Tsai et al., 2023), all of the above methods described
in this paragraph are identified as special cases of Generalized Representers but with different chosen
kernels.
One limitation of the current influence-based methods is that they attribute the influence of each
training data point to the parameters of the trained model as an essential intermediate step. Indeed,
as the nature of stochastic gradient descent (the dominating training strategy of neural networks),
isolating such contribution is barely possible without 1) relying on approximations or 2) accessing
the training process. Unfortunately, either solution would result in performance degradation or
heavy computational overhead (Schioppa et al., 2022). Hence, this work delves into the exploration
of an alternative influence connection between training and test data points without exploiting the
perturbation of model parameters.

2.2   K ERNELIZED S TEIN D ISCREPANCY

The idea of Kernelized Stein Discrepancy (KSD) (Liu et al., 2016) can be traced back to a theorem
called Stein Identity (Kattumannil, 2009) that states, if a smooth distribution p(x) and a function
ϕ(x) satisfy lim||x||→∞ p(x)ϕ(x) = 0,
                            Ex∼p [ϕ(x)∇x log p(x) + ∇x ϕ(x)] = 0,         ∀ϕ.
The identity can characterize distribution p(x) such that it is often served to assess the goodness-of-fit
(Kubokawa, 2024) of the model. The above expression could be further abstracted to use function
operator Ap (a.k.a Stein operator) such that
                                Ap ϕ(x) = ϕ(x)∇x log p(x) + ∇x ϕ(x),
where the operator encodes distribution p(x) in the form of derivative to input (a.k.a score function).
Stein’s identity offers a mechanism to measure the gap between two distributions by assuming the
variable x is sampled from a different distribution q ̸= p such that
                                 p
                                    S(q, p) = max Ex∼q [Ap ϕ(x)],
                                                 ϕ∈F

where the expression takes the most discriminant ϕ that maximizes the violation of Stein’s identity to
quantify the distribution discrepancy. This discrepancy is, accordingly, referred as Stein Discrepancy.
The challenge of computing Stein Discrepancy comes from the selection of function set F, which
motivates the later innovation of KSD that takes F to be the unit ball of a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS). By leveraging the reproducing property of RKHS, the KSD could be eventually
transformed into
                                    S(q, p) = Ex,x′ ∼q [κp (x, x′ )]
                            ′
where κp (x, x′ ) = Axp Axp k(x, x′ ) that can work with arbitrary kernel function k(x, x′ ). See Ap-
pendix C for expanded derivations.
In the literature, KSD has been adopted for tackling three types of application tasks – 1) parameter
inference (Barp et al., 2019), 2) Goodness-of-fit tests (Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016;


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                           0.75
                                                                                                  60


                                                                                    Discrepancy


                                                                                                                             Discrepancy
                                                                                                                                           0.70


                                                                                       [Pd, P ]


                                                                                                                                [Pd, P ]
    Rotated: -120° Rotated: -60° Training Data        Rotated: 60° Rotated: 120°                  40                                       0.65
                                                                                                                                           0.60
                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                           0.55
                                                                                                  0                                        0.50
                                                                                                       100     0       100                        0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
    Class Ratio: 1:9 Class Ratio: 3:7 Training Data Class Ratio: 7:3 Class Ratio: 9:1                  Degree of Rotation                               Data Ratio (Pos/Neg)

Figure 1: Varying of Kernelized Stein Discrepancy given the shift of training data distribution on
Two Moon dataset.


Yang et al., 2018), and 3) particle filtering (sampling) (Gorham et al., 2020; Korba et al., 2021).
However, to the best of our knowledge, its innate property that uniquely defines model-dependent data
correlation has never been exploited, which, we note, is valuable to interpret model behaviour from
various aspects, including instance-level prediction explanation and global prototypical explanations.

3        H IGHLY- PRECISE AND DATA - CENTRIC E XPLANATION
HD-Explain is an example-based prediction explanation method based on Kernelized Stein Discrep-
ancy. Consider a trained classifier fθ as the outcome of a training process with Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE)
                                   argmax E(x,y)∼PD [log Pθ (y|x)].
                                                                θ
Theoretically, maximizing observation likelihood is equivalent to minimizing a KL divergence
between data distribution PD and the parameterized distribution Pθ such that

                                     PD (x, y)
    DKL (PD , Pθ ) = E(x,y)∼PD log
                                      Pθ (x, y)
     = − E(x,y)∼PD [log Pθ (y|x)] + E(x,y)∼PD [log PD (y|x)] + E(x,y)∼PD [log PD (x/Pθ (x)],
          |          {z         } |              {z         } |              {z           }
                                 Likelihood                                      constant                            constant as θ does not model inputs

which, in turn, is proven to align with minimizing KSD in the form of gradient descent (Liu & Wang,
2016)
                                   ∇ϵ DKL (PD , Pθ )|ϵ = −S(PD , Pθ ),
where ϵ is the step size of gradient decent.
The chain of reasoning above shows that a well-trained classifier fθ through gradient-descent should
lead to minimum discrepancy between the training dataset distribution and the model encoded
distribution S(PD , Pθ ) 1 . We empirically verify the connection through simple examples as shown
in Figure 1, where the changes in training data distribution would result in larger KSD compared
to that of the original training data distribution. Intuitively, the connection shows that there is a tie
between a model and its training data points, encoded in the form of a Stein kernel function kθ (·, ·)
defined on each pair of data points. As the kernel function is conditioned on model fθ , we note it is
an encoding of data correlation under the context of a trained model, which paves the foundation of
the example-based prediction explanation.

3.1        KSD BETWEEN M ODEL AND T RAINING DATA

Recall that KSD, S(PD , Pθ ), defines the correlation between pairs of training samples through model
θ dependent kernel function with closed-form decomposition
                                        κθ ((xa , ya ), (xb , yb )) = Aaθ Abθ k(a, b)
                                        = ∇a ∇b k(a, b) + k(a, b)∇a log Pθ (a)∇b log Pθ (b)                                                                                      (1)
                                        + ∇a k(a, b)∇b log Pθ (b) + ∇b k(a, b)∇a log Pθ (a),
where we denote data point (xa , ya ) with a for clean notation. The only model-dependent factor in
the above decomposition is a derivative ∇x,y log Pθ (x, y) (for both data a or b).
    1
      Since PD is discrete distribution while Pθ is continuous, the Discrepancy between the two distributions will
not recap Stein Identity (= 0) with a limited number of training data points.


                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, as the KSD only models the discrepancy between joint distributions rather than conditional
distributions, it is challenging to estimate discrepancy between predictive models Pθ (y|x) and its
training set z = (x, y) ∼ PD without including Pθ (x) into consideration, even though the marginal
distribution Pθ (x) is not estimated by the predictive model at all.
Inspired by the previous study on Goodness of Fit (Jitkrittum et al., 2020), to unlock KSD support on
predictive models, we propose to set Pθ (x) ≡ PD (x) such that the identical marginal distribution
would not contribute to the discrepancy between the joint distributions PD (x, y) and Pθ (x, y). In
addition, while original distribution P (x) that generates data could be arbitrary complex distribution
(that is out of modelling scope of the predictive model), we may simply set data point distribution
PD (not original distribution P ) as an Uniform distribution over data points in the dataset under the
particular context, given a data point is sampled from a generated dataset uniformly. Although the
relaxation appears hasty, we believe that the relaxation is valid in the prediction explanation context
(and probably only valid in this particular context) in terms of measuring correlation between a pair
of data points, where all train/test data points’ input are valid observation (e.g. images) rather than
random continuous valued sample in the same space form an unknown distribution.
With the above relaxations, the score function ∇x,y log Pθ (x, y) in the Stein operator Aθ could
be derived as a concatenation of the gradient of model fθ (x)y to its input x and its probabilistic
prediction fθ (x) in logarithm form, since
               ∇x,y log Pθ (x, y) = ∇x,y [log Pθ (y|x) + log PD (x)]
                                  = ∇x,y log Pθ (y|x) + [∇x log PD (x)||∇y PD (x)]
                                                                                                (2)
                                  = [∇x y⊤ log fθ (x)||∇y y⊤ log fθ (x)] + [0||0]
                                  = [∇x log fθ (x)y || log fθ (x)],
where [·||·] denotes concatenation operation. We use one-hot vector representation y to represent data
label y here. Since PD (x) follows uniform distribution, its gradient to the inputs is a 0 vector.
In the above derivation, we treat discrete label y as-is without specialized discrete distribution
treatments (see (Yang et al., 2018)) to avoid significant computation overhead. In fact, data space in
practice is unlikely dense even if a group of features are continuous (e.g. images). Treating the label
as a sparse continuous feature can be viewed as an approximation.
Combining Equation 1 and 2, we can estimate the correlation of any pairs of training data points
conditioned on the trained machine learning model. Computationally, since a score function
∇x,y log Pθ (x, y) depends on a single data point, its outputs of the training set could be pre-computed
and cached to accelerate the kernel computation. In particular, the output dimension of the score
function is simply m + k for data with m dimensional features and k class labels. Compared to the
existing solutions, whose training data cache (or influence) are bounded by the dimension of model
parameters (such as Influence function, TracIn, RPS, RPS-JLE), the explanation method built on
KSD would come with a significant advantage in terms of scalability (see comparison in Table 1).
This statement is generally true for neural network based classifiers, whenever the size of model
parameters is far larger than the data dimension.

3.2   P REDICTION E XPLANATION

The computation of kernel function in Equation 1 requires access to features and labels of a data
point. While the ground-truth label information is available for the training set, it is inaccessible for a
test data point. We consider the predicted class ŷt of the test data point xt as a label to construct a
complete data point (xt , ŷt ) and apply the KSD kernel function. For a test data point xt , we search
for top-k training data points that maximize the KSD defined kernel.
Figure 2 demonstrates HD-Explain on a 2d synthetic dataset. The distribution of κθ (d, ·) in the
right most plot shows that only a small number of training data points have a strong influence on a
particular prediction.

4     E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we conduct several qualitative and quantitative experiments to demonstrate various
properties of HD-Explain and compare it with the existing example-based solutions.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            3
                                                                                 Week Prediction Support
                                                            2

                                                            1                          Strong Prediction Support


                                                            0

Figure 2: Demonstration of HD-Explain on 2D Rectangular synthetic dataset. Left shows the training
dataset with three classes. Middle figure shows the explanation support of training data points to a
given test point (as black cross), where green shows a higher KSD kernel value. Right shows the
distribution of KSD kernel values (over the training set) to the test point, where only a small number
of training data points provide strong support to this prediction.


Datasets: We consider multiple disease classification tasks where diagnosis explanation is highly
desired. We also introduced synthetic and benchmark classification datasets to deliver the main idea
without the need for medical background knowledge. Concretely, we use CIFAR-10 (32 × 32 × 3),
Brain Tumor (Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 128×128×3), Ovarian Cancer (Histopathology Images,
128 × 128 × 3) datasets, and SVHN (32 × 32 × 3). More details are listed in the Appendix F.
Baselines: The baseline explainers used in our experiments include Influence Function, Representer
Point Selection, and TracIn. While other variants of these baseline explainers exist (Barshan et al.,
2020; Sui et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021), we note they don’t offer fundamental performance
improvements over the classic ones. In addition, as Influence Function and TracIn face scalability
issues, we limit the influence of parameters to the last layer of the model so that they can work
with models that contain a large number of parameters. Our experiments use ResNet-18 as the
backbone model architecture (with around 11 million trainable parameters) for all image datasets
(see Appendix H for detail on our hardware setup).
Finally, we also introduce an HD-Explain variant (HD-Explain*) to match the last layer setting of
other baseline models, even though HD-Explain can scale up to the whole model without computation
pressure. The HD-Explain* is a simple change of HD-Explain in terms of using data representations
(the output of the last non-predictive layer of the neural classifier) rather than the raw features.
Specifically, we assume a neural network model fθ could be decomposed into two components
fθ2 · fθ1 , where fθ1 is a representation encoder and fθ2 is a linear model for prediction. With this
decomposition, we define the KSD kernel function for HD-Explain* as

      κθ ((fθ1 (xa ), ya ), (fθ1 (xb ), yb )) = Aaθ2 Abθ2 k(a, b)
                                            = ∇a ∇b k(a, b) + k(a, b)∇a log Pθ2 (a)∇b log Pθ2 (b)
                                            + ∇a k(a, b)∇b log Pθ2 (b) + ∇b k(a, b)∇a log Pθ2 (a),

where we define a = (fθ1 (xa ), ya ) and b = (fθ1 (xb ), yb ) for short. This setting reduces the
prediction explanation to the last layer of the neural network in a similar fashion to RPS.
Metrics: In existing example-based explanation works, the experimental results are often demon-
strated qualitatively, as visualized explanation instances, without quantitative evaluation. This results
in subjective evaluation. In this paper, we propose several quantitative evaluation metrics to measure
the effectiveness of each method.

 • Hit Rate: Hit rate measures how likely an explanation sample hits the desired example cases
   where the desired examples are guaranteed to be undisputed. Specifically, we modify a training
   data point with minor augmentations (adding noise or flipping horizontally) and use it as a test
   data point, such that the best explanation for the generated test data point should be the original
   data point in the training set.
 • Coverage: Given n test data points, the metric measures the number of unique explanation
   samples an explanation method produces when configuring to return top-k training samples.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data



  Influence                                                 Influence                                                 Influence
  Function                                                  Function                                                  Function


     RPS                                                       RPS                                                      RPS


    TracIn                                                    TracIn                                                    TracIn


 HD-Explain                                                HD-Explain                                                HD-Explain


 HD-Explain*                                               HD-Explain*                                               HD-Explain*


      (a) High-Conf Correct Predict                             (b) Low-Conf Correct Predict                             (c) Low-Conf Incorrect Predict

Figure 3: Qualitative evaluation of various example-based explanation methods using CIFAR10. We
show three scenarios where the target model makes a) a highly-confident prediction that matches
ground truth label, b) a low-confident prediction that matches ground truth label, c) low-confident
prediction that does not match ground truth label (which is a bird). For each sub plot, we show top-3
influential training data points picked by the explanation methods for the test example.
 Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data



  Influence                                                 Influence                                                 Influence
  Function                                                  Function                                                  Function


     RPS                                                       RPS                                                       RPS


    TracIn                                                    TracIn                                                    TracIn


 HD-Explain                                                HD-Explain                                                HD-Explain


 HD-Explain*                                               HD-Explain*                                               HD-Explain*


      (a) High-Conf Correct Predict                             (b) High-Conf Correct Predict                             (c) Low-Conf Correct Predict

Figure 4: Qualitative evaluation of various example-based explanation methods using SVHN. We
show two scenarios where the target model makes a-b) a highly-confident prediction that matches
ground truth label, c) a low-confident prediction that matches ground truth label. For each sub plot,
we show top-3 influential training data points picked by the explanation methods for the test example.
We include two samples of high-confidence correct predictions to show the overlap of explanations.


      Formally,
                                                       | ∪ni=1 ei |
                                                                          Coverage =
                                                         n×k
   where ei is the set of top-k explanations for test data point i. Coverage is motivated to measure
   the diversity of explanations across a test set where a high value reflects higher granularity (per
   test point) of the explanation.
 • Run Time: It measures the run time of an explanation method in wall clock time.

4.1            Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION

Figure 3 shows three test cases of the CIFAR10 classification task that cover different classification
outcomes, including high-confidence correct prediction, low-confident correct prediction, and low-
confident incorrect prediction. For both correct prediction cases, we are confident that HD-Explain
provides a better explanation than others in terms of visually matching test data points e.g. brown


                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   HD-Explain                    HD-Explain*           RPS           IF                     TracIn*
                         100
                                                                           0.8                                                   103
 Hit Rate (log-scale)


                                                                                                                Execution Time
                                                                                                                  (in seconds)
                                                                           0.6


                                                                Coverage
                        10 1                                                                                                     102
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                 101
                                                                           0.2
                        10 2
                                                                           0.0
                               CIFAR10   OCH   MRI     SVHN                      CIFAR10   OCH   MRI     SVHN                          CIFAR10   OCH   MRI   SVHN

                                    (a) Hit Rate                                      (b) Coverage                                     (c) Execution Time

Figure 5: Quantitative explanation comparison among candidate example-based explanation methods.
Data augmentation strategy used is Noise Injection. Error bar shows 95% confidence interval.


                                                                           0.8                                                   103
 Hit Rate (log-scale)


                        10 1


                                                                                                                Execution Time
                                                                                                                  (in seconds)
                                                                           0.6
                                                                Coverage

                                                                                                                                 102
                        10 2                                               0.4
                                                                           0.2                                                   101
                        10 3                                               0.0
                               CIFAR10   OCH   MRI     SVHN                      CIFAR10   OCH   MRI     SVHN                          CIFAR10   OCH   MRI   SVHN

                                    (a) Hit Rate                                      (b) Coverage                                     (c) Execution Time

Figure 6: Quantitative explanation comparison among candidate example-based explanation methods.
Data augmentation strategy used is Horizontal Flip. Error bar shows 95% confidence interval. We
reuse the legend of Figure 5.


frogs in Figure 3 (a) and deer on the grass in Figure 3 (b). In contrast, for the misclassified prediction
case (as shown in Figure 3 (c)), we note the HD-Explain produces an example that does not even
belong to the same class as the predicted one. pecifically, the predicted class is cat (while the ground
truth label is bird), and HD-Explain generates an explanation sample from the deer class. This
reflects a low confidence in model’s prediction for the particular test example and highlight a potential
error in the prediction. RPS also shows such inconsistency in explanation, which aligns with its
claim (Yeh et al., 2018). The other two baseline methods do not offer such properties and still produce
explanations that match the predicted label well. It is hard to justify how those training samples
support such prediction visually (since no clear shared pattern is obvious to us). In addition, it is
interesting to see that Influence Function and TracIn produce near identical explanations, reflecting
their similarity in leveraging the perturbation of model parameters.
Figure 4 provides additional insights on SVHN dataset. HD-Explain again shows a better explanation
for producing training samples that appear similar to the test samples. In addition, we notice that
RPS produces the same set of explanations for different sample cases, as shown in Fig. 4 (a-b), which
reveals its limitation in providing instance-level explanations. To verify this observation further, we
conducted a quantitative evaluation as described in the next section.
The qualitative evaluation for OCH and MRI datasets are given in the appendix due to the page limit
of the main paper. The overall observations remain consistent with CIFAR10 and SVHN.

4.2                        Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

In order to perform quantitative evaluation, we limit our experiments to datasets where ground-truth
explanation samples are available. Specifically, given a training data sample (xi , yi ), we generate a
test point xt by adopting two image data augmentation methods:

 • Noise Injection: xt = xi + ϵ s.t. ϵ ∼ N (0, 0.01σ), where σ is the element-wise standard
   deviation of features in the entire training dataset.
 • Horizontal Flip: xt = flip(xi ), where we flip images horizontally that do not compromise the
   semantic meaning of images.


                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     RBF             IMQ                            Linear
            1.0                                       1.0                                           1.0
            0.8                                       0.8                                           0.8                                             102


                                                                                                                                   Execution Time
                                                                                                                                     (in seconds)
                                                      0.6


                                           Coverage
            0.6                                                                                     0.6
 Hit Rate


                                                                                         Hit Rate
            0.4                                       0.4                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                    101
            0.2                                       0.2                                           0.2
            0.0                                       0.0                                           0.0
                  CIFAR10 OCH   MRI SVHN                    CIFAR10 OCH   MRI SVHN                        CIFAR10 OCH   MRI SVHN                          CIFAR10 OCH MRI SVHN

                (a) Hit Rate                                 (b) Coverage                               (c) Hit Rate                          (d) Execution Time
              (Noise Injection)                                  (both)                               (Horizontal Flip)                             (both)

Figure 7: Quantitative explanation comparison among HD-Explainers with different kernel functions
           on all image classification datasets. Error bar shows 95% confidence interval.


We created 30 augmented test points for each training data point (> 10, 000 data points) in each
dataset, resulting in more than 300, 000 independent runs. Since the data augmentation is guaranteed
to maintain prediction consistency, the ideally best explanation for the generated test point is the
original data point xi itself. Hence, the quantitative evaluation could be a sample retrieval evaluation
where Hit Rate measures the probability of successful retrieval.
Figure 5(a) shows the hit rate comparison among candidate methods on the four image classification
datasets under Noise Injection data augmentation. The existing methods face significant difficulty
in retrieving the ideal explanatory sample (≤ 10%), even with such a simple problem setup; only
HD-Explain (and its variant) produces a reasonable successful rate (> 80%). We further investigate
the diversity of explanations across a testset using the Coverage metric. Here, diversity indirectly
reflects the granularity of an explanation when accumulated over the test dataset. Figure 5(b) shows
the Coverage score, the ratio of explanation samples that are unique over many test points. It turns
out that existing solutions produce only 10% - 50% coverage – many test points receive the same set
of explanations, disregarding their unique characteristic. We further observed that the explanations
of baselines are often dominated by the class labels; data points predicted as the same class would
receive a similar set of explanations. In contrast, HD-Explain shows substantially higher coverage,
generating explanations that considers the unique characteristics of each test point.
Regarding computation efficiency, while we have summarized the scalability limitation of the
candidate methods in Table 1, there was no computational efficiency evaluation conducted in previous
works. We recorded the wall clock execution time of each experiments as shown in Figure 5(c).
As expected, the Influence Function takes longer to return its explanation than other methods. HD-
Explain*, TracIn* and RPS, all use the last layer to generate explanation. RPS showed the lowest
compute time since it does not require auto-differentiation for computing the training data influence.
HD-Explain* showed the second best compute time and is efficient than TracIn*2 and IF. HD-Explain
considers the whole model for explanation and its compute time is not directly comparable to others.
However, it shows better efficiency than IF across all datasets and is better than TracIn* on CIFAR10.
We observe a similar trend in the other data augmentation scenario, Horizontal Flip, where computa-
tion time and coverage are roughly the same, as shown in Figure 6. However, we do notice that, as the
outcome of image flipping, the raw feature (pixel) level similarity between xt and xi is destroyed. As
an outcome, the HD-Explain that works on raw features suffers from performance deduction while
other methods, including HD-Explain*, are less impacted. This observation suggests that choosing
the layer of explanation might be considered in the practical usage of this approach.

4.3               K ERNEL O PTIONS

We use the Radial Basis Function (RBF) as our default choice of kernel. However, another kernel
may better fit a particular application domain. In this experiment, we compare three well-known
kernels i.e. Linear, RBF, and Inverse Multi-Quadric (IMQ) on the three image classification datasets.

  2
    TracIn* is configured only to compute the gradient of the prediction layer due to its high memory require-
ments.


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7 presents the results under both data augmentation scenarios. Overall, the IMQ kernel
performs better than the RBF kernel regarding explanation quality (Hit Rate). The advantage is
significant when the data augmentation scenario is Horizontal Flip (Figure 7c, which appears more
challenging than Noise Injection. IMQ also showed better performance on Coverage (Figure 7b).
The linear kernel performs worse compared to other kernels. However, it is substantially efficient
than the others, as shown in Figure 7d, highlighting its utility on large datasets. Compared to the
baselines presented in Figure 5, we note that the Linear kernel is sufficient for HD-Explain to stand
out from other methods in both performance and efficiency.

4.4     D ISCUSSION : I NTUITION ON WHY HD-E XPLAIN WORKS

After showing HD-Explain’s empirical performance, we now present our understanding of how
HD-Explain finds the explanations for the prediction of a test data point. In particular, we want to
understand why the approach is faithful to the pre-trained model.
In HD-Explain, the key metric on measuring the predictive supports of a test point xt given a training
data (xi , yi ) is the KSD defined kernel κθ ([xt ||ŷt ], [xi ||yi ]), where ŷt denotes the predicted class
label by model fθ in one-hot encoding. By definition, the kernel κθ ((xa , ya ), (xb , yb )) = kθ (a, b)
between two data points can be decomposed into four terms
             trace(∇a ∇b k(a, b)) + k(a, b)∇a log Pθ (a)⊤ ∇b log Pθ (b)
             |       {z         } |                {z                 }
                       ①                                        ②

                                    + ∇a k(a, b) ∇b log Pθ (b) + ∇b k(a, b)⊤ ∇a log Pθ (a) .
                                                     ⊤
                                      |          {z          } |            {z           }
                                                       ③                            ④


We examine the effect of each term as follows:

 • ①: We note that the first term is often a similarity bias of raw data points given a specified kernel
   function. In particular, for the RBF kernel k(a, b) = exp(−γ||a − b||2 ), the first term is simply
   Pd+l
      i   2γk(a, b), where d + l refers to the sum of input and output (in one-hot) dimensions of a
   data point. Intuitively, the term shows how similar the two data points are given the RBF kernel.
   For linear kernel k(a, b) = a⊤ b, on another hand, the first term is simply d + l as a constant bias
   term, which does not deliver any similarity information between the two data points.
 • ②: The second term reflects the similarity between two data points in the context of the trained
   model. In particular, considering the sub-term ∇a log Pθ (a)⊤ ∇b log Pθ (b), based on our deriva-
   tion in Equation 2 (in the main paper), we note it is equivalent to
           [∇xa log fθ (xa )ya || log fθ (xa )]⊤ [∇xb log fθ (xb )yb || log fθ (xb )]
                                 = ∇xa log fθ (xa )⊤                                   ⊤
                                                   ya ∇xb log fθ (xb )yb + log fθ (xa ) log fθ (xb ),
                                   |                {z                 } |             {z         }
                                         similarity of scores (input gradients)    similarity of predictions

      where both terms could be viewed as similarity between data points in the context of trained
      model.
 • ③-④: Both of the last two terms examine the alignment between the score of one data point and
   the kernel derivative of another data point. We conjecture that this alignment reflects how a test
   prediction would change if there is a training data point present closer to it than before.

5      C ONCLUSION

This paper presents HD-Explain, a Kernel Stein Discrepancy-driven example-based prediction
explanation method. We performed comprehensive qualitative and quantitative evaluation comparing
three baseline explanation methods using three datasets. The results demonstrated the efficacy of
HD-Explain in generating explanations that are accurate and effective in terms of their granularity
level. In addition, compared to other methods, HD-Explain is flexible to apply on any layer of interest
and can be used to analyze the evolution of a prediction across layers. HD-Explain serves as an
important contribution towards improving the transparency of machine learning models.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ariful Islam Anik and Andrea Bunt. Data-centric explanations: explaining training data of machine
  learning systems to promote transparency. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
  Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–13, 2021.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:17953–17967, 2022.
Alessandro Barp, Francois-Xavier Briol, Andrew Duncan, Mark Girolami, and Lester Mackey.
  Minimum stein discrepancy estimators. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Elnaz Barshan, Marc-Etienne Brunet, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Relatif: Identifying explanatory
  training samples via relative influence. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1899–1909. PMLR, 2020.
Jonathan Brophy, Zayd Hammoudeh, and Daniel Lowd. Adapting and evaluating influence-estimation
  methods for gradient-boosted decision trees. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(154):
  1–48, 2023.
Carrie J Cai, Jonas Jongejan, and Jess Holbrook. The effects of example-based explanations in a
  machine learning interface. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on intelligent user
  interfaces, pp. 258–262, 2019.
Yuanyuan Chen, Boyang Li, Han Yu, Pengcheng Wu, and Chunyan Miao. Hydra: Hypergradient data
  relevance analysis for interpreting deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7081–7089, 2021.
Kacper Chwialkowski, Heiko Strathmann, and Arthur Gretton. A kernel test of goodness of fit. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 2606–2615. PMLR, 2016.
Nicholas Frosst and Geoffrey Hinton. Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1711.09784, 2017.
Jackson Gorham, Anant Raj, and Lester Mackey. Stochastic stein discrepancies. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:17931–17942, 2020.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry.
  Datamodels: Understanding predictions with data and data with predictions. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
 Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9525–9587. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/ilyas22a.html.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Wittawat Jitkrittum, Heishiro Kanagawa, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Testing goodness of fit of
 conditional density models with kernels. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
 pp. 221–230. PMLR, 2020.
Sudheesh Kumar Kattumannil. On stein’s identity and its applications. Statistics & probability letters,
  79(12):1444–1449, 2009.
Been Kim, Rajiv Khanna, and Oluwasanmi O Koyejo. Examples are not enough, learn to criticize!
  criticism for interpretability. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Anna Korba, Pierre-Cyril Aubin-Frankowski, Szymon Majewski, and Pierre Ablin. Kernel stein
  discrepancy descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5719–5730. PMLR,
  2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tatsuya Kubokawa. Stein’s identities and the related topics: an instructive explanation on shrinkage,
  characterization, normal approximation and goodness-of-fit. Japanese Journal of Statistics and
  Data Science, pp. 1–45, 2024.
Xiao-Hui Li, Caleb Chen Cao, Yuhan Shi, Wei Bai, Han Gao, Luyu Qiu, Cong Wang, Yuanyuan
  Gao, Shenjia Zhang, Xun Xue, et al. A survey of data-driven and knowledge-aware explainable ai.
  IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34(1):29–49, 2020.
Brian Y Lim, Qian Yang, Ashraf M Abdul, and Danding Wang. Why these explanations? selecting
  intelligibility types for explanation goals. In IUI Workshops, 2019.
Qiang Liu and Dilin Wang. Stein variational gradient descent: A general purpose bayesian inference
  algorithm. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Qiang Liu, Jason Lee, and Michael Jordan. A kernelized stein discrepancy for goodness-of-fit tests.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 276–284. PMLR, 2016.
Christoph Molnar. Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com, 2020.
Chang S Nam, Jae-Yoon Jung, and Sangwon Lee. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence: Research
  and Applications. Academic Press, 2022.
Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Trak:
  Attributing model behavior at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2023a.
Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. TRAK:
  Attributing model behavior at scale. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
  Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 27074–27113. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/park23c.html.
Leif E Peterson. K-nearest neighbor. Scholarpedia, 4(2):1883, 2009.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 19920–19930, 2020.
Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence functions.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8179–8186, 2022.
Yi Sui, Ga Wu, and Scott Sanner. Representer point selection via local jacobian expansion for
  post-hoc classifier explanation of deep neural networks and ensemble models. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 34:23347–23358, 2021.
Che-Ping Tsai, Chih-Kuan Yeh, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Sample based explanations via generalized
  representers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems., 36, 2023.
Jiasen Yang, Qiang Liu, Vinayak Rao, and Jennifer Neville. Goodness-of-fit testing for discrete
   distributions via stein discrepancy. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5561–
   5570. PMLR, 2018.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Joon Kim, Ian En-Hsu Yen, and Pradeep K Ravikumar. Representer point selection
  for explaining deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jianlong Zhou, Amir H Gandomi, Fang Chen, and Andreas Holzinger. Evaluating the quality of
   machine learning explanations: A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics, 10(5):593, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A PPENDIX / SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

B    P ROBLEM D EFINITION R ECAP
We consider the task of explaining the prediction of a differentiable classifier f : IRd → IRl , given
inputs test sample xt ∈ IRd , where d denotes the input dimension and l denotes the number of classes.
Specifically, we are interested in explaining a prediction of a model f (·) by returning a subset of its
training samples D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 that has strong predictive support to the prediction of test point
xt . While not explicitly stated in the main paper, we treat example-based prediction explanation as a
function ψ(f, D, xt ) : F × D × IRd → {IRd , IRl }k such that it takes a trained model f , a training
dataset D, and an arbitrary test point xt as inputs and output top-k training samples as explanations.

C    A DDITIONAL D ERIVATION OF K ERNELIZED S TEIN D ISCREPANCY
While Stein’s Identity has been well described in many previous works (Liu et al., 2016; Liu & Wang,
2016; Chwialkowski et al., 2016), we briefly recap some key derivations in this paper to seek for
self-contained.
As mentioned in the main paper, Stein’s Identity states that, if a smooth distribution p(x) and a
function ϕ(x) satisfy lim||x||→∞ p(x)ϕ(x) = 0, we have
                  Ex∼p [ϕ(x)∇x log p(x) + ∇x ϕ(x)] = Ex∼p [Ap ϕ(x)] = 0,                            ∀ϕ.
Intuitively, by using integration by part rules, we can reveal the original assumption from the derived
expression such that
                          Z                                                 +∞
                             ϕ(x)∇x log p(x) + ∇x ϕ(x)dx = p(x)ϕ(x)
                           x                                                               −∞


Stein Discrepancy measures the difference between two distributions q and p by replacing the
expectation of distribution p term in Stein’s Identity expression with distribution q, which reveals the
difference between two distributions by projecting their score functions (gradients) with the function
ϕ(x)
          max Ex∼q [Ap ϕ(x)] = max Ex∼q [Ap ϕ(x)] − Ex∼q [Aq ϕ(x)]
          ϕ∈F                  ϕ∈F                  |     {z     }
                                                                             =0
                                   = max Ex∼q [            ϕ(x)             (∇x log p(x) − ∇x log q(x))]
                                     ϕ∈F                   |{z}             |            {z           }
                                                  projection coefficients         score function difference

Clearly, the choice of projection coefficients (function ϕ(x)) term is critical to measure the distribution
difference.
Kernelized Stein Discrepancy (KSD) addresses the task of searching function ϕ by treating the above
challenge as an optimization task where it decomposes the target function ϕ with linear decomposition
such that
                                               X                     X
        max Ex∼q [Ap ϕ(x)] = max Ex∼q [Ap         wi ϕi (x)] = max        wi Ex∼q [Ap ϕi (x)],
         ϕ∈F                        ϕ∈F                                       ϕ∈F
                                                       i                               i

with linear property of Stein operator Ap . The linear decomposition path is the way to reduce the
optimization task into looking for a finite number of the base functions ϕi ∈ F whose coefficient
norm is constraint to 1 (||w||H ≤ 1). KSD takes F to be the unit ball of a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS) and leverages its reproducing property such that ϕ(x) = ⟨ϕ(·), k(x, ·)⟩, which in turn
transforms the maximization objective of the Stein Discrepancy into
                           max⟨ϕ(·), Ex∼q [Ap k(·, x)]⟩H ,              s.t.||ϕ||H ≤ 1.
                               ϕ

The optimal ϕ is therefore a normalized version of Ex∼q [Ap k(·, x)]. Hence, KSD is defined as the
optimal between the distribution p and q with the optimal solution of ϕ
                                                                                              ′
                S(q, p) = Ex,x′ ∼q [κp (x, x′ )],     where κp (x, x′ ) = Axp Axp k(x, x′ ).


                                                        13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D            D ISCUSSION : R ELAXATIONS OF KSD E STIMATION

In section 3.1, we introduced multiple relaxations such that KSD estimation can support predictive
model (as conditional distribution model) with discrete labels. However, we want to clarify that the
relaxations introduced are not generally applicable to other context (e.g., Goodness of Fit) given
their selective conditions on the data input distribution. In fact, the data distribution P that generated
the datasets {(xi , yi )}ni could be complex given the potentially intractable marginal distribution of
P (x). Our solution avoids the modelling of such complexity by only limiting the KSD discrepancy
computation between model distribution Pθ and the sampled data distribution PD instead of touch
original distribution P .
In particular, in the data-centric prediction explanation context, we only aim to extract training
data points that are similar to the test sample, such that all inputs in the framework are valid (e.g.,
images) rather than random continuous inputs sampled from an unknown distribution P that might
be inevitable in other contexts. To apply the similar relaxation to other context, a thorough theoretical
proof is needed, which is out of the scope of this research.
It is worth noting that the both relaxations introduced in this paper has corresponding theoretically
rigid solutions (Yang et al., 2018; Jitkrittum et al., 2020) with the cost of computational overhead.
While they are much more elegant, for explanation prediction purpose, we may prefer faster approxi-
mations. How to better incorporate the theoretically rigid solution in a more efficient way will be in
our future research.


E            D ISCUSSION : P REDICTION E XPLAIN Q UALITY ON H EALTHCARE DATASET

 Explainer      Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Test Data   Top Influential Training Data    Explainer    Test Data   Top Influential Training Data   Test Data   Top Influential Training Data


  Influence                                                                                              Influence
  Function                                                                                               Function


    RPS                                                                                                    RPS


    TracIn                                                                                                TracIn


 HD-Explain                                                                                             HD-Explain


HD-Explain*                                                                                             HD-Explain*


              (a) Overian Cancer Histopathology (OCH)                                                                              (b) Brain Tumor MRI

Figure 8: Qualitative evaluation of example-based explanation methods on Overian Cancer
histopathology and Brain Tumor MRI datasets. We show two test data points that are predicted to
belong to the same class in each dataset. Red triangle in the top right corner of an image shows the
duplicate explanations across test samples.

Figure 8 provides additional insights into Ovarian Cancer histopathology and Brain Tumor MRI
datasets. HD-Explain again shows a better explanation for producing training samples that appear
similar to the test samples (note for the semantic similarity, these explanations should be referred to a
medical practitioner). For instance, the explanation of HD-Explain follows the scanning orientation
of test points in MRI as shown in Figure 8 (b). We note all baseline approaches tend to produce
similar explanations to test samples belonging to the same classes. Rather than providing individual
prediction explanations, those approaches act closer to per-class interpreters that look for class
prototypes. To verify this observation further, we conducted a quantitative evaluation as described in
the next section.
There is potential concern on interpreting our experiments on the two healthcare datasets provided,
where no domain experts’ evaluation contained in this work.


                                                                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the quantitative evaluation (Figures 5 and 6), we highlight that HD-Explain demonstrates bet-
ter explanation performance in terms of retrieving original data points that were used for data
augmentation-based retrieval tests. This study is objective, requiring no domain knowledge for result
validation.
Regarding the qualitative evaluation (as part of the visualization in Figure 4), we agree that the
explanation quality of healthcare datasets needs insights from domain experts, whereas machine
learning research in general often lacks corresponding authority to justify specific domain’s results.
This challenge extends across the entire model explanation literature. Our objective is to facilitate
the general population’s understanding, even in the absence of domain expert evaluation. It is
important to recap that the provided explanations by HD-Explain are visually similar to the test
data points. However, their deeper pathological interpretation requires further investigation by
healthcare practitioners, which we encourage for future studies. Furthermore, experimental evaluation
of our approach on CIFAR demonstrates that the effectiveness of our method is not limited to
medical datasets and can be easily applied across other domains. Overall, we believe that qualitative
evaluation aims to enhance understanding of the model’s behavior rather than serving as a performance
justification.


F     DATASET D ETAILS

                                         Table 2: Summary of datasets used in the paper.
       Dataset             Application             Type      # Size   # Feature Dimension   # Number of Classes   Duplicated Samples    Public Dataset
     Two Moons              Synthetic           2D Numeric    500             2                     2                    No            Shared with code
     Rectangulars           Synthetic           2D Numeric    500             2                     3                    No            Shared with code
      CIFAR-10       Classification Benchmark     Image      60,000      32 × 32 × 3                10                   No                  Yes
    Overian Cancer   Histopathology (Private)     Image      20,000     128 × 128 × 3               5                    Yes                 No
     Brain Tumor         MRI Benchmark            Image       7,023     128 × 128 × 3               4                    Yes                 Yes



In this paper, we conducted our experiments on five datasets – two synthetic and three benchmark
image classification datasets. As the work concerns the trustworthiness of the machine learning
model in high-stakes applications, we also introduced medical diagnosis datasets to provide more
insight into the potential benefit the proposed work introduced. To train the target machine learning
models, we conducted data augmentations to increase the number of training data samples, including
random cropping, rotation, shifting, horizontal flipping, and noise injection. Table 2 summarizes
more details about the datasets.


G      DATA D EBUGGING

Before describing the data debugging setting of this paper, we want to recap that the data debugging
functionality is a side effect/benefit of HD-Explain, which is not our main proposal. Indeed, using the
prediction explanation method as a data debugging tool is still under investigation since it might be
over-claimed due to the over-regularized setting in previous works (e.g. Binary classification tasks).
While we relaxed some settings, we don’t claim it practical for real-world applications.
The data debugging task in this paper is a data sample retrieval task where we retrieve samples that
intentionally flipped their classification labels. Higher Precision and Recall of the retrieval reflects
higher performance of data debugging.
For the HD-Explain (and its variant HD-Explain*), the retrivial order is determined by the values of
the diagonals of the KSD-defined kernel matrix, κθ (a, a) for all a ∈ D. This setting is very similar to
how the Influence function does the data debugging with the self-influence of a data sample. Indeed,
κθ (a, a) could be treated as a self-influence that does not rely on model parameters.
Now, we describe our data debugging experiments to highlight the self-explanatory ability of candidate
methods on the training data. In particular, we generalized previous research’s binary classification-
based data debugging experiment into a multi-classification scenario, where we randomly flip labels
of 100 training data points at each run. We adopt standard information retrieval metrics, Precision
and Recall, that measure how likely the candidate methods can retrieve the mislabeled training data
points. Figure 9 shows our experimental results. While HD-Explain on the entire model has little


                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            HD-Explain   HD-Explain*                 RPS         IF
                   1.0                                                               1.0
                   0.8                                                               0.8


                                                                       Precision@K
                   0.6
        Recall@K
                                                                                     0.6
                   0.4                                                               0.4
                   0.2                                                               0.2
                   0.0                                                               0.0
                           20 40 60 80 100                                                   20 40 60 80 100
                         Top-K Suspecious Mislabeling                                      Top-K Suspecious Mislabeling

                           (a) Recall@K                                                     (b) Precision@K
Figure 9: Data debugging comparison among candidate methods on CIFAR-10 dataset. Results
collected from 30 independent runs. Error bar shows 95% confidence interval.

data debugging ability, its variant on the last layer offers outstanding performance compared to the
other last-layer explanation methods. Note, the data debugging functionality is a side effect/benefit of
HD-Explain, which is not our main proposal

H    H ARDWARE SETUP
We ran all our experiments on a machine equipped with a GTX 1080 Ti GPU, a second-generation
Ryzen 5 processor, and 32 GB of memory.

I   B ROADER I MPACT
The development of HD-Explain, a highly precise and data-centric explanation method for neural
classifiers, promises to significantly enhance the transparency and trustworthiness of machine learning
models across various applications. Furthermore, HD-Explain’s scalable and computationally efficient
approach makes it feasible for deployment in large-scale, real-world applications. This not only
promotes transparency and accountability in AI systems but also paves the way for broader acceptance
and integration of AI technologies in society. By bridging the gap between complex model behavior
and human understanding, HD-Explain fosters a more informed and trust-based relationship between
AI systems and their users. Overall, HD-Explain’s contributions to model interpretability and
transparency have the potential to drive significant advancements in the responsible and ethical use
of AI, ensuring that these technologies are developed and deployed in ways that are understandable,
accountable, and aligned with societal values.
However, in terms of Negative Societal Impacts, over-reliance on explanation methods like HD-
Explain might create a false sense of interpretability, masking the inherent limitations and uncertainties
of machine learning models. Thus, careful consideration and mitigation of these negative impacts are
crucial for the responsible deployment of HD-Explain and similar tools.

J   L IMITATION OF PROPOSED METHOD
While HD-Explain demonstrates significant promise in providing detailed explanations for neural
classifier predictions, we intended to investigate the limitation of our method.
For a given datapoint, we sorted all data based on their Stein Kernel similarity to the target data and
found that the top relevant data points selected by HD-Explain were very similar in attributes such as
colour palette, object position, and background colour, which are unique to the target sample (See
Figure 10 Left). This observation triggered our curiosity about whether the HD-Explain is sensitive
to its raw input features (low-level information). To investigate this possibility, we set a low threshold
to capture a large portion of relevant data points. We observed that for data points with low Stein
Kernel similarity (i.e. they are weakly relevant), the dot product of Stein scores is low but still above
this datapoint designated threshold. We noticed that the model’s prediction confidence is lower for
such outliers due to the reduced dot product of Stein scores, indicating a reliance on RBF similarity.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Original        RBF             IF *           KSD


                                                                Original
     Label: car    Label: deer    Label: car      Label: car                Label: car    Label: deer    Label: ship    Label: ship
      Pred: car
      Original      Pred:
                       RBFdeer     Pred:
                                      IF * car     Pred:
                                                     KSDcar                  Pred: car     Pred: deer     Pred: ship     Pred: ship


                                                                Original
    Label: horse   Label: bird   Label: horse    Label: horse              Label: horse   Label: horse   Label: deer    Label: bird
     Pred: horse
      Original      Pred:
                      RBFbird     Pred:IFhorse
                                         *        Pred:
                                                     KSDhorse               Pred: horse    Pred: horse    Pred: horse    Pred: bird


                                                                Original
    Label: horse   Label: deer   Label: horse    Label: horse              Label: horse   Label: deer    Label: bird    Label: deer
     Pred: horse
      Original      Pred:
                       RBFdeer    Pred:IFhorse
                                         *        Pred:
                                                     KSDhorse               Pred: horse    Pred: deer     Pred: bird     Pred: deer


                                                                Original
    Label: dog     Label: deer   Label: dog      Label: dog                Label: dog     Label: dog     Label: cat     Label: cat
     Pred: dog      Pred: deer    Pred: dog       Pred: dog                 Pred: dog      Pred: dog      Pred: cat      Pred: cat

Figure 10: Demonstrative figures to show the limitations of our method on CIFAR-10 dataset. Left)
Given query sample, the most relevant data points selected by different methods, such as RBF
kernel similarity (RBF), influence-based methods (IF*), and HD-Explain. Right): By setting a low
threshold on the KSD, we note HD-Explain can produce less informative explanation. HD-Explain
still falsefully considered them as explanation. Our conjecture is that it relies more on the RBF
similarity.
Such that, HD-Explain’s performance depends on the model’s prediction quality and generalization
ability. As HD-Explain incorporates the complete derivative calculation, it includes more information
from the model’s internal weights, but generalization errors, such as overlapping decision boundaries
and the impact of noisy data, can cause the selection of data points from other classes, especially for
correctly labelled but low-confidence predictions. To balance the potential drawback of modelling
the raw feature space, the user can use HD-Explain*.
In the main paper, we evaluated HD-Explain with three well-known kernel options, including Linear,
RBF, and Inverse Multi-Quadric (IMQ). The purpose was to demonstrate the impact of kernel choices
on the performance of HD-Explain. While we show that IMQ performs best in our experimental
environment, we want to highlight that the selection of the kernel may influence the HD-Explain’s
performance in practice. Hence, one may need to conduct empirical analysis on which kernel to use
before applying HD-Explain in production.

K       R ELATION TO DATA ATTRIBUTION E STIMATION
Data attribution estimation is closely related to the sample-based prediction explanation but a different
concept. As stated by Park et al. (2023b), the definition of data attribution is as follows:
Definition K.1 (Data attribution). Consider an ordered training set of examples S = {z1 , . . . , zn }
and a model output function f (z; θ). A data attribution method τ (z, S) is a function τ : Z × Z n →
Rn that, for any example z ∈ Z and a training set S, assigns a (real-valued) score to each training
input zi ∈ S indicating its importance to the model output f (z; θ∗ (S)). When the second argument
S is clear from the context, we will omit the second argument and simply write τ (z).

In particular, data attribution estimation faces a more generalized problem that does not explain
the importance of data for a specific pre-trained model but the importance of a family of models
of the same architecture or function. The star (θ∗ ) refers to the potentially optimal model that
can be trained on the dataset S. Indeed, if we examine the two approaches in the data attribution
estimation literature (data modelling (Ilyas et al., 2022) and TRAK (Park et al., 2023b)), we note both
approaches require either training multiple models on a subset of data points or introducing various
aggressive approximations, such as (1) linear Taylor expansion, 2) random projection, and 3) newton
approximation. Both data and model manipulations will cause unfaithfulness to the pre-trained model.


                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In fact, the data modelling algorithm (Ilyas et al., 2022) does not involve any pre-trained model but
directly optimizes the linear data modelling score as follows.
                                           m
                                      1 X ⊤                           2
                     τDM (z) := minn          (β 1Si − f (z; θ∗ (Si )) + λ∥β∥1 .
                                 β∈R m
                                          i=1

L     HD-E XPLAIN : E XPLANATION P ROCESS
The following algorithm shows the algorithm of HD-Explain in pseudocode.
Algorithm 1 HD-Explain
Input: Training set D, Test input xtest , and classifier model fθ
Output: Sample based explanations Dexplain ⊂ D

 1: Step 1: Caching                                                                                    ▷ Reduce redundant computation
 2: initialize empty list c ← []
 3: for (xi , yi ) ∈ D do
 4:      pi ← fθ (xi )
 5:      gi ← ∇xi log fθ (xi )yi
 6:      c.add([xi , yi , pi , gi ])
 7: end for

 8: Step 2: Prediction Contribution of Each Training Data
 9: Given test input xtest
10: ptest ← fθ (xtest )
11: ŷtest ← argmax ptest                                                                                       ▷ Best Predicted Label
12: gtest ← ∇xtest log fθ (xtest )ŷtest
13: c.add([xtest , ytest , ptest , gtest ]) ∇xtest ,ŷtest log Pθ (xi , ŷi ) ← [gtest ||ptest ]
14: for (xi , yi ) ∈ D do
15:       ∇xi ,yi log Pθ (xi , yi ) ← [gi ||pi ]                                                                ▷ Cache-able if needed
16:       κθ ((xi , yi ), (xtest , ŷtest )) ← Equation 1
17: end for
18: Dexplain ← argsort([κθ ((xi , yi ), (xtest , ŷtest )) for i ∈ |D|])



M      A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION E XAMPLES FOR SVHN

                                             Explainer     Test Data   Top Influential Training Data



                                               Influence
                                               Function


                                                 RPS


                                                TracIn


                                              HD-Explain


                                             HD-Explain*


                                                 (a) Low-Conf Incorrect Predict

Figure 11: Qualitative evaluation of various example-based explanation methods using SVHN. We
show the missing scenario in the main paper, where the target model makes low-confident prediction
that does not match ground truth label (which is a 7). For the sub plot, we show top-3 influential
training data points picked by the explanation methods for the test example. The observation is
similar to that of CIFAR-10.



                                                                       18
