Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V ISUAL C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT: B RIDGING L OGICAL
G APS WITH M ULTIMODAL I NFILLINGS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Recent advances in large language models elicit reasoning in a chain-of-thought
             that allows models to decompose problems in a human-like fashion. Though
             this paradigm improves multi-step reasoning ability in language models, it is
             limited by being unimodal and applied mainly to question-answering tasks. We
             claim that incorporating visual augmentation into reasoning is essential, especially
             for complex, imaginative tasks. Consequently, we introduce VC OT1 a novel
             method that leverages chain-of-thought prompting with vision-language grounding
             to recursively bridge the logical gaps within sequential data. Our method uses
             visual guidance to generate synthetic multimodal infillings that add consistent and
             novel information to reduce the logical gaps for downstream tasks that can benefit
             from temporal reasoning, as well as provide interpretability into models’ multi-
             step reasoning. We apply VC OT to the V ISUAL S TORYTELLING and W IKI H OW
             summarization datasets and demonstrate through human evaluation that VC OT
             offers novel and consistent synthetic data augmentation beating chain-of-thought
             baselines, which can be used to enhance downstream performance.


1       I NTRODUCTION

A recent landmark result in natural language
processing is chain-of-thought prompting (C OT)
(Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), whereby
decomposing complex problems into simple
steps for input to a large language model (LLM)
confers improved performance on a variety of
tasks (Lampinen et al., 2022). While C OT                             student biking to class            family gathers at hospital

demonstrates impressive performance on tasks                              Summarization on data containing Logical Gaps:
                                                                         “Biking to Class Brings Family Together at Hospital”
in the text-only question-answering domain, it
is unclear how this technique can be generalized
to multimodal (e.g., vision-language) settings.
We hypothesize that one core benefit to CoT
in the text domain is that it prompts an LLM
to fill in logical or sequential gaps. With this
frame, both the methodology and benefits of ex-              student biking to class     student falls off bike   family gathers at hospital
tending CoT to the visual domain becomes plau-
                                                                        Summarization using VCOT’s Multimodal Infillings:
sible. Many vision-language (VL) reasoning                             “Biker Falls Going To Class; Family Gathers at Hospital”
tasks, such as virtual assistants (Qiu et al., 2021),
navigators (Anderson et al., 2018), and decision-
makers (Huang et al., 2022), require some de-            Figure 1: Sequences often contain logical gaps
gree of sequential data understanding. However,          between elements that can limit reasoning tasks;
these techniques are currently restricted to “rea-       our proposed Visual Chain-of-Thought method
son” over a limited set of input data (e.g., key         bridges these gaps with multimodal infillings to
frames) which may contain logical gaps, hinder-          downstreaming reasoning.
ing task-specific performance (Figure 1). This
    1
        The source code will be made publicly available at camera ready.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


leads us to our core idea: we can extend CoT prompting into the vision and language domain by
integrating generative image models to produce intermediate images.
We argue incorporating the visual modality into C OT can help bridge logical gaps in two ways.
First, multi-step reasoning with visuals better fills logical gaps because images capture additional
information that unimodal text cannot. Second, visual chains mimic human imagination which creates
novel solutions (Tan & Bansal, 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022) and provide interpretability
(Wang et al., 2022b) into decision making. One imagined picture provides a thousand-word insight to
enhance computer reasoning.
We propose Visual Chain-of-Thought (VC OT), which combines the efficiency, robustness, and
multi-step reasoning of C OT with the multimodal capabilities of vision-language models. VC OT
synthetically augments sequential datasets and bridges logical gaps by recursively generating mul-
timodal infillings and using the synthetic data to improve downstream task performance. These
synthetic generations also serve as human-interpretable insights into AI systems’ ability of multi-step
reasoning. We demonstrate that VC OT creates consistent and novel synthetic data that enhances
downstream performance on the V IST (Huang et al., 2016) and W IKI H OW (Koupaee & Wang, 2018)
datasets. Our main contributions are:

• We propose Visual Chain-of-Thought for sequential data to generate synthetic text-visual pairs as
  data augmentation for downstream reasoning.
• We devise a consistency and novelty-driven approach to recursively generate multimodal infillings
  that augment faithful, relevant context.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through human evaluation, showing improvements
  in sequential reasoning.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Training-free Prompting Paradigm. Language model pre-training and fine-tuning ushered in
an era of higher accuracy, more data and compute-efficient NLP (Devlin et al., 2018; Howard &
Ruder, 2018; Gao et al., 2020; Dodge et al., 2020). As models continued to scale, few and zero-shot
techniques for many general language tasks have become feasible and performant (Kojima et al.,
2022; Brown et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022). Recent research focuses on optimizing prompts in
order to improve the performance of zero-shot techniques, such as in-context inference (Lampinen
et al., 2022) and prompt ensembling (Wang et al., 2022a). In light of the impressive performance of
prompt-optimization efforts for zero-shot NLP techniques, it becomes natural to ask: can multimodal
vision & language tasks benefit from LLM generalization techniques? Our work seeks to bridge the
best of both modalities through using efficient strategies to reason with LLMs while leveraging visual
imagery for sequential tasks.

Data Augmentation. Another trend within language modeling is to augment LLMs with external
data. These solutions include leveraging dense passage retrieval (Lewis et al., 2020), prompt
editing (Madaan et al., 2022), human guidance (Guan et al., 2020), and conversation history in
the conversational AI setting (Ghazvininejad et al., 2018). External data provides complementary
knowledge to the models’ training data, improves robustness without rigorous fine-tuning, and enables
systems to be time-agnostic. Previous work studies visual knowledge incorporation for language
understanding (Tan & Bansal, 2021; Lu et al., 2022) and generation (Zhu et al., 2022), but it has yet
to be applied to sequential reasoning. We are the first propose a vision-augmented C OT, which infills
temporal data to provide data augmentation to reduce the logical leaps in sparse data that may limit
general sequential generation tasks.

Intermediate Infillings. In earlier research relating to synthetic infillings, researchers point out
significant lagging performance in temporal reasoning (Vashishtha et al., 2020) and offer advance-
ments (Zhou & Hripcsak, 2007; Dorn, 1992). Works have separately looked to augment sparse data
with intermediate logical links (Kotnis et al., 2015) and create intermediate representations between
sequential elements (Hong et al., 2023). While promising, these advancements are task-specific,
unimodal, and computationally expensive. Our novel application of VC OT draws inspiration from
previous research and adds synthetic multimodal logical infillings to strengthen temporal reasoning
for general sequential datasets.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               1     Visual1,                 , Visualn                                  3      Caption1, …, Captionn

Preparation Stage
                           Input                                                                     Image
                         Sequence                                                                  Captioning
                                                                     …


                            Task                                                                    Multipoint
                         Unification           2                                                    Foveation            4
                                                      Text1,        …           , Textn                                             Global Focus


                                                               Novelty-Driven
                                                                 Generator                                                 this process is applied
Infilling Stage


                         Prepared                                                                  Multimodal
                                                                                                                           recursively to generate
                          Inputs                                                                    Infilling
                                                                                                                            multimodal infillings
                                                                                                   Candidates
                     1     2     3      4                       Consistency-                                            that help bridge logical gaps
                                                               Driven Selector



                            Visual1,           Visuald1,         Visuald2,        Visuald1,     Visual2,            , Visualn
                                                                                                                                           Interpretable
Downstream Stage


                                                                                                            …                               Reasoning


                                                                                                                                           Downstream
                                                                                                                                              Tasks
                               Text1,           Textd1,           Textd2,          Textd1,       Text2,         …     , Textn

                    Key:             VCoT Generated Data          VCoT Proposed Tasks          Corollary Data        Corollary Tasks


Figure 2: Overview of our novel Visual Chain-of-Thought method. The preparation stage unifies an
arbitrary input sequence as a sequence of visual-text pairs (§4.1), constructs associated captions, and
a global focus (§4.2). Next, VC OT recursively generates multimodal infillings by first producing
novel candidates (§4.3) and then selecting the most consistent option (§4.4). VC OT’s multimodal
infillings provide interpretability into the reasoning process and synthetic data for downstream tasks.

3                   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

To improve temporal reasoning in language models, we define the multimodal infilling task to
bridge the logical gaps in sequential data with synthetic multimodal infillings. Given two consecutive
text-visual pairs {(vi−1 , ti−1 ), (vi+1 , ti+1 )}, we generate an infilling {(vi , ti )} through generator g
(e.g., VC OT) using model M (Equation 1). After we generate multiple such infillings, we select the
best (vibest , tbest
                i    ) among the candidates using judgement function j((vi , ti )) (e.g., C LIP similarity)
(Equation 2). In keeping with the training-free formulation of CoT, we limit ourselves to generating
and selecting candidate intermediate steps through prompting existing pretrained models. For a
downstream task T (e.g. visual storytelling, instruction summarization) measured by performance pe
(e.g., novelty, consistency, coherence, descriptiveness), (vibest , tbest
                                                                     i    ) is an optimal infilling (viopt , topt
                                                                                                              i )
to be kept if its’ addition improves the downstream task performance (Equation 3). Otherwise, the
optimal infilling is redundant or damaging, and it is set to null (Equation 4). Our VC OT is a method
that serves as a generator g and a way to select (vibest , tbest
                                                            i    ), but we leave determining optimality of
recursive termination to future work.
                                                                         ti := g(ti−1 , ti+1 , M )                                                      (1)

                                                                       tbest
                                                                        i    := arg max[j(ti )]                                                         (2)
                                                                                          ti

                                                                             vi := g(tbest
                                                                                      i    , M)                                                         (3)
                                                                  vibest := arg max[g(tbest
                                                                                       i    , M )]                                                      (4)
                                                                             vi |tbest
                                                                                  i



                         pe(T, [(vi−1 , ti−1 ), (vibest , tbest
                                                           i    ), (vi+1 , ti+1 )]) > pe(T, [(vi−1 , ti−1 ), (vi+1 , ti+1 )])                           (5)


                                                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        (vibest , tbest

                                                                        ) Eq. 6 holds
                                 (viopt , topt
                                           i ) :=
                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                     (6)
                                                        null              otherwise

4       VC OT M ULTIMODAL I NFILLING G ENERATION

We propose the VC OT method as a solution to the multimodal infilling task. To generate high-quality
multimodal infillings, we use a combination of CoT and vision-language models. We propose the
following pipeline2 (Figure 2):

1. We transform text-only datasets into multimodal text-visual pairs for task unification (§4.1).
2. We identify the multipoint foveation to extract the global focus to guide the generation of
   consistent multimodal infillings (§4.2).
3. We generate our synthetic data through a novelty-driven recursive infilling (§4.3) and
   consistency-driven visual augmentation (§4.4) approach to provide interpretability for multi-step
   reasoning and reduce logical gaps to aid downstream task performance.

4.1       TASK U NIFICATION

To apply VC OT to general sequences, we first reformat sequential data into text-visual pairs. For
text-only sequences, we generate candidate visuals {v1′ , . . . , vn′ } for the corresponding input text
sequence {t1 , . . . , tn } by using S TABLE D IFFUSION. Here, each vi′ is a set of multiple candidate
visuals {vi1 , . . . , vij } for each ti . We then assess the similarity of each candidate visual in vi′ to the
grounding input text ti using C LIP embeddings and select the most similar candidate. This yields
a sequence of consistent visuals {v1 , . . . , vn } that form pairs with the input text, unifying general
sequences into a series of text-visual pairs.

4.2       M ULTIPOINT F OVEATION

To keep the multimodal infillings consistent with
the input sequence, we use foveation to iden-
tify the overall main focus (Mei et al., 2022).
Since pairwise sequential elements may omit
relevant and important fixation points, we de-
fine multipoint foveation (MPF) to identify all
of the core fixation points (e.g., setting, charac-
ters) of the entire visual-text input sequence (Fig-                Two people sitting    A lighthouse on         Two people are
ure 3). We then project the visual-text pairs into                   at a table laden     a cliff at the edge   holding each other
                                                                     with beverages          of the beach          on the bridge
a unimodal text space by captioning the visuals:
{(v1 , t1 )...(vn , tn )} → {(c1 , t1 )...(cn , tn )}.
The projected output, along with three to four                  Multipoint Foveation: A romantic scene of a couple near a lighthouse
hand-written few-shot exemplars, is fed into
G PT-3.5 to generate a maximum likelihood3                   Figure 3: Visualization of our multipoint foveation
summary from which the MPF f is extracted                    method, which extracts a global focus from a se-
(Equation 5). The foveation guides infillings                quence of text-visual pairs to guide new infilling
to be consistent and not introduce excessive in-             generations.
formation. We provide a qualitative example
showing the effectiveness of MPF (Figure 14).
                              M P F ((ci , ti ), M ) := arg max(IP(f |(ci , ti ), M ))                                               (7)
                                                                f


4.3       N OVELTY-D RIVEN R ECURSIVE I NFILLING

The judgment function, j((vi , ti )) (Equation 2), judges the generated multimodal infillings based
on two metrics: consistency and novelty. Consistency ensures that the infillings maintain faithful
    2
        https://sites.google.com/view/vcot/home
    3
        Likelihood is defined in Appendix A.3.1.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (vi-1, ti-1)                         (vi, ti)                (vi+1, ti+1)


                      Only harvest honey from a             Use the frames of          Use hive tool to
                        12 - 18 month old hive              the hive to assess        separate the top
                          that does not face                  the amount of         box from bottom two
                      temperatures below 18°C.             harvestable honey.        boxes of a beehive.


                                                                                             Use smoker
                                                Check for pests                                before
                                                 and diseases.                                accessing
                                                                                            honey frames.


                                      (vi’’, ti’’)                               (vi’’, ti’’)

Figure 4: Infilling examples. Given three inputs: image, text pairs: (vi−1 , ti−1 ), (vi+1 , ti+1 ), and
                                                     ′    ′          ′′   ′′
depth = 2, VC OT recursively generates (vi , ti ), (vi , ti ), and (vi , ti ) that fill in the logical gaps.


details from the surrounding steps, while novelty ensures that the infillings add relevant and new
information that accurately bridges the logical gaps.
We infill a set of visual-text pairs (vi−1 , ti−1 ) and (vi+1 , ti+1 ) using foveation f with new information
bridging the logical gap (Appendix A.1, Algorithm 2). We opt for a recursive approach rather than
an iterative approach when infilling logical gaps as some information may have more logical gaps
than others and may require more infillings. A recursive approach makes it easier to dynamically
determine when infillings are not beneficial to the task and when to stop generating them in contrast
to an iterative approach. Our approach generates multiple depths of infillings to add valuable new,
relevant, and consistent multimodal information for downstream tasks (Figure 4).

4.4   C ONSISTENCY-D RIVEN V ISUAL AUGMENTATION

To explicitly guide consistent infilling generation, we use multipoint foveation (§4.2) to ground
our generations to the input sequence and C LIP to select the most consistent recursively generated
infilling with respect to their surrounding pair (Algorithm 1). Specifically, we generate five candidate
text-infillings with G PT-3.5 and compare them to their surrounding visuals using C LIP embeddings
and select the most similar candidate. When generating text-infillings, we prompt GPT-3.5 with
information from the surrounding text to provide logical context that maintains consistency, novelty,
and sequential order. To generate a consistent, sequential visual, we prompt S TABLE D IFFUSION
with the selected text-infilling to generate four candidate visuals. Then, we choose the candidate
visual most consistent using C LIP embeddings.
To determine the recursive stopping condition, we experiment with both a fixed recursive depth and an
learned approach by prompting G PT-3.5 to classify whether a logical gap remains. Empirical results
demonstrate the G PT-3.5-halting approach shows inconsistent performance that adds significant
noise. Instead, we opt for a fixed depth, depth-limit=2, which balances sufficiently filling logical
gaps with not injecting irrelevant information.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We leverage leading vision and language generation models S TABLE D IFFUSION and G PT-3.5 for
synthetic data augmentation, along with C LIP guidance and O FA captioning. We test our method on
the V IST and W IKI H OW datasets due to their sequential composition to show the effectiveness of
VC OT in bridging reasoning gaps.


                                                                    5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm 1: genInfilling(prev, next, foveation)
  Data: prev (vi−1 , ti−1 ) and next (vi+1 , ti+1 ) infillings and foveation f
  Result: single intermediate infilling (vi , ti )
  S TEP 1: GENERATE INTERMEDIATE TEXT
1 Generate captions ci−1 , ci+1 for visuals vi−1 , vi+1 , respectively
                                 ′            ′
2 Generate five candidate texts t1 , . . . , t5 using G PT-3.5 with input ((ci−1 , ti−1 ), (ci+1 , ti+1 ), f )
                                                                                            ′        ′
3 Select highest similarity candidate text tbest by comparing C LIP embeddings of t1 , . . . , t5 to the C LIP
   embeddings of ti−1 and ti+1
  S TEP 2: GENERATE INTERMEDIATE VISUAL
                                      ′          ′
4 Generate four candidate visuals v1 , . . . , v4 using S TABLE D IFFUSION with input tbest
                                                                                               ′          ′
5 Select highest similarity candidate visual (vbest ) by comparing C LIP embeddings of v1 , . . . , v4 to the C LIP
   embedding of tbest
6 return (vbest , tbest )



  Figure 5: VC OT generates candidate infillings and uses C LIP embs to select the most consistent one.


  Figure 6: Consistency and novelty rating distributions of VC OT text-visual infillings compared to the
  Chain-of-Thought (C OT), Chain-of-Images C O I, and random baselines. Here multimodal infillings
  are selected as “good”, “neutral”, or “poor”, and VC OT again surpasses all other baselines.

  Table 1: Consistency and novelty ratings of VC OT intermediate visual-text infillings compared
  to the Chain-of-Thought (C OT) + Chain-of-Images (C O I) and random baselines, represented as
  wins-tie-loss percentages. VC OT has higher win percentages compared to both baselines.

                               Image Consistency           Text Consistency               Image Novelty                  Text Novelty
        VC OT vs. Baseline
                             Win(↑)    Tie    Lose(↓)   Win(↑)    Tie       Lose(↓)   Win(↑)    Tie    Lose(↓)   Win(↑)      Tie    Lose(↓)
        C OT+C O I           26.82    53.02   20.16     28.07    52.21      19.73     30.13    50.24   19.63     25.77      52.86   21.37
        Random               30.13    50.24   19.63     43.40    39.27      17.33     43.66    38.95   17.39     41.87      40.36   17.77


  5.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

  Datasets. We use V IST and W IKI H OW to evaluate the quality of VC OT’s synthetic multimodal
  infillings and their impacts on visual storytelling and instruction summarization, respectively. V IST
  is a visual storytelling dataset consisting of sequences of five text-visual pairs representing a single
  story (Huang et al., 2016). The test set contains 2021 stories. The clear gaps between flickr visuals
  and human-written captions, and pairwise sequential elements often create sizable logical gaps.
  W IKI H OW is a text summarization dataset containing “How-To” articles, with 6000 test set articles
  (Koupaee & Wang, 2018). VC OT’s synthetic multimodal infillings between logically distanced
  instructions can decompose difficult instructions. V IST provides us with a standard sequential text-
  visual dataset, and we showcase W IKI H OW as a text-only dataset for our task unification process
  (§4.1). For downstream evaluation of W IKI H OW, we input “How-To” articles as a sequence of
  paragraphs that we seek to summarize into descriptive, human-understandable instructions, a slightly
  different approach than strict summarization.

  Implementation Details. VC OT generates five textual infilling candidates using G PT-3.5, one
  with zero temperature and four with 0.5 temperature. In our current approach, we select the best
  textual infilling (Equation 2) and input it input into the S TABLE D IFFUSION generator. We otherwise
  use zero temperature to maximize consistency. To evaluate the infillings themselves, we combine
  W IKI H OW and V IST examples and present 7062 generated infillings whose scores are provided by
  Amazon Mechanical Turk crowd workers who pass an attention check. For the downstream tasks, we
  evaluate each dataset separately, considering 227 full W IKIHOW articles and 266 V IST stories.


                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use G PT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) for all language tasks over open-source alternatives as
G PT-3.5 demonstrates stability over open-source alternatives. We utilize an out-of-the-box image
captioning checkpoint (OFA-base) to show the generality of VC OT and demonstrate performance
without the need for task-specific fine-tuning. We use S TABLE D IFFUSION (Rombach et al., 2022)
(Stable-Diffusion 1.4) for image generation. We use C LIP for multimodal similarity com-
parisons to guide the cross-modal generation.

5.2   H UMAN E VALUATION

The reason we opt for human evaluation over                                       By working as a junior 2D


                                                         step t-1
automatic evaluations is to account for multi-                                   artist or runner, you can get
modality and ensure complex analysis of filling                                   your foot in the door and
                                                                                 work on blockbusters or TV.
logical gaps with novel and consistent synthetic
tokens. Further, we do not seek to compare with
the datasets’ ground truths because the ground                      Infilling Produced by CoT + CoI
truths in V IST and W IKI H OW often are incoher-
                                                                               Gain experience by learning
ent or undescriptive. Instead, our data augmen-


                                                         step t
                                                                                the basics of compositing,
tation seeks to surpass ground truth results by                                animation, and 3D modeling
synthetically filling logical gaps and providing                                  to become a VFX artist.
human-interpretable multi-step reasoning.


                                                         VS.
                                                                      Infilling Produced by VCoT
Evaluation Criteria. For both evaluations, we
use the novelty and consistency metrics                  step t                With experience, you
defined in §4.3. As additional downstream evalu-                              can move up the ranks
                                                                             and become a 3D artist
ation metrics, we add coherence for storytelling
                                                                                or VFX supervisor.
and descriptiveness for instruction summariza-
tion. Coherence confirms that the output
flows logically together as an interesting and cre-
                                                                             As a supervisor, you are
ative story. Descriptiveness verifies that
                                                         step t+1


                                                                             responsible for making
the generated summaries describe accurately                                 raw images fit together to
and with detail the steps of the “How-To” ar-                                create the final product.
ticle. We select our human evaluation criteria
based on BART S CORE (Yuan et al., 2021) and
our goal of generating relevant logical infillings. Figure 7: Compared to the Chain-of-Thought
                                                    (C OT) and Chain-of-Images (C O I) baselines,
Evaluation Details. We ask human annotators VC OT infills more consistent and relevant novel
to follow the evaluation criteria (novelty, con- information to the input steps on "How to Become
sistency, coherence, and descriptiveness) using a VFX Artist." C OT and C O I generate their respec-
win-tie-lose comparison, a common approach in tive infilling unimodally whereas VC OT infills us-
human evaluation (Gu et al., 2021; Yang et al., ing context from both modes.
2019), which reduces variance and increases
inter-annotator agreement. Since our method is
the first to generate multimodal infillings, exist-
ing vision-language models are not well-suited as baselines. Instead, we use head-to-head compar-
isons of VC OT’s text-visual pairs with purely textual chain-of-thought (C OT) paired with the purely
visual chain-of-images (C O I) performed in parallel, using the same recursion depth. To evaluate
the infillings, we additionally compare with a random baseline, which selects a random multimodal
pair from our generated examples. To evaluate downstream task performance, we also compare with
generation without using generated infillings, as well as with the ground truth of each dataset. We
hired a total of 20,534 workers using the Mechanical Turk platform, and paid a rate of $.30/HIT for
our labeling tasks to an average hourly wage of $15/hr.

5.3   Q UALITY OF M ULTIMODAL I NFILLINGS

We ask human evaluators to judge our synthetic multimodal infillings based on novelty and consistency
(§4.3) on a 5-point scale (1-2 = poor, 3 = neutral, 4-5 = good). VC OT infillings outperform all
baselines on the 5-point scoring of quality (Figure 6). When comparing win-tie-losses, VC OT also
outperforms both baselines by at least 6.6% and 4.4% for the consistency and novelty of our synthetic


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: The downstream wins-tie-loss percentages for VC OT against four baselines for downstream
summarization and storytelling tasks. In addition to novelty and consistency, we measure descriptivity
and coherence for W IKI H OW and V IST, respectively. We emphasize in purple if VC OT wins or
loses by greater than 1%, and we average the scores on the left. VCOT wins or ties in almost every
averaged score as well as in most general categories.

                                                     Novelty                       Consistency                   Descriptivity                Average
      Dataset       VCoT vs. Baselines
                                            Win(↑)     Tie     Lose(↓)     Win(↑)       Tie    Lose(↓)   Win(↑)      Tie    Lose(↓)   Win       Tie     Loss
                   Chain-of-Thought         34.23    36.90     28.87       30.06       39.66     30.28   23.31      56.39     20.30   29.20    44.32    26.48
                   Chain-of-Images          37.28    25.82     36.90       44.20       26.04     29.76   33.83      27.44     38.72   38.44    26.43    35.13
   WikiHow
                   No Infilling             33.56    38.47     27.98       38.24       26.12     35.64   33.46      32.71     33.83   35.09    32.43    32.48
                   Reference Step           40.92    28.42     30.65       47.99       21.80     30.21   42.11      22.56     35.34   43.67    24.26    32.07
                                                     Novelty                       Consistency                    Coherence                   Average
      Dataset       VCoT vs. Baselines
                                            Win(↑)     Tie     Lose(↓)     Win(↑)       Tie    Lose(↓)   Win(↑)      Tie    Lose(↓)   Win       Tie     Loss
                   Chain-of-Thought         39.86    29.42     30.72       30.17       38.01     31.82   35.11      35.11     29.79   35.05    34.18    30.77
                   Chain-of-Images          33.81    23.71     42.47       35.33       30.17     34.50   35.11      36.88     28.01   34.76    30.25    34.99
      V IST
                   No Infilling             34.64    23.92     41.44       37.32       27.56     35.12   31.21      43.62     25.18   34.39    34.21    31.40
                   Reference Step           28.73    40.62     30.65       37.04       30.45     32.51   36.52      38.30     25.18   34.10    36.46    29.44



                  Chain-of-Thought Produced Summary                                    Visual Chain-of-Thought Produced Summary

              Monitor your Burmese cat's eating habits and look          Monitor your Burmese cat's eating habits and groom them regularly to
               for signs of diabetes as they age, and take them to       check for signs of parasites, infections, or other health problems, and
              the vet regularly for check-ups and preventive care.                   provide a balanced diet with plenty of exercise.
                                                                              Make sure your Burmese cat receives core vaccinations, such as
                 Make sure your cat is vaccinated and tested for
                                                                         distemper, feline leukemia, and rabies, and consider other vaccinations
                feline leukemia, and schedule regular check-ups
                                                                            depending on your cat's needs, as well as spaying or neutering to
                with a veterinarian to ensure your cat is healthy.
                                                                             prevent unwanted litters and reduce the risk of certain diseases.
              Start deworming your kitten at three weeks old and          Start deworming your Burmese cat at three weeks of age and provide
               schedule regular vet visits to monitor their health       regular flea and tick treatments, vaccinations, and parasite prevention
                and ensure they are up-to-date on vaccinations.                      treatments to ensure their health and wellbeing.


Figure 8: Comparison of a W IKI H OW summary produced by Chain-of-Thought versus Visual Chain-
of-Thought. The purple text highlights how VC OT can improve on the summary quality compared to
text-only C OT.


visuals and text (Table 1), respectively. Qualitative examples show that VC OT outperforms baselines
by generating more useful and relevant infillings for sizable logical gaps (Figure 7, Figure 13). The
strong consistency and novelty of the synthetic multimodal infillings indicates that they add both
relevant and new information to their surrounding sequential steps, and thus VC OT helps bridge
logical gaps in sequential data.
VC OT infills chronological gaps in the V IST and W IKI H OW sequences with consistent bridging
information. We hypothesize the utility of VC OT increases with size of the logical gap because
these gaps hinder downstream task performance (§5.4) and interpretability for large language models.
VC OT synthetically augments additional context to language models with multimodal infillings, al-
lowing for smaller logical leaps and enhanced reasoning. We argue that VC OT outperforms baselines
by maintaining consistency through foveation grounding (§4.2) and C LIP similarity alignment (§4.4).
With regard to novelty, VC OT adds new, relevant information for a logical flow between surrounding
steps (Figure 11, Figure 12). We observe that many baseline-generated images contain new but
less relevant information (Table 1). Notably, C O I often generates novel images (Figure 13) that do
not align with the surrounding steps, hindering the relevance aspect. In contrast, VC OT excels in
increasing yet balancing both newness and relevance.

5.4      D OWNSTREAM TASK P ERFORMANCE


Qualitative Results It is clear from our qualitative results (Figure 8, Figure 9) that VC OT increases
consistency among the text and images, while also adding relevant, novel information. Additionally,
the infillings provide multimodal interpretability into computer reasoning (Figure 4).


                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       VIST
                     Images


                              I took my son to watch   We looked up at the blue We shared a special mo-
                              the sunset and admire     and white sky, apprecia- ment together, feeling
                        CoT     the beauty of nature   ting the beauty of nature the warmth of the sun
                                     together.         in the peaceful moment. and the beauty of the sky.
                                 On the way home          We had picked up        The sky was blue and
                               from school, my son         a presentation of        white over the car,
                       VCoT      and I enjoyed the       flowers from school,      and we enjoyed the
                                 beautiful view of        which we admired           scenic view of the
                               the sky and flowers.       as we drove home.        flowers and the sky.


Figure 9: Comparison of a V IST story produced by C OT versus Visual Chain-of-Thought. The purple
text highlights how VC OT can improve on the storytelling quality compared to text-only C OT.


Quantitative Results VC OT convincingly surpasses baselines in average downstream results
(Table 2), winning in every category besides tying Chain-of-Images for VIST.
For W IKI H OW, we see a clear improvement in novelty (Table 2), which makes sense because we
augment the data with novel, relevant tokens for instruction generation. Meanwhile for consistency,
VC OT ties with C OT and surpasses all other baselines. We hypothesize this tie is due to the lengthy
nature of the input text, allowing G PT-3.5 to create fairly consistent instructions with or without the
use of VC OT. For descriptiveness, VC OT beats all baselines except for C O I, likely because C O I
injects visually-descriptive information that isn’t grounded by the original text. Specifically, C O I’s
image-only modality allows it to capture novel but less consistent information than that of the limited
textual description. Overall, VC OT offers a balanced combination of performance improvements.
For V IST, VC OT’s infillings improve consistency against all baselines besides C OT. Conversely, we
find that VC OT loses in novelty to all baselines other than C OT, which VC OT (Table 2) improves
upon. These juxtaposed results offer interpretability into computer reasoning, namely that C O I
introduces more novel information, C OT preserves consistency, and VC OT maintains a balance. We
suspect that VC OT’s loss in novelty is a result of 1) VC OT’s attentiveness to consistency through
C LIP guidance and multipoint foveation, and 2) repeated tokens generated with our consistency-driven
approach that overlap and cause repetition. These results demonstrate that VC OT provides insight
on specific ways to improve computer reasoning–design strategies that both enhance and balance
novelty and consistency.


6    C ONCLUSION

We introduce a new research direction to generate synthetic logical infillings for sequential data, which
we tackle with our novel multimodal paradigm visual chain-of-thought. We combine chain-of-thought
with visual guidance to recursively generate multimodal infillings that bridge the natural logical gaps
between sequential elements. By adding infillings to sequences while maintaining consistency, we
augment novel, relevant information to bolster downstream task performance while also providing
human-interpretable insights into the system’s reasoning process. Through task unification, we can
apply VC OT on various multimodal tasks.
Human experiments show that VC OT creates more novel and consistent logical infillings than the uni-
modal C OT and C O I baselines performed in parallel on the sequential datasets V IST and W IKI H OW,
and these infillings are helpful to improve downstream task performance. While we demonstrate
VC OT on the instruction summarization and visual storytelling tasks, future work can explore VC OT
in new domains that could benefit from synthetic data augmentation and bolstered reasoning abilities,
such as procedural planning, DNA sequencing, and video understanding. Furthermore, future research
can look into aligning multimodal infillings with other desired downstream performance metrics.
Along these lines, it is valuable to measure desired outputs through automatic evaluation metrics to
support evaluation at scale.


                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
Human evaluation was conducted via crowdsourcing using the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform.
For all Mechanical Turk experiments, we require workers to be located in Australia, Canada, New
Zealand, the United Kingdom, or the United States and have a HIT approval rating of at least 98%.
For both the intermediate and downstream tasks, it is estimated we pay workers at a rate of $15.0/hr,
a rate which is above the federal minimum wage at the time in which this research was conducted.
The data annotation project is considered an exempt protocol by the human subject committee by
IRB guidelines. We provide a consent form at the beginning of each task. We include additional
details regarding screenshots and task descriptions for each Mechanical Turk study in Appendix A.

R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid,
  Stephen Gould, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-
  grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3674–3683, 2018.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1810.04805.
Jesse Dodge, Gabriel Ilharco, Roy Schwartz, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Noah Smith.
  Fine-tuning pretrained language models: Weight initializations, data orders, and early stopping,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06305.
Jürgen Dorn. Temporal reasoning in sequence graphs. In AAAI, pp. 735–740, 1992.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.15723.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih,
 and Michel Galley. A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), Apr. 2018. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11977. URL
 https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11977.
Xiaodong Gu, Kang Min Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Dialogbert: Discourse-aware response generation
  via learning to recover and rank utterances. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 12911–12919, 2021.
Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Sihang Guo, Ruohan Zhang, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Widening
  the pipeline in human-guided reinforcement learning with explanation and context-aware data
  augmentation, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.14804.
Xin Hong, Yanyan Lan, Liang Pang, Jiafeng Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. Visual transformation telling,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NqaGPQXblk.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification,
  2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.06146.
Ting-Hao K. Huang, Francis Ferraro, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Jacob Devlin, Aishwarya
  Agrawal, Ross Girshick, Xiaodong He, Pushmeet Kohli, Dhruv Batra, et al. Visual storytelling.
  In 15th Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (NAACL 2016), 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
 org/abs/2201.07207.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  11916.

Bhushan Kotnis, Pradeep Bansal, and Partha Talukdar. Knowledge base inference using bridging
  entities. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2038–2043, 2015.

Mahnaz Koupaee and William Yang Wang. Wikihow: A large scale text summarization dataset, 2018.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.09305.

Andrew K Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie CY Chan, Kory Matthewson, Michael Henry
 Tessler, Antonia Creswell, James L McClelland, Jane X Wang, and Felix Hill. Can language
  models learn from explanations in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02329, 2022.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Na-
  man Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian
  Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
  tasks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf.

Yujie Lu, Wanrong Zhu, Xin Eric Wang, Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang Wang. Imagination-
  augmented natural language understanding. In Proceedings of 2022 Conference of the North
  American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
  gies, pp. 4392–4402, Dublin, Ireland, 2022.

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Peter Clark, and Yiming Yang. Memprompt: Memory-assisted prompt
 editing with user feedback, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.06009.

Alex Mei, Sharon Levy, and William Yang Wang. Foveate, attribute, and rationalize: Towards safe
  and trustworthy ai, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09667.

Liang Qiu, Yuan Liang, Yizhou Zhao, Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Zhou Yu, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun
  Zhu. Socaog: Incremental graph parsing for social relation inference in dialogues. In The 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjÃ¶rn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. URL https://github.com/
  CompVis/latent-diffusionhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752.

Haochen Tan and Mohit Bansal. Improving language understanding via contextualized, visually-
  grounded supervision. In Proceedings of 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763, San Francisco, California, 2021.

Siddharth Vashishtha, Adam Poliak, Yash Kumar Lal, Benjamin Van Durme, and Aaron Steven
  White. Temporal reasoning in natural language inference. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 4070–4078, 2020.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Rationale-augmented
  ensembles in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00747, 2022a.

Zhenhailong Wang, Manling Li, Ruochen Xu, Luowei Zhou, Jie Lei, Xudong Lin, Shuohang Wang,
  Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Derek Hoiem, et al. Language models with image descriptors are
  strong few-shot video-language learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10747, 2022b.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Liu Yang, Junjie Hu, Minghui Qiu, Chen Qu, Jianfeng Gao, W Bruce Croft, Xiaodong Liu, Yelong
  Shen, and Jingjing Liu. A hybrid retrieval-generation neural conversation model. In Proceedings
  of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 1341–
  1350, 2019.
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text
 generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27263–27277, 2021.
Li Zhou and George Hripcsak. Temporal reasoning with medical data—a review with emphasis on
  medical natural language processing. Journal of biomedical informatics, 40(2):183–202, 2007.
Wanrong Zhu, An Yan, Yujie Lu, Wenda Xu, Xin Eric Wang, Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang
 Wang. Visualize before you write: Imagination-guided open-ended text generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2210.03765, 2022.


                                               12
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A        A PPENDIX
    A.1       A LGORITHMS

    Algorithm 2: recGen(prev, next, depth, f)
  Data: (image, text) pairs prev (v1 , t1 ) and next (v2 , t2 ), depth d, and foveation f
  Result: infilled list of (visual, text) pairs between (v1 , t1 ) and (v2 , t2 )
1 inf illing ← genInfilling(prev, next, f )
2 if d + 1 ≤ depth-limit then
3      prevGen ← recGen(prev, inf illing, d + 1, f )
4      nextGen ← recGen(inf illing, next, d + 1, f )
5      return prevGen + [inf illing] + nextGen
6   return [inf illing]

    VC OT’s recursive multimodal infilling generation algorithm given two sequential text-visual pairs.

    A.2       C ROWDSOURCING H UMAN E VALUATION

    We show the interface of our human evaluations in Figure 10. We manually ensure no personal
    information is collected and no offensive content is presented during human evaluations.

    A.3       D ETAILS OF O UR A PPROACH

    We apply our generated multimodal infillings to improve the traditionally text-based tasks of visual
    storytelling and instruction summarization. To integrate our multimodal infillings into the downstream
    tasks, we pass them along with the unified input to create an extensive summary using few-shot
    examples and image captioning. The information in the summary can guide models to better reason
    temporally in a wide range downstream tasks.
    Because storytelling and summarization are inherently different, we use different prompting schemes.
    For V IST, we pass in the few-shot examples, summary, focus, current steps, and past story steps
    to autoregressively build the final sequential story. Since it is very important for a story to flow
    over time, current steps are very dependent on the past steps in time. For Wikihow, we also pass
    in the few-shot examples, summary, focus, current steps. Unlike the past story steps for V IST, we
    input the surrounding multimodal infillings because the summarized steps of W IKI H OW articles
    aren’t quite as dependent on flowing over time. Summarizing “How-To” articles into a series of
    human-understandable instructions does, however, require understanding the nearby logical steps.
    Experiments demonstrate that VC OT improves the overall quality of the final stories and instruction
    summarization for the example datasets W IKIHOW and V IST.

    A.3.1        L IKELIHOOD OF G PT-3.5 O UTPUTS
    The G PT-3.5 API response4 returns the log probabilities of individual generated tokens. We compute
    the joint log likelihood probability of an output sequence t1 , ..., tn as the sum of the individual token
    log probabilities (Equation 8).
                                                                     n
                                                                     X
                                           ln(IP(t1 , ..., tn )) ≈         ln(IP(ti ))                       (8)
                                                                     i=1


    A.4       R EPRODUCIBILITY

    The only non-open source model we use is G PT-3.5 text-davinci-003. We used the OpenAI
    API in January 2023 with temperature 0 for one candidate infilling and temperature 0.5 to generate 4
    different candidate infillings, and temperature 0 otherwise for all other tasks; all other hyperparameters
    are set to the default. Repetitive runs on V IST/W IKI H OW examples yield similar results, promoting
    reproducibility.

        4
            https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/completions/create#completions/create-logprobs.


                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Figure 10: Amazon Mechanical Turk Platform Interface


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Multimodal                                                                         Multimodal
                                   Inﬁllings                                                                          Inﬁllings


   Create a designated      Utilize storage           Create separate areas for      Let your hamster
                                                                                                               Provide your hamster with Let your hamster explore
   area for each type of    containers and            different types of supplies    become familiar with      a safe and comfortable    his new home by
   material and tool to     shelves to store and      to maximize space and          your scent by offering    environment by setting up providing him with a few
   keep the studio          organize supplies for     efficiency.                    him treats from your      his cage with bedding,    hours of supervised
   organized and efficient. easy access.                                             hand.                     toys, and chew toys.      playtime outside the cage.


   Create a sketchbook  to    Gather inspiration from Create a folder or board                                                           Vegetables are cooked in
              `                                                                   Cook prepares                Vegetables are added
   document your ideas        other artists, books, and for storing project ideas
                                                                                  traditional Jewish soup      to the soup on the        the soup and placed in a
   and progress as you        websites to help inform and inspiration to help you
                                                                                  by adding vegetables.        stove.                    bowl.
   work on the project.       your project.             stay organized.


 A large amount of snow is Snow covers London and                                    Hikers rest in forest    Hikers take a break and    A strange orange
                                                      Snowy scenes in                and observe the          observe the surrounding
 covering a yellow ﬂower.  Montreal, highlighting the London and Montreal.                                                               matter on a tree.
                                                                                     wildlife.                wildlife and plants.
                           beauty of winter.


                                                                                                                                         For NeoPopRealist murals,
  A hive tool can be used    Carefully remove the      Use a bee brush to gently Painting a mural requires Sketch out the design         100% acrylic exterior paint is
  to separate the top box    frames from the honey     remove the bees from the preparation, equipment, and     of the mural or          best for exterior projects,
  from the bottom two        super and inspect the     honey super before lifting it a suitable location with a drawing in pencil or     while latex paint is best for
  boxes of a beehive.        honeycomb for signs of    off the hive.                 smooth, flat surface,      chalk before painting.
                                                                                                                                         interior walls, and varnish
                             honey.                                                  although rough-textured                             may be necessary to protect
                                                                                     surfaces can also be used.                          the mural in public places.


Figure 11: Example VC OT multimodal infillings (middle text-visual pair) generated with our visual
chain-of-thought method.


                                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Multimodal                                                                      Multimodal
                                      Inﬁllings                                                                       Inﬁllings


  Research topics that are      Follow inﬂuencers     Read articles from               Tourists explore the      Tourists admire       A well manicured
  trending online to get a      and celebrities on    various sources to               beauty of the castle      the castle and its    sidewalk is the
                                social media to get learn about current                and its grounds.          grounds as they       entrance to a
  better understanding of
                                the latest updates on trends and topics in                                       walk down the         property.
  what is popular in the                                                                                         path.
                                their lives and       the entertainment
  world of pop culture.         interests.            industry.


                                                                                       Good pet ownership      Take your pet for       Provide your pet
 Take courses and build a       Research the different    Freelance VFX artists have
                                                                                       involves cleaning up    regular check-ups to    with a healthy diet
 portfolio to demonstrate       types of VFX software     more control over their      after your pet,
 your skills and abilities as   and techniques                                                                 ensure their health     and exercise
                                                          schedule and project         organizing their toys, and wellbeing.
 a VFX artist.                  available to gain a                                                                                    routine to keep
                                                          selection, but must handle   and helping to maintain
                                better understanding of                                                                                them fit and active.
                                                          administrative tasks and     their living area.
                                the industry.             may struggle to bring in a
                                                          consistent income.


                                                                                       Repeat words and        Observe your parrot's Reward your parrot with
   Students listen to           Students receive          Students shake hands         phrases to the parrot   behavior to identify
   speeches and take                                                                                                                  treats and positive
                                diplomas from the         with the teacher and         in a consistent and     which words and
   part in a presidential       teacher in a presidential receive their diplomas.                                                     reinforcement to show
                                                                                       clear manner to help    phrases it is learning
   inauguration                 inauguration ceremony.                                                                                appreciation for its
                                                                                       them learn.             and which need further
   ceremony.                                                                                                   repetition.            efforts.


                                                                                       Group of people          People bundle up in    A woman is
                                                     Mushrooms and                     gather around a ﬁre
     A smiling boy is     Boy throws frisbee                                                                    hats and coats to keep wearing a
                                                     a leaf laying in                  in the snow.
     holding a red        and runs through                                                                      warm by the ﬁre.       beanie in cold
                                                     the grass.
     frisbee.             nature.                                                                                                      weather.


Figure 12: Example VC OT multimodal infillings (middle text-visual pair) generated with our visual
chain-of-thought method.


                                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 Baseline Comparison of
                            Ex: 1                                                 Multimodal inﬁllings:                                                                   Ex: 2


                                                                                                                                      Container ship unloads
                                             The homeowner walks                                                                      cargo at wharf and
                                             through the house admiring                                                               people walk up stairs to
                                             the modern interior.                                                                     industrial structure.



                                                                          Homeowner admires the            People walk up stairs to                                People walk up stairs to
 The homeowner                                                            modern furniture and             the industrial structure                                the industrial structure
 admires the garden                                                       fixtures in the house.           as the container ship                                   and unload cargo from
                                                                                                           unloads cargo at the                                    the container ship.
 before entering the
 house to explore the                                                                                      wharf.
 modern interior.

                                                                                                                                      The boat named Jascon
                                             Family enters the house and                                                              27 is tied to the wharf near
                                             admires the vintage decor.
                                                                                                                                      an industrial structure.
                                                                                    Top Inﬁlling: VCoT
                                                                                 Bottom inﬁlling: CoI+CoT
                            Ex: 3                                                                                                                                          Ex: 4


                                             Reduce consumption of                                                                      Tourists explore the
                                             single-use items and opt                                                                   industrial structure and
                                             for reusable alternatives                                                                  take in the view of the
                                             when possible.                                                                             river.

                                                                                                         A very large building with
                                                                                                         evenly spaced barred                                      Tourists explore the
 Recycle and upcycle                                                                                     windows.                                                  industrial structure
 materials whenever                                                      Buy products with minimal                                                                 and see the Jascon
 possible.                                                               packaging and look for                                                                    27 boat.
                                                                         sustainable materials when
                                                                         possible.


                                             Reduce your consumption                                                                   People walk from the
                                             of resources by reusing and                                                               building to the wharf and
                                             recycling items whenever                                                                  board the Jascon 27.
                                             possible.


Figure 13: Comparison of generating multimodal infillings for two surrounding steps using vi-
sual chain-of-thought vs text-only chain-of-thought plus image-only chain-of-images performed in
parallel.
  No Multipoint Foveation


                             A man showing his portrait Man shows off his tattoos and The tattooed man stands up and     The tattooed man joins the band,    Three men are singing into
                                tattoos on his calf.      joins the band on stage.        joins the band on stage.        and they start singing together. microphones next to each other.
    Multipoint Foveation


                            A man showing his portrait      Tourists explore London, People walking around the city People explore the city and listen to   Three men are singing into
                               tattoos on his calf.    admiring the unique art and culture. admiring the sights.                live music.               microphones next to each other.


Figure 14: Comparison of infillings generated with and without Multipoint Foveation (MPF) in the
VIST dataset. In this example, the overall story is about people exploring different parts of a city,
including a tattoo parlor, music show, city streeets, etc. The infilling generated with MPF is more
consistent with the global context of the story. By contrast, the infilling generated without MPF
overfits to the local information of the man with the tattoo and creates an unrealistic tattooed singing
man inconsistent with the actual story.

                                                                                                    17
