Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR N ODE S ELECTION
IN B RANCH - AND -B OUND

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         A big challenge in branch and bound lies in identifying the optimal node within
         the search tree from which to proceed. Current state-of-the-art selectors utilize
         either hand-crafted ensembles that automatically switch between naive sub-node
         selectors, or learned node selectors that rely on individual node data. We pro-
         pose a novel bi-simulation technique that uses reinforcement learning (RL) while
         considering the entire tree state, rather than just isolated nodes. To achieve this,
         we train a graph neural network that produces a probability distribution based on
         the path from the model’s root to its “to-be-selected” leaves. Modelling node-
         selection as a probability distribution allows us to train the model using state-of-
         the-art RL techniques that capture both intrinsic node-quality and node-evaluation
         costs. Our method induces a high quality node selection policy on a set of varied
         and complex problem sets, despite only being trained on specially designed, syn-
         thetic travelling salesmen problem (TSP) instances. Using such a fixed pretrained
         policy shows significant improvements on several benchmarks in optimality gap
         reductions and per-node efficiency under strict time constraints.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The optimization paradigm of mixed integer programming plays a crucial role in addressing a wide
range of complex problems, including scheduling (Bayliss et al., 2017), process planning (Floudas &
Lin, 2005), and network design (Menon et al., 2013). A prominent algorithmic approach employed
to solve these problems is branch-and-bound (BnB), which recursively subdivides the original prob-
lem into smaller sub-problems through variable branching and pruning based on inferred problem
bounds. BnB is also one of the main algorithms implemented in SCIP (Bestuzheva et al., 2021a;b),
a state-of-the art mixed integer linear and mixed integer nonlinear solver.
An often understudied aspect is the node selection problem, which involves determining which
nodes within the search tree are most promising for further exploration. This is due to the intrin-
sic complexity of understanding the emergent effects of node selection on overall performance for
human experts. Contemporary methods addressing the node selection problem typically adopt a
per-node perspective (Yilmaz & Yorke-Smith, 2021; He et al., 2014; Morrison et al., 2016), incor-
porating varying levels of complexity and relying on imitation learning (IL) from existing heuris-
tics (Yilmaz & Yorke-Smith, 2021; He et al., 2014). However, they fail to fully capture the rich
structural information present within the branch-and-bound tree itself.
We propose a novel selection heuristic that leverages the power of bi-simulating the branch-and-
bound tree with a neural network-based model and that employs reinforcement learning (RL) for
heuristic training, see Fig. 1. To do so, we reproduce the SCIP state transitions inside our neural net-
work structure (bi-simulation), which allows us to take advantage of the inherent structures induced
by branch-and-bound. By simulating the tree and capturing its underlying dynamics we can extract
valuable insights that inform the RL policy, which learns from the tree’s dynamics, optimizing node
selection choices over time.
We reason that RL specifically is a good fit for this type of training as external parameters outside
the pure quality of a node have to be taken into account. For example, a node A might promise a
significantly bigger decrease in the expected optimality gap than a second node B, but node A might
take twice as long to evaluate, making B the “correct” choice despite its lower theoretical utility. By


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Branch and Bound Tree             Independent Node Processing               𝐾 steps message passing                               Path Extraction
                                                                                        (+ MLP)
                                                   for each node                                                                                 ℎ! (𝑛" )
                    𝑛!                                                                               ℎ! (𝑛" )

                                                   extract features
                                                                                                                                      ℎ! (𝑛# )              ℎ$ (𝑛% )
            𝑛"             𝑛#                                                             ℎ! (𝑛# )              ℎ$ (𝑛% )
                                                   normalize

                                                                                                                           ℎ! (𝑛& )              ℎ! (𝑛' )
                                                   MLP processing                                                                                                      4.
     𝑛$            𝑛%                                                          ℎ! (𝑛& )              ℎ! (𝑛' )
                                1.                                    2.                                             3.    𝑃 𝑛! = 1&2 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛!      + 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛#
                                                                                                                           𝑃 𝑛$ = 1&3 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛$      + 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛%    + 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛#
 branching candidates 𝑛# , 𝑛$ , 𝑛%                                                                                         𝑃 𝑛& = 1&3 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛&      + 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛%    + 𝑤 ℎ" 𝑛#

                                                                               à tree-dependent node
                                       à node representation                                                                          𝜎 ⋅             branching node
                                                                                 representations ℎ! (𝑛" )

Figure 1: Our method: (1) SCIP solves individual nodes and executes existing heuristics. (2) Fea-
tures are extracted from every branch-and-bound node and sent to individual normalization and em-
bedding. (3) The node embeddings are subject to K steps of GNN message passing on the induced
tree-structure. (4) Based on the node embeddings, we generate root-to-leave paths, from which we
sample the next node. The resulting node is submitted to SCIP and we return to step 1.


incorporating the bi-simulation technique, we can effectively capture the intricate interdependencies
of nodes and propagate relevant information throughout the tree.

2      B RANCH AND B OUND
BnB is one of the most effective methods for solving mixed integer programming (MIP) problems. It
recursively solves relaxed versions of the original problem, gradually strengthening the constraints
until it finds an optimal solution. The first step relaxes the original MIP instance into a tractable
subproblem by dropping all integrality constraints such that the subproblem can later be strictified
into a MIP solution. For simplicity, we focus our explanation to the case of mixed integer linear
programs (MILP) while our method theoretically works for any type of constraint allowed in SCIP
(see nonlinear results in Sec. 5.3.2, and (Bestuzheva et al., 2023). Concretely a MILP has the form
                                     PMILP = min{cT1 x + cT2 y|Ax + By ≥ b, y ∈ Zn },                                                                                       (1)
where c1 and c2 are coefficient vectors, A and B are constraint matrices, and x and y are variable
vectors. The integrality constraint y ∈ Zn requires y to be an integer. In the relaxation step, this
constraint is dropped, leading to the following simplified problem:
                                        Prelaxed = min{cT1 x + cT2 y|Ax + By ≥ b}.                                                                                          (2)
Now, the problem becomes a linear program without integrality constraints, which can be exactly
solved using the Simplex (Dantzig, 1982) or other efficient linear programming algorithms.
After solving the relaxed problem, BnB proceeds to the branching step: First, a non-integral yi is
chosen. The branching step then derives two problems: The first problem (Eq. 3) adds a lower
bound to variable yi , while the second problem (Eq. 4) adds an upper bound to variable yi . These
two directions represent the rounding choices to enforce integrality for yi :1
                                Prelaxed ∪ {y ≤ c} = min{cT1 x + cT2 y|Ax + By ≥ b, yi ≤ ⌊c⌋}                                                                               (3)
                         Prelaxed ∪ {y ≥ c + 1} = min{cT1 x + cT2 y|Ax + By ≥ b, yi ≥ ⌈c⌉}                                                                                  (4)
The resulting decision tree, with two nodes representing the derived problems can now be processed
recursively. However, a naive recursive approach exhaustively enumerates all integral vertices, lead-
ing to an impractical computational effort. Hence, in the bounding step, nodes that are deemed
worse than the currently known best solution are discarded. To do this, BnB stores previously found
solutions which can be used as a lower bound to possible solutions. If a node has an upper bound
larger than a currently found integral solution, no node in that subtree has to be processed.
   1
     There are non-binary, “wide” branching strategies which we will not consider here explicitly. However, our
approach is flexible enough to allow for arbitrary branching width. See Morrison et al. (2016) for an overview.


                                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The interplay of these three steps—relaxation, branching, and bounding—forms the core of branch-
and-bound. It enables the systematic exploration of the solution space while efficiently pruning
unpromising regions. Through this iterative process, the algorithm converges towards the optimal
solution for the original MIP problem, while producing exact optimality bounds at every iteration.


3   R ELATED W ORK

While variable selection through learned heuristics has been studied a lot (see e.g. Parsonson et al.
(2022) or Etheve et al. (2020)), learning node selection, where learned heuristics pick the best node
to continue, have only rarely been addressed in research. We study learning algorithms for node se-
lection in state-of-the-art branch-and-cut solvers. Prior work that learns such node selection strate-
gies made significant contributions to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the optimization.
Notably, many approaches rely on per-node features and Imitation Learning (IL). Otten & Dechter
(2012) examined the estimation of subproblem complexity as a means to enhance parallelization
efficiency. By estimating the complexity of subproblems, the algorithm can allocate computational
resources more effectively. Yilmaz & Yorke-Smith (2021) employed IL to directly select the most
promising node for exploration. Their approach utilized a set of per-node features to train a model
that can accurately determine which node to choose. He et al. (2014) employed support vector
machines and IL to create a hybrid heuristic based on existing heuristics. By leveraging per-node
features, their approach aimed to improve node selection decisions. While these prior approaches
have yielded valuable insights, they are inherently limited by their focus on per-node features.
Labassi et al. (2022) proposed the use of Siamese graph neural networks, representing each node as
a graph that connects variables with the relevant constraints. Their objective was direct imitation of
an optimal diving oracle. This approach facilitated learning from node comparisons and enabled the
model to make informed decisions during node selection. However, the relative quality of two nodes
cannot be fully utilized to make informed branching decisions as interactions between nodes remain
minimal (as they are only communicated through a final score and a singular global embedding
containing the primal and dual estimate). While the relative quality of nodes against each other is
used, the potential performance is limited as the overall (non-leaf) tree structure is not considered.
Another limitation of existing methods is their heavy reliance on pure IL that will be constrained by
the performance of the existing heuristics. Hence, integrating RL to strategically select nodes holds
great promise. This not only aims for short-term optimality but also for the acquisition of valuable
information to make better decisions later in the search process. This is important as node selection
not only has to model the expected decrease in the optimality gap, but also has to account for the
time commitment a certain node brings with it as not all nodes take equal amount of time to process.


4   M ETHODOLOGY

We combine two major objectives: a representation that effectively captures the inherent structures
and complexities of the branch-and-bound tree, see Sec. 4.1, and an RL policy trained to select
nodes (instead of an heuristic guided via RL), see Sec. 4.2. To do this, we view node-selection as a
probabilistic process where different nodes nk can be sampled from a distribution π: nk ∼ π(nk |so ),
where so is the state of the branch-and-bound optimizer. Optimal node selection can now be framed
as learning a node-selection distribution π that, given some representation of the optimizer state
so , selects the optimal node ni to maximize a performance measure. A reasonable performance
measure, for instance, captures the achieved performance against a well-known baseline. In our
case, we choose our performance measure, i.e., our reward, to be

                                          gap(node selector)
                                  r=−                         −1                                 (5)
                                               gap(scip)
The aim is to decrease the optimality gap achieved by our node-selector at the end of the solve
(i.e., gap(node selector)), normalized by the results achieved by the existing state-of-the-art node-
selection methods in the SCIP (Bestuzheva et al., 2021a) solver at the end of the solve (i.e.,
gap(scip)). We further shift this performance measure, such that any value > 0 corresponds to
our selector being superior to existing solvers, while a value < 0 corresponds to our selector being


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


worse, and clip the reward objective between (1, −1) to ensure equal size of the reward and “pun-
ishment” ranges as is commonly done in prior work (see, e.g. Mnih et al. (2015). In general, finding
good performance measurements that areis difficult (see Sec. 5). For training we can circumvent a
lot of the downsides of this reward formulation, like divide-by-zero or divide-by-infinity problems,
by simply sampling difficult, but tractable problems (see Sec. 4.3).

4.1   T REE R EPRESENTATION

To address the first objective, we propose a novel approach that involves bi-simulating the existing
branch-and-bound tree using a graph neural network (GNN). This entails transforming the tree into a
graph structure, taking into account the features associated with each node (for a full list of features
we used, see Appendix C). We ensure that the features stay at a constant size, independent from,
e.g., the number of variables and constraints, to enable efficient batch-evaluation of the entire tree.
In the reconstructed GNN, the inputs consist of the features of the current node, as well as the fea-
tures of its two child nodes. Pruned or missing nodes are replaced with a constant to maintain the
integrity of the graph structure. This transformation enables us to consider subtrees within a prede-
termined depth limit, denoted as K, by running K steps of message passing. This approach allows
us to balance memory and computational requirements across different nodes, while preventing the
overload of latent dimensions in deep trees.
For our graph processing GNN, we use a well understood method known as “Message Passing”
across nodes. For all nodes, this method passes information from the graph’s neighborhood into
the node itself, by first aggregating all information with a permutation invariant transform (e. g.,
computing the mean across neighbors), and then updating the node-state with the neighborhood
state. In our case, the (directed) neighborhood is simply the set of direct children (see Fig. 1). As
message passing iterates, we accumulate increasing amounts of the neighborhood, as iteration t + 1
utilizes a node-embedding that already has the last t steps aggregated. Inductively, the message
passing range directly correlates with the number of iterations used to compute the embeddings.
Concretely, the internal representation can be thought of initializing h0 (n) = x(n) (with x(n) being
the feature associated with node n) and then running K iterations jointly for all nodes n:

                                                  ht (left(n)) + ht (right(n))
                      ht+1 (n) = ht (n) + emb                                    ,                (6)
                                                                2
where left(n) and right(n) are the left and right children of n, respectively, ht (n) is the hidden
representation of node n after t steps of message passing, and emb is a function that takes the mean
hidden state of all embeddings and creates an updated node embedding.

4.2   RL FOR N ODE S ELECTION

While the GNN model is appealing, it is impossible to train using contemporary imitation learning
techniques, as the expert’s action domain (i.e., leaves) may not be the same as the policy’s action
domain, meaning that the divergence between these policies is undefined. Instead, we phrase our
node selection MDP as a the (state, action, reward) triple of (BnB tree, selectable leaves, reward r)
(where r is defined according to Eq. 5) and use RL techniques to solve this problem. Using the final
node-representation hK (n) we can derive a value for every node V (hK (n)) and a weight W (hK (n))
to be used by our RL agent. Specifically we can produce a probability distribution of node-selections
(i. e., our actions) by computing the expected weight across the unique path from the graph’s root to
the “to-be-selected” leaves. We specifically consider the expectation as to not bias against deeper or
shallower nodes. This definition allows us to have a global view on the node-selection probability,
despite the fact that we only perform a fixed number of message-passing iterations to derive our
node embeddings. Concretely, let n be a leaf node in the set of candidate nodes C , also let P (r, n)
be the unique path from the root r to the candidate leaf node, with |P (r, n)| describing its length.
We define the expected path weight W ′ (n) to a leaf node n ∈ C as
                                             1       X
                               W ′ (n) =                   W (hK (u)).                             (7)
                                         |P (r, n)|
                                                   u∈P (r,n)
Selection now is performed in accordance to sampling from a selection policy π induced by
                           π(n| tree) = softmax ({W ′ (n)|∀n ∈ C }).                                (8)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intuitively, this means that we select a node exactly if the expected utility along its path is high. Note
that this definition is naturally self-correcting as erroneous over-selection of one subtree will lead to
that tree being completed, which removes the leaves from the selection pool C .
By combining the bi-simulation technique, the GNN representation, and the computation of node
probabilities, we establish a framework that enables distributional RL for node selection. We con-
sider proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) for optimizing the node-selection
policy. For its updates, PPO considers the advantage A of the taken action in episode i against the
current action distribution. Intuitively, this amounts to reducing the frequency of disadvantageous
actions, while increasing the frequency of high quality actions. We choose the generalized advantage
estimator (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2015), which interpolates between an unbiased but high variance
Monte Carlo estimator, and a biased, low variance estimator. For the latter we use a value function
V (s), which we implemented similarly to the policy-utility construction above:
                                     Q̃(n|s)
                        Q(n|s) =                                                                           (9)
                                    |P (r, n)|
                        Q̃(n|s) = Q̃(left child|s) + Q̃(right child|s) + q(hn |s)                         (10)
                          V (s) = {max Q(n) | ∀n ∈ C }                                                    (11)
where q(hn ) is the per-node estimator, Q̃ the unnormalized Q-value, and C is the set of open nodes
as proposed by the branch-and-bound method. Note that this representation uses the fact that the
value function can be written as the maximal Q-value: V (s) = maxa∈A Q(a|s).
This method provides low, but measurable overhead compared to existing node selectors, even if
we discount the fact that our Python-based implementation is vastly slower than SCIP’s highly
optimized C-based implementations. Hence, we focus our model on being efficient at the beginning
of the selection process, where good node selections are exponentially more important as finding
more optimal solutions earlier allows to prune more nodes from the exponentially expanding search
tree. Specifically we evaluate our heuristic at every node for the first 250 selections, then at every
tenth node for the next 750 nodes, and finally switch to classical selectors for the remaining nodes.2

4.3   DATA G ENERATION & AGENT T RAINING

In training MIPs, a critical challenge lies in generating sufficiently complex training problems. First,
to learn from interesting structures, we need to decide on some specific problem, whose e. g., satisfia-
bility is knowable as generating random constraint matrices will likely generate empty polyhedrons,
or polyhedrons with many eliminable constraints (e.g., in the constraint set consisting of cT x ≤ b
and cT x ≤ b+ρ with ρ ̸= 0 one constraint is always eliminable). This may seem unlikely, but notice
how we can construct aligned c vectors by linearly combining different rows (just like in LP-dual
formulations). In practice, selecting a sufficiently large class of problems may be enough as during
the branch-and-cut process many sub-polyhedra are anyways being generated. Since our algorithm
naturally decomposes the problem into sub-trees, we can assume any policy that performs well on
the entire tree also performs well on sub-polyhedra generated during the branch-and-cut.
For this reason we consider the large class of Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), which itself has
rich use-cases in planning and logistics, but also in optimal control, the manufacturing of microchips
and DNA sequencing (see Cook et al. (2011)). The TSP problem consists of finding a round-trip
path in a weighted graph, such that every vertex is visited exactly once, and the total path-length is
minimal (for more details and a mathematical formulation, see Appendix A)
For training, we would like to use random instances of TSP but generating them can be challeng-
ing. Random sampling of distance matrices often results in easy problem instances, which do not
challenge the solver. Consequently, significant effort has been devoted to devising methods for gen-
erating random but hard instances, particularly for problems like the TSP, where specific generators
for challenging problems have been designed (see Vercesi et al. (2023) and Rardin et al. (1993)).
However, for our specific use cases, these provably hard problems may not be very informative as
they rarely contain efficiently selectable nodes. For instance, blindly selecting knapsack instances
   2
     This accounts for the “phase-transition” in MIP solvers where optimality needs to be proved by closing the
remaining branches although the theoretically optimal point is already found (Morrison et al., 2016). Note that
with a tuned implementation we could run our method for more nodes, where we expect further improvements.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


according to the Merkle-Hellman cryptosystem (Merkle & Hellman, 1978), would lead to challeng-
ing problems, but ones that are too hard to provide meaningful feedback to the RL agent.
To generate these intermediary-difficult problems, we adopt a multi-step approach: We begin by
generating random instances and then apply some mutation techniques (Bossek et al., 2019) to
introduce variations, and ensure diversity within the problem set. From this population of candidate
problems, we select the median optimality-gap problem. The optimality gap, representing the best
normalized difference between the lower and upper bound for a solution found during the solver’s
budget-restricted execution, serves as a crucial metric to assess difficulty. This method is used to
produce 200 intermediary-difficulty training instances
To ensure the quality of candidate problems, we exclude problems with more than 100% or zero
optimality gap, as these scenarios present challenges in reward assignment during RL. To reduce
overall variance of our training, we limit the ground-truth variance in optimality gap. Additionally,
we impose a constraint on the minimum number of nodes in the problems, discarding every instance
with less than 100 nodes. This is essential as we do not expect such small problems to give clean
reward signals to the reinforcement learner.

5       E XPERIMENTS
For our experiments we consider the instances of TSPLIB (Reinelt, 1991) and MIPLIB (Gleixner
et al., 2021) which are one of the most used datasets for benchmarking MIP frameworks and thusly
form a strong baseline to test against. We further test against the UFLP instance generator by
(Kochetov & Ivanenko, 2005), which specifically produces instances hard to solve for branch-and-
bound, and against MINLPLIB (Bussieck et al., 2003), which contains mixed integer nonlinear
programs, to show generalization towards very foreign problems. The source code for reproducing
our experiments will be made publicly available (see supplementary material).

5.1     BASELINES

We run both our method and SCIP for 45s.3 We then filter out all runs where SCIP has managed to
explore less than 5 nodes, as in these runs we cannot expect even perfect node selection to make any
difference in performance. If we included those in our average, we would have a significant number
of lines where our node-selector has zero advantage over the traditional SCIP one, not because our
selector is better or worse than SCIP, but simply because it wasn’t called in the first place. We set this
time-limit relatively low as our prototype selector only runs at the beginning of the solver process,
meaning that over time the effects of the traditional solver take over. Running the system for longer
yields similar trends, but worse signal-to-noise ratio in the improvement due to the SCIP selector
dominating the learnt solver in the long-runtime regime.
A common issue in testing new node selection techniques against an existing (e.g., SCIP) strategy is
the degree of code-optimization present in industrial-grade solvers compared to research prototypes:
SCIP is a highly optimized C-implementation while our node selector has Python and framework
overhead to contend with. This means the node-throughput is naturally going to be much slower
than the node-throughput of the baseline, even if we disregard the additional cost of evaluating the
neural network. We cannot assess the theoretically possible efficiency of our method, so all of our
results should be taken as a lower-bound on performance4 .

5.2     E VALUATION M ETRICS

A core issue in benchmarking is the overall breadth of difficulty and scale of problem instances.
Comparing the performance of node selection strategies is challenging due to a lack of aggregatable
metrics. Further, the difficulty of the instances in benchmarks do not only depend on the scale
but also specific configuration, e.g., distances in TSPLIB: while swiss42 can be solved quickly,
ulysses22 cannot be solved within our time limit despite only being half the size (see Table 3).
    3
      Unfortunately, we could not include Labassi et al. (2022) and He et al. (2014) as baselines due to compat-
ibility issues between SCIP versions, see Appendix D for more details.
    4
      For instance, our method spends about as much time in the feature-extraction stage as in all other stages
combined. This is due to the limited efficiency of even highly optimized Python code.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can also see this at the range of optimality gaps in Table 3. The gaps range from 1134% to 0%.
Computing the mean gap alone is not very meaningful as instances with large gaps dominate the
average.5 To facilitate meaningful comparisons, we consider three normalized metrics as follows.
The Reward (Eq. 5) considers the shifted ratio between the optimality gap of our approach and that
of the baseline; positive values represent that our method is better and vice verse. This has the natural
advantage of removing the absolute scale of the gaps and only considering relative improvements.
The downside is that small differences can get blown-up in cases where the baseline is already
small.6 Note that the function also has an asymmetric range, since one can have an infinitely negative
reward, but can have at most have a +1 positive reward. Hence, we clip the reward in the range ±1
as this means a single bad result cannot destroy the entire valuation for either method.
Utility defines the difference between both methods normalized using the maximum of both gaps:

                                       gap(scip) − gap(node selector)
                         Utility =                                         .               (12)
                                     max (gap(node selector), gap(scip))
The reason we do not use this as a reward measure is because we empirically found it to produce
worse models. This is presumably because some of the negative attributes of our reward, e.g., the
asymmetry of the reward signal, lead to more robust policies. In addition, the utility metric gives
erroneous measurements when both models hit zero optimality gap. This is because utility implicitly
defines 00 = 0, rather than reward, which defines it as 00 = 1. In some sense the utility measurement
is accurate, in that our method does not improve upon the baseline. On the other hand, our method
is already provably optimal as soon as it reaches a gap of 0%. In general, utility compresses the
differences more than reward which may or may not be beneficial in practice.
Utility per Node normalizes Utility by the number of nodes used during exploration:

                                                scip − selector
                          Utility/Node =                              ,                               (13a)
                                               max (selector, scip)
                      gap(node selector)              gap(scip)
where selector = nodes(node     selector) and scip = nodes(scip) . The per-node utility gives a proxy for
the total amount of “work” done by each method. However, it ignores the individual node costs, as
solving the different LPs may take different amounts of resources (a model with higher “utility/node”
is not necessarily more efficient as our learner might pick cheap but lower expected utility nodes on
purpose). Further, the metric is underdefined: comparing two ratios, a method may become better
by increasing the number of nodes processed, but keeping the achieved gap constant. In practice the
number of nodes processed by our node selector is dominated by the implementation rather than the
node choices, meaning we can assume it is invariant to changes in policy. Another downside arises
if both methods reach zero optimality gap, the resulting efficiency will also be zero regardless of
how many nodes we processed. As our method tend to reach optimality much faster (see Sec. 5 and
Appendix D), all utility/node results can be seen as a lower-bound for the actual efficiency.

5.3    R ESULTS

While all results can be found in Appendix D we report an aggregated view for each benchmark in
Table 6. In addition to our metrics we report the winning ratio of our method over the baseline, and
the geometric mean of the gaps at the end of solving (lower is better).
For benchmarking and training, we leave all settings, such as presolvers, primal heuristics, diving
heuristics, constraint specialisations, etc. at their default settings to allow the baseline to perform
best. All instances are solved using the same model without any fine-tuning. We expect that tuning,
e.g., the aggressiveness of primal heuristics, increases the performance of our method, as it decreases
   5
      A gap decrease from 1, 000% down to 999% has the same overall magnitude as a decrease from 1% to 0%
– but from a practical point of view the latter is much more meaningful. The degree of which a result can be
improved also depends wildely on the problem’s pre-existing optimality gap. For instance an improvement of
2% from 1, 000% down to 998% is easily possible, while becoming impossible for a problem whose baseline
already achieves only 1% gap. This would mean that in a simple average the small-gap problems would
completely vanish under the size of large-gap instances.
    6
      For example, if the baseline has a gap of 0.001 and ours has a gap of 0.002 our method would be 100%
worse, despite the fact that from a practical point of view both of them are almost identical.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance across benchmarks (the policy only saw TSP instances during training). The
5min runs use the same model, evaluated for the first 650 nodes, and processed according to Sec. 5.1.
 Benchmark                          Reward   Utility   Utility/Node   Win-rate   geo-mean Ours   geo-mean SCIP
 TSPLIB (Reinelt, 1991)             0.184     0.030         0.193       0.50         0.931            0.957
 UFLP (Kochetov & Ivanenko, 2005)   0.078     0.093        -0.064      0.636          0.491           0.520
 MINLPLib (Bussieck et al., 2003)   0.487     0.000         0.114      0.852         28.783          31.185
 MIPLIB (Gleixner et al., 2021)     0.140    -0.013         0.208      0.769        545.879         848.628
 TSPLIB@5min                        0.192     0.056         0.336      0.600         1.615            2.000
 MINLPlib@5min                      0.486    -0.012         0.078      0.840        17.409           20.460
 MINLPlib@5min                      0.150    -0.075         0.113      0.671        66.861          106.400


the relative cost of evaluating a neural network, but for the sake of comparison we use the same
parameters. We train our node selection policy on problem instances according to Sec. 4.3 and
apply it on problems from different benchmarks.
First, we will discuss TSPLIB itself, which while dramatically more complex than our selected train-
ing instances, still contains instances from the same problem family as the training set (Sec. 5.3.1).
Second, we consider instances of the Uncapacitated Facility Location Problem (UFLP) as generated
by Kochetov & Ivanenko (2005)’s problem generator. These problems are designed to be particu-
lary challenging to branch-and-bound solvers due to their large optimality gap (Sec. D.3.1). While
the first two benchmarks focused on specific problems (giving you a notion of how well the al-
gorithm does on the problem itself) we next consider “‘meta-benchmarks” that consist of many
different problems, but relatively few instances of each. MINLPLIB (Bussieck et al., 2003) is a
meta-benchmark for nonlinear mixed-integer programming (Sec. 5.3.2), and MIPLIB (Gleixner
et al., 2021) a benchmark for mixed integer programming (Sec. 5.3.3). We also consider gener-
alisation against the uncapacitated facility location problem using a strong instance generator, see
Appendix D.3.1. Our benchmarks are diverse and complex and allow to compare algorithmic im-
provements in state-of-the-art solvers.


5.3.1   TSPLIB

From an aggregative viewpoint we outperform the SCIP node selection by ≈ 20% in both reward
and utility per node. Due to the scoring of zero-gap instances we are only 3.3% ahead in utility.
If both our method and the baseline reach an optimality gap of 0, it is unclear how the normalised
reward should appear. “Reward” defines 00 = 1 as our method achieved the mathematically optimal
value, so it should achieve the optimal reward. “Utility” defines 00 = 0 as our method did not
improve upon the baseline. While this also persists in “utility per node”, our method is much more
efficient compared to the baseline s.t. zero-gap problems do not affect our results much.
Qualitatively, it is particularly interesting to study the problems our method still looses against SCIP
(in four cases). A possible reason why our method significantly underperforms on Dantzig42 is
that our implementation is just too slow, considering that the baseline manages to evaluate ≈ 40%
more nodes. A similar observation can be made on eil51 where the baseline manages to complete
5× more nodes. KroE100 is the first instance our method looses against SCIP, although it explores
an equal amount of nodes. We believe that this is because our method commits to the wrong subtree
early and never manages to correct into the proper subtree. rd100 is also similar to Dantzig and
eil51 as the baseline is able to explore 60% more nodes. Ignoring these four failure cases, our
method is either on par (up to stochasticity of the algorithm) or exceeds the baseline significantly.
It is also worthwhile to study the cases where both the baseline and our method hit 0 optimality
gap. A quick glance at instances like bayg29, fri26, swiss42 or ulysses16 shows that our
method tends to finish these problems with significantly fewer nodes explored. This is not captured
by any of our metrics as the “utility/node” metric is zero if the utility is zero, as is the case with
0 optimality gap instances. Qualitatively, instances like bayg29 manage to reach the optimum in
only 13 the number of explored nodes, which showcases a significant improvement in node-selection
quality. It is worth noting that, due to the different optimization costs for different nodes, it not
always holds that evaluating fewer nodes is faster in wall-clock time. In practice, “fewer nodes is
better” seems to be a good rule-of-thumb to check algorithmic efficiency.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3.2    MINLPLIB
We now consider MINLPs. To solve these, SCIP and other solvers use branching techniques that
cut nonlinear (often convex) problems from a relaxed master-relaxation towards true solutions. We
consider MINLPLib (Bussieck et al., 2003), a meta-benchmark consisting of hundreds of synthetic
and real-world MINLP instances of varying different types and sizes. As some instances take hours
to solve (making them inadequate to judge our node selector which mainly aims to improve the
starting condition of problems), we also pre-filter the instances. Specifically, we apply the same
filtering for tractable problems as in the TSPLIB case. Full results can be found in Appendix D.3.
Our method still manages to outperform SCIP, even on MINLPs, although it has never seen a single
MINLP problem before, see Table 6. The reason for the significant divergence between the Reward
and Utility performance measures is once again due to the handling of 00 . Since MINLPLIB con-
tains a fair few “easy” problems that can be solved to 0% gap, this has a much bigger effect on
this benchmark than the others. Qualitatively, our method either outperforms or is on par with the
majority of problems, but also loses significantly in some problems, greatly decreasing the average.
Despite the fact that utility “rounds down” advantages to zero, the overall utility per node is still
significantly better than that of SCIP. Inspecting the instances with poor results, we also see that for
most of them the baseline manages to complete significantly more nodes than our underoptimized
implementation. We expect features specifically tuned for nonlinear problems to increase perfor-
mance by additional percentage points, but as feature selection is orthogonal to the actual algorithm
design, we leave more thorough discussion of this to future work 7 .

5.3.3    MIPLIB
Last, but not least we consider the meta-benchmark MIPLIB (Gleixner et al., 2021), which consists
of hundreds of real-world mixed-integer programming problems of varying size, complexity, and
hardness. Our method is either close to or exceeds the performance of SCIP, see Table 6. It is also
the first benchmark our method looses on, according to the utility-metric.
Considering per-instance results, we see similar patterns as in previous failure cases: Often we
underperform on instances that need to close many nodes, as our method’s throughput lacks behind
that of SCIP. We expect that a more efficient implementation alleviates the issues in those cases.
We also see challenges in problems that are far from the training distribution. Consider
fhnw-binpack4-48, were the baseline yields an optimality gap of 0 while we end at +∞. This
is due to the design of the problem: Instead of a classical optimization problem, this is a satisfaction
problem, where not an optimal value, but any valid value is searched, i.e., we either yield a gap of 0,
or a gap of +∞, as no other gap is possible. Notably, these kinds of problems may pose a challenge
for our algorithm, as the node-pruning dynamics of satisfying MIPs are different than the one for
optimizing MIPs: Satisfying MIPs can only rarely prune nodes since, by definition, no intermediary
primally valid solutions are ever found. We believe this problem could be solved by considering
such problems during training, which we currently do not.

6    C ONCLUSION
We have proposed a novel approach to branch-and-bound node selection, leveraging the power of
bisimulation and RL. By aligning our model with the branch-and-bound tree structure, we have
demonstrated the potential to develop a versatile heuristic that can be applied across various opti-
mization problem domains, despite being trained on a narrow set of instances. To our knowledge,
this is the first demonstration of learned node selection to mixed-integer (nonlinear) programming.
There are still open questions. Feature selection remains an area where we expect significant im-
provements, especially for nonlinear programming, which contemporary methods do not account
for. We also expect significant improvements in performance through code optimization. An impor-
tant area for research lies in generalized instance generation: Instead of focusing on single domain
instances for training (e.g. from TSP), an instance generator should create problem instances with
consistent, but varying levels of difficulty across different problem domains.
    7
      We are not aware of a learned BnB node-selection heuristic used for MINLPs, so guidance towards feature
selection doesn’t exist yet. Taking advantage of them presumably also requires to train on nonlinear problems.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Manu Orsini, Sertan Girgin, Raphael
 Marinier, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly,
 and Olivier Bachem. What Matters In On-Policy Reinforcement Learning? A Large-Scale Em-
 pirical Study, June 2020.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Thomas C. Bachlechner, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Huanru Henry Mao, G. Cottrell, and Ju-
  lian McAuley. Rezero is all you need: Fast convergence at large depth. In Conference on Un-
  certainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:212644626.
Christopher Bayliss, Geert De Maere, Jason Adam David Atkin, and Marc Paelinck. A simulation
  scenario based mixed integer programming approach to airline reserve crew scheduling under
  uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research, 252:335–363, 2017.
Ksenia Bestuzheva, Mathieu Besançon, Wei-Kun Chen, Antonia Chmiela, Tim Donkiewicz, Jasper
  van Doornmalen, Leon Eifler, Oliver Gaul, Gerald Gamrath, Ambros Gleixner, Leona Gottwald,
  Christoph Graczyk, Katrin Halbig, Alexander Hoen, Christopher Hojny, Rolf van der Hulst,
  Thorsten Koch, Marco Lübbecke, Stephen J. Maher, Frederic Matter, Erik Mühmer, Benjamin
  Müller, Marc E. Pfetsch, Daniel Rehfeldt, Steffan Schlein, Franziska Schlösser, Felipe Serrano,
  Yuji Shinano, Boro Sofranac, Mark Turner, Stefan Vigerske, Fabian Wegscheider, Philipp Well-
  ner, Dieter Weninger, and Jakob Witzig. The SCIP Optimization Suite 8.0. Technical report,
  Optimization Online, December 2021a.
Ksenia Bestuzheva, Mathieu Besançon, Wei-Kun Chen, Antonia Chmiela, Tim Donkiewicz, Jasper
  van Doornmalen, Leon Eifler, Oliver Gaul, Gerald Gamrath, Ambros Gleixner, Leona Gottwald,
  Christoph Graczyk, Katrin Halbig, Alexander Hoen, Christopher Hojny, Rolf van der Hulst,
  Thorsten Koch, Marco Lübbecke, Stephen J. Maher, Frederic Matter, Erik Mühmer, Benjamin
  Müller, Marc E. Pfetsch, Daniel Rehfeldt, Steffan Schlein, Franziska Schlösser, Felipe Serrano,
  Yuji Shinano, Boro Sofranac, Mark Turner, Stefan Vigerske, Fabian Wegscheider, Philipp Well-
  ner, Dieter Weninger, and Jakob Witzig. The SCIP Optimization Suite 8.0. ZIB-Report 21-41,
  Zuse Institute Berlin, December 2021b.
Ksenia Bestuzheva, Antonia Chmiela, Benjamin Müller, Felipe Serrano, Stefan Vigerske, and
  Fabian Wegscheider. Global Optimization of Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programs with SCIP 8,
  January 2023.
Jakob Bossek, Pascal Kerschke, Aneta Neumann, Markus Wagner, Frank Neumann, and Heike
  Trautmann. Evolving diverse tsp instances by means of novel and creative mutation operators.
  In Proceedings of the 15th ACM/SIGEVO Conference on Foundations of Genetic Algorithms,
  FOGA ’19, pp. 58–71, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450362542. doi: 10.1145/3299904.3340307.
Michael R. Bussieck, Arne Stolbjerg Drud, and Alexander Meeraus. MINLPLib—a collection of
 test models for mixed-integer nonlinear programming. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 15(1):
 114–119, February 2003. doi: 10.1287/ijoc.15.1.114.15159.
William J Cook, David L Applegate, Robert E Bixby, and Vasek Chvatal. The traveling salesman
 problem: a computational study. Princeton university press, 2011.
George B. Dantzig. Reminiscences about the origins of linear programming. Operations Research
  Letters, 1(2):43–48, 1982. ISSN 0167-6377. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-6377(82)90043-8.
Marc Etheve, Zacharie Alès, Côme Bissuel, Olivier Juan, and Safia Kedad-Sidhoum. Reinforcement
 learning for variable selection in a branch and bound algorithm. ArXiv, abs/2005.10026, 2020.
 URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211551730.
Christodoulos A. Floudas and Xiaoxia Lin. Mixed integer linear programming in process schedul-
  ing: Modeling, algorithms, and applications. Annals of Operations Research, 139:131–162, 2005.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ambros Gleixner, Gregor Hendel, Gerald Gamrath, Tobias Achterberg, Michael Bastubbe, Timo
 Berthold, Philipp Christophel, Kati Jarck, Thorsten Koch, Jeff Linderoth, Marco Lübbecke,
 Hans D. Mittelmann, Derya Ozyurt, Ted K. Ralphs, Domenico Salvagnin, and Yuji Shinano.
 MIPLIB 2017: Data-driven compilation of the 6th mixed-integer programming library. Math-
 ematical Programming Computation, 13(3):443–490, September 2021. ISSN 1867-2957. doi:
 10.1007/s12532-020-00194-3.
He He, Hal Daume III, and Jason M Eisner. Learning to search in branch and bound algorithms. In
  Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
Yuri Kochetov and Dmitry Ivanenko. Computationally Difficult Instances for the Uncapacitated
  Facility Location Problem, pp. 351–367. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005. ISBN 978-0-387-
  25383-1. doi: 10.1007/0-387-25383-1 16.
Abdel Ghani Labassi, Didier Chételat, and Andrea Lodi. Learning to compare nodes in branch and
  bound with graph neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35,
  2022.
Govind Menon, M. Nabil, and Sridharakumar Narasimhan. Branch and bound algorithm for optimal
  sensor network design. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 46(32):690–695, 2013. ISSN 1474-6670.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.3182/20131218-3-IN-2045.00143. 10th IFAC International Symposium
  on Dynamics and Control of Process Systems.
R. Merkle and M. Hellman. Hiding information and signatures in trapdoor knapsacks. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Information Theory, 24(5):525–530, September 1978. doi: 10.1109/tit.1978.1055927.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1109/tit.1978.1055927.
C. E. Miller, A. W. Tucker, and R. A. Zemlin. Integer programming formulation of traveling sales-
  man problems. J. ACM, 7(4):326–329, oct 1960. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/321043.321046.
Hans D. Mittelmann. Decison Tree for Optimization Software. https://plato.asu.edu/
  sub/nlores.html, 2021. Accessed: 2023-09-02.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G.
  Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Pe-
  tersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran,
  Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforce-
  ment learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015. doi: 10.1038/nature14236. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
David R. Morrison, Sheldon H. Jacobson, Jason J. Sauppe, and Edward C. Sewell. Branch-and-
  bound algorithms: A survey of recent advances in searching, branching, and pruning. Discrete
  Optimization, 19:79–102, 2016. ISSN 1572-5286. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disopt.2016.01.
  005.
Lars Otten and Rina Dechter. A Case Study in Complexity Estimation: Towards Parallel Branch-
  and-Bound over Graphical Models. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence - Proceedings of the
  28th Conference, UAI 2012, October 2012.
Christopher W. F. Parsonson, Alexandre Laterre, and Thomas D. Barrett. Reinforcement learn-
  ing for branch-and-bound optimisation using retrospective trajectories. In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  249192146.
Ronald L. Rardin, Craig A. Tovey, and Martha G. Pilcher. Analysis of a Random Cut Test In-
  stance Generator for the TSP. In Complexity in Numerical Optimization, pp. 387–405. WORLD
  SCIENTIFIC, July 1993. ISBN 978-981-02-1415-9. doi: 10.1142/9789814354363 0017.
Gerhard Reinelt. TSPLIB—a traveling salesman problem library. ORSA Journal on Computing, 3
  (4):376–384, November 1991. doi: 10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376.
J. Schulman, Philipp Moritz, S. Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-Dimensional Con-
   tinuous Control Using Generalized Advantage Estimation. CoRR, June 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Eleonora Vercesi, Stefano Gualandi, Monaldo Mastrolilli, and Luca Maria Gambardella. On
  the generation of metric TSP instances with a large integrality gap by branch-and-cut. Math-
  ematical Programming Computation, 15(2):389–416, June 2023. ISSN 1867-2957. doi:
  10.1007/s12532-023-00235-7.
Bing Xu, Naiyan Wang, Tianqi Chen, and Mu Li. Empirical evaluation of rectified acti-
  vations in convolutional network. ArXiv, abs/1505.00853, 2015. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14083350.
Kaan Yilmaz and Neil Yorke-Smith. A Study of Learning Search Approximation in Mixed Integer
  Branch and Bound: Node Selection in SCIP. AI, 2(2):150–178, April 2021. ISSN 2673-2688.
  doi: 10.3390/ai2020010.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    TSP- AS -MILP F ORMULATION
In general, due to the fact that TSP is amongst the most studied problems in discrete optimization,
we can expect existing mixed-integer programming systems to have rich heuristics that provide
a strong baseline for our method. Mathematically, we choose the Miller–Tucker–Zemlin (MTZ)
formulation (Miller et al., 1960):
                                  n
                                  X n
                                    X
                  min                            cij xij                                                  (14a)
                    x
                                  i=1 j̸=i,j=1
                                      n
                                      X
                  subject to                 xij = 1                          ∀i = 1, . . . , n           (14b)
                                  j=1,i̸=j
                                    n
                                    X
                                             xij = 1                          ∀j = 1, . . . , n           (14c)
                                  i=1,i̸=j

                                 u1 − uj + (n − 1)xij ≤ n − 2                 2 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ n              (14d)
                                 2 ≤ ui ≤ n                                   2≤i≤n                       (14e)
                                 ui ∈ Z, xij ∈ {0, 1}                                                      (14f)
Effectively this formulation keeps two buffers: one being the actual (i, j)-edges travelled xij , the
other being a node-order variable ui that makes sure that ui < uj if i is visited before j. There
are alternative formulations, such as the Dantzig–Fulkerson–Johnson (DFJ) formulation, which are
used in modern purpose-built TSP solvers, but those are less useful for general problem generation:
The MTZ formulation essentially relaxes the edge-assignments and order constraints, which then
are branch-and-bounded into hard assignments during the solving process. This is different to DFJ,
which instead relaxes the “has to pass through all nodes” constraint. DFJ allows for subtours (e. g.,
only contain node A, B, C but not D, E) which then get slowly eliminated via the on-the-fly gener-
ation of additional constraints. To generate these constraints one needs specialised row-generators
which, while very powerful from an optimization point-of-view, make the algorithm less general as
a custom row-generator has to intervene into every single node. However, in our usecase we also do
not really care about the ultimate performance of individual algorithms as the reinforcement learner
only looks for improvements to the existing node selections. This means that as long as the degree
of improvement can be adequately judged, we do not need state-of-the-art solver implementations
to give the learner a meaningful improvement signal.

B    U NCAPACITATED FACILITY LOCATION P ROBLEM
Mathmatically, the uncapacitated facility location problem can be seen as sending a product zij from
facility i to consumer j with cost cij and demand dj . One can only send from i to j if facility i was
built in the first place, which incurs cost fi . The overall problem therefore is
                           n X
                           X m                       n
                                                     X
            min                       cij dj zij +         fi xi                                          (15a)
              x
                            i=1 i=1                  i=0
                              Xn
            subject to                zij = 1                      ∀i = 1, . . . , m                      (15b)
                           j=1,i̸=j
                            Xn
                                      zij ≤ M xi                   ∀j = 1, . . . , n                      (15c)
                           i=1,i̸=j

                           zij ∈ {0, 1}                            ∀i = 1, . . . , n, ∀j = 1, . . . , m   (15d)
                           xi ∈ {0, 1}                             ∀i = 1, . . . , n                      (15e)
                                                                                                           (15f)
where M is a suitably large constant representing the infinite-capacity one has when constructing
xi = 1. One can always choose M ≥ m since that, for the purposes of the polytop is equivalent to
setting M to literal infinity. This is also sometimes referred to as the “big M ” method.

                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The instance generator by Kochetov & Ivanenko (2005) works by setting n = m = 100 and setting
all opening costs at 3000. Every city has 10 “cheap” connections sampled from {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and
the rest have cost 3000, which represents infinity (i. e., also invoking the big M method).

C    F EATURES
Table 2 lists the features used on every individual node. The features split into two different types:
One being “model” features, the other being “node” features. Model features describe the state of the
entire model at the currently explored node, while node features are specific to the yet-to-be-solved
added node. We aim to normalize all features with respect to problem size, as e. g., just giving the
lower-bound to a problem is prone to numerical domain shifts. For instance a problem with objective
cT x, x ∈ P is inherently the same from a solver point-of-view as a problem 10cT x, x ∈ P , but
would give different lower-bounds. Since NNs are generally nonlinear estimators, we need to make
sure such changes do not induce huge distribution shifts. We also clamp the feature values between
[−10, 10] which represent “infinite” values, which can occur, for example in the optimality gap. Last
but not least, we standardize features using empirical mean and standard deviation. These features

                                            Table 2: Features used per individual node.

                                  Number of cuts applied                       normalized by total number of constraints
                 model features


                                  Number of separation rounds
                                  optimality gap
                                  lp iterations
                                  mean integrality gap
                                  percentage of variables already integral
                                  histogram of fractional part of variables    10 evenly sized buckets
                 node features


                                  depth of node                                normalized by total number of nodes
                                  node lowerbound                              normalized by min of primal and dual bound
                                  node estimate                                normalized by min of primal and dual bound



are inspired by prior work, such as Labassi et al. (2022); Yilmaz & Yorke-Smith (2021), but adapted
to the fact that we do not need e. g., explicit entries for the left or right child’s optimality gap, as
these (and more general K-step versions of these) can be handled by the GNN.
Further, to make batching tractable, we aim to have constant size features. This is different from
e. g., Labassi et al. (2022), who utilize flexibly sized graphs to represent each node. The upside
of this approach is that certain connections between variables and constraints may become more
apparent, with the downside being the increased complexity of batching these structures and large
amounts of nodes used. This isn’t a problem for them, as they only consider pairwise comparisons
between nodes, rather than the entire branch-and-bound graph, but for us would induce a great deal
of complexity and computational overhead, especially in the larger instances. For this reason, we
represent flexibly sized inputs, such as the values of variables, as histograms: i.e., instead of having
k nodes for k variables and wiring them together, we produce once distribution of variable values
with 10-buckets, and feed this into the network. This looses a bit of detail in the representation, but
allows us to scale to much larger instances than ordinarily possible.
In general, these features are not optimized, and we would expect significant improvements from
more well-tuned features. Extracting generally meaningful features from branch-and-bound is a
nontrivial task and is left as a task for future work.

D    F ULL R ESULTS
The following two sections contain the per-instance results on the two “named” benchmarks
TSPLIB (Reinelt, 1991) and MINLPLIB (Bussieck et al., 2003). We test against the strong SCIP
8.0.4 baseline. Due to compatibility issues, we decided not to test against (Labassi et al., 2022) or
(He et al., 2014): These methods were trained against older versions of SCIP, which not only made
running them challenging, but also would not give valid comparisons as we cannot properly account
for changes between SCIP versions. Labassi et al. (2022) specifically relies on changes to the SCIP
interface, which makes porting to SCIP 8.0.4 intractable. In general, this shouldn’t matter too much,


                                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as SCIP is still demonstrably the state-of-the-art non-commercial mixed-integer solver, which fre-
quently outperforms even closed-source commercial solvers (see Mittelmann (2021) for thorough
benchmarks against other solvers), meaning outperforming SCIP can be seen as outperforming the
state-of-the-art.

D.1   TSPLIB RESULTS

Table 3: Results on TSPLIB (Reinelt, 1991) after 45s runtime. Note that we filter out problems in
which less than 5 nodes were explored as those problems cannot gain meaningful advantages even
with perfect node selection. “Name” refers to the instances name, “Gap Base/Ours” corresponds to
the optimization gap achieved by the baseline and our method respectively (lower is better), “Nodes
Base/Ours” to the number of explored Nodes by each method, and “Reward”, “Utility” and “Utility
Node” to the different performance measures as described in Section 5.

             Name        Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours    Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
             att48          0.287      0.286        1086          2670    -0.002   -0.002          0.593
             bayg29         0.000      0.000        2317          7201     1.000    0.000          0.000
             bays29         0.000      0.036       11351         10150     1.000    1.000          0.997
             berlin52       0.000      0.000         777          1634     1.000    0.000          0.000
             bier127        2.795      2.777          23            25    -0.007   -0.007          0.074
             brazil58       0.328      0.644        1432          2182     0.491    0.491          0.666
             burma14        0.000      0.000          96            65     1.000    0.000          0.000
             ch130          8.801      8.783          48            43    -0.002   -0.002         -0.106
             ch150          7.803      7.802          18            18    -0.000   -0.000         -0.000
             d198           0.582      0.582          10            11    -0.000   -0.000          0.091
             dantzig42      0.185      0.100        2498          3469    -0.847   -0.459         -0.248
             eil101         2.434      2.430          31            61    -0.002   -0.002          0.491
             eil51          0.178      0.017         828          4306    -1.000   -0.907         -0.514
             eil76          0.432      1.099         309           709     0.607    0.607          0.829
             fri26          0.000      0.000        1470          6721     1.000    0.000          0.000
             gr120          7.078      7.083          41            43     0.001    0.001          0.047
             gr137          0.606      0.603          30            25    -0.006   -0.006         -0.171
             gr17           0.000      0.000          92           123     1.000    0.000          0.000
             gr24           0.000      0.000         110           207     1.000    0.000          0.000
             gr48           0.192      0.340         586          2479     0.435    0.435          0.866
             gr96           0.569      0.552          93           182    -0.032   -0.031          0.472
             hk48           0.071      0.106        2571          2990     0.324    0.324          0.419
             kroA100        8.937      8.945         102           233     0.001    0.001          0.563
             kroA150       11.343     11.340          23            21    -0.000   -0.000         -0.087
             kroA200       13.726     13.723           5             7    -0.000   -0.000          0.286
             kroB100        7.164      7.082          83           109    -0.011   -0.011          0.230
             kroB150       10.965     10.965          16            14     0.000    0.000         -0.125
             kroB200       11.740     11.740           7             6     0.000    0.000         -0.143
             kroC100        8.721      8.754         118           133     0.004    0.004          0.116
             kroD100        7.959      7.938          70           111    -0.003   -0.003          0.368
             kroE100        8.573      2.952         105           108    -1.000   -0.656         -0.646
             lin105         2.005      2.003          98           149    -0.001   -0.001          0.341
             pr107          1.367      1.336         128           217    -0.024   -0.023          0.396
             pr124          0.937      0.935          64            61    -0.001   -0.001         -0.048
             pr136          2.351      2.350          31            45    -0.000   -0.000          0.311
             pr144          2.228      2.200          47            37    -0.012   -0.012         -0.222
             pr152          2.688      2.683          14            41    -0.002   -0.002          0.658
             pr226          1.091      1.092           6             6     0.001    0.001          0.001
             pr76           0.534      0.476         201           855    -0.123   -0.109          0.736
             rat99          0.853      0.849          41            80    -0.005   -0.005          0.485
             rd100          5.948      4.462         100           166    -0.333   -0.250          0.197
             si175          0.270      0.270           8             7     0.000    0.000         -0.125
             st70           0.586      3.018         379          1068     0.806    0.806          0.931
             swiss42        0.000      0.000        1075          1133     1.000    0.000          0.000
             ulysses16      0.000      0.000       18322         19553     1.000    0.000          0.000
             ulysses22      0.103      0.127       13911         13313     0.191    0.191          0.154
             Mean             —          —          1321          1799     0.184   0.030           0.193


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   MIPLIB RESULTS

Table 4: Results on MIPLIB (Gleixner et al., 2021) after 45s runtime. Note that we filter out prob-
lems in which less than 5 nodes were explored as those problems cannot gain meaningful advan-
tages even with perfect node selection. “Name” refers to the instances name, “Gap Base/Ours”
corresponds to the optimization gap achieved by the baseline and our method respectively (lower
is better), “Nodes Base/Ours” to the number of explored Nodes by each method, and “Reward”,
“Utility” and “Utility Node” to the different performance measures as described in Section 5. Note
that all results where achieved with a policy only trained on TSP instances

      Name                 Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
      30n20b8                 2.662         ∞          147          301     1.000    1.000           1.000
      50v-10                  0.101      0.113         303         1094     0.103    0.103           0.752
      CMS750 4                0.100      0.072          68          281    -0.389   -0.280           0.664
      air05                   0.000      0.000         248          523     1.000    0.000           0.000
      assign1-5-8             0.085      0.087       17466        23589     0.030    0.030           0.282
      binkar10 1              0.000      0.000        2843         2270     1.000    0.000           0.000
      blp-ic98                0.127      0.127          26           43     0.001    0.001           0.396
      bnatt400                   ∞          ∞          547         1568     0.000    0.000           0.651
      bnatt500                   ∞          ∞          148          936     0.000    0.000           0.842
      bppc4-08                0.038      0.038        1318         3277     0.000    0.000           0.598
      cost266-UUE             0.130      0.143         468          770     0.094    0.094           0.449
      csched007                  ∞          ∞          558         1770     0.000    0.000           0.685
      csched008               0.070         ∞          910         1179     1.000    1.000           1.000
      cvs16r128-89            0.560      0.601           6            7     0.068    0.068           0.202
      drayage-25-23           0.000      0.000         105          267     1.000    0.000           0.000
      dws008-01                  ∞          ∞          123          173     0.000    0.000           0.289
      eil33-2                 0.194      0.189         191          171    -0.025   -0.024          -0.127
      fast0507                0.027      0.027          11            7    -0.003   -0.003          -0.366
      fastxgemm-n2r6s0t2     18.519     18.519         785         2531     0.000    0.000           0.690
      fhnw-binpack4-4            ∞          ∞       140002       152608     0.000    0.000           0.083
      fhnw-binpack4-48           ∞       0.000       15019        24649    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
      fiball                  0.029      0.036         442          610     0.200    0.200           0.420
      gen-ip002               0.008      0.010       88794       125319     0.197    0.197           0.397
      gen-ip054               0.008      0.010      157950       179874     0.207    0.207           0.263
      glass-sc                0.580      0.495         200          328    -0.173   -0.148           0.285
      glass4                  1.123      1.033       37424        35671    -0.087   -0.080          -0.123
      gmu-35-40               0.001      0.001       28534        27077     0.402    0.398           0.276
      gmu-35-50               0.001      0.001       16456        22333     0.177    0.176           0.346
      graph20-20-1rand        0.000      0.000         416          283     1.000    0.000           0.000
      graphdraw-domain        0.421      0.430       49640        56798     0.022    0.022           0.145
      ic97 potential          0.023      0.040       39316        30633     0.415    0.415           0.247
      icir97 tension          0.011      0.006        6697         7943    -0.882   -0.468          -0.367
      irp                     0.000      0.000           6            6     1.000    0.000           0.000
      istanbul-no-cutoff      0.514      0.393          37           28    -0.309   -0.236          -0.422
      lectsched-5-obj            ∞       2.200        1192         1118    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
      leo1                    0.118      0.113          34          108    -0.049   -0.046           0.670
      leo2                    0.345      0.135          49           61    -1.000   -0.609          -0.514
      mad                        ∞          ∞        78783        81277     0.000    0.000           0.031
      markshare2                 ∞          ∞        91135       127265     0.000    0.000           0.284
      markshare 4 0              ∞          ∞       570277       682069     0.000    0.000           0.164
      mas74                   0.079      0.084       32005        26180     0.060    0.060          -0.129
      mas76                   0.014      0.015       49987        52401     0.060    0.060           0.100
      mc11                    0.008      0.009         333         1989     0.139    0.138           0.855
      mcsched                 0.090      0.086         439         1526    -0.049   -0.046           0.698
      mik-250-20-75-4         0.000      0.000       10067        10120     1.000    0.000           0.000
      milo-v12-6-r2-40-1      0.038      0.031         340          514    -0.242   -0.195           0.179
      momentum1               2.868      2.868          10            9    -0.000   -0.000          -0.100
      n2seq36q                0.665      0.665           5            6     0.000    0.000           0.167
      n5-3                    0.046      0.000         427          595    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
      neos-1171737            0.032      0.032           7           13     0.000    0.000           0.462
      neos-1445765            0.000      0.000         190          263     1.000    0.000           0.000
      neos-1456979               ∞       0.344         204          405    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
      neos-1582420            0.016      0.016          11           11     0.000    0.000           0.000
      neos-2657525-crna          ∞          ∞        42826        45188     0.000    0.000           0.052
      neos-2978193-inde       0.013      0.013         964         2178     0.000    0.000           0.557
      neos-3004026-krka          ∞          ∞         1134         1163     0.000    0.000           0.025
      neos-3024952-loue          ∞          ∞          246          377     0.000    0.000           0.347
      neos-3046615-murg       2.515      2.631       66921        79117     0.044    0.044           0.191
      neos-3083819-nubu       0.000      0.000        1683         1687     1.000    0.000           0.000
      neos-3381206-awhea      0.000      0.000         969          230     1.000    0.000           0.000
      neos-3402294-bobin         ∞          ∞           10           24     0.000    0.000           0.583
      neos-3627168-kasai      0.003      0.008        6269         3338     0.577    0.577           0.205
      neos-3754480-nidda         ∞          ∞        87703       106632     0.000    0.000           0.178
                                                                                    Continued on next page


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Name                  Gap Ours   Gap Base      Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward       Utility   Utility/Node
      neos-4338804-snowy       0.024         0.028        37447        36741        0.125    0.125          0.107
      neos-4387871-tavua       0.631         0.634            5            7        0.005    0.005          0.289
      neos-4738912-atrato      0.016         0.006          529         1064       -1.000   -0.634         -0.265
      neos-4954672-berkel      0.265         0.254          454          775       -0.043   -0.041          0.389
      neos-5093327-huahum      0.539         0.559            5            6        0.036    0.036          0.197
      neos-5107597-kakapo      2.639         5.077         1885         2332        0.480    0.480          0.580
      neos-5188808-nattai         ∞             ∞            16          105        0.000    0.000          0.848
      neos-5195221-niemur    106.417       106.417           11           12        0.000    0.000          0.083
      neos-911970              0.000         0.000         3905        15109        1.000    0.000          0.000
      neos17                   0.000         0.000         2151         3346        1.000    0.000          0.000
      neos5                    0.062         0.059        66231        91449       -0.053   -0.050          0.235
      neos859080               0.000         0.000          990         1227        1.000    0.000          0.000
      net12                    2.592         2.114           56           29       -0.227   -0.185         -0.578
      ns1208400                   ∞             ∞            82          150        0.000    0.000          0.453
      ns1830653                2.831         1.242          334          686       -1.000   -0.561         -0.099
      ns1952667                   ∞             ∞           100           52        0.000    0.000         -0.480
      nu25-pr12                0.000         0.000          119          153        1.000    0.000          0.000
      nursesched-sprint02      0.000         0.000            9            7        1.000    0.000          0.000
      nw04                     0.000         0.000            6            6        1.000    0.000          0.000
      pg                       0.000         0.000          460          491        1.000    0.000          0.000
      pg5 34                   0.004         0.004          275          592       -0.023   -0.022          0.524
      piperout-08              0.000         0.000          223          309        1.000    0.000          0.000
      piperout-27              0.000         0.000           47           28        1.000    0.000          0.000
      pk1                      1.244         1.117       102268       120685       -0.113   -0.102          0.057
      radiationm18-12-05       0.057         0.167          886         2569        0.661    0.661          0.883
      rail507                  0.033         0.033           10            9        0.000    0.000         -0.100
      ran14x18-disj-8          0.115         0.092          458          975       -0.251   -0.200          0.412
      rd-rplusc-21                ∞             ∞           137         3542        0.000    0.000          0.961
      reblock115               0.106         0.139           80          731        0.238    0.238          0.917
      rmatr100-p10             0.216         0.326           43           74        0.337    0.337          0.615
      rocI-4-11                0.671         0.837        12054         7909        0.198    0.198         -0.181
      rocII-5-11               3.479         1.568          164          287       -1.000   -0.549         -0.211
      rococoB10-011000         1.244         1.258           12           26        0.012    0.012          0.544
      rococoC10-001000         0.337         0.153          135          866       -1.000   -0.546          0.656
      roll3000                 0.000         0.000         1156         2046        1.000    0.000          0.000
      sct2                     0.001         0.002         2117         1215        0.619    0.615          0.332
      seymour                  0.044         0.035          176          563       -0.243   -0.195          0.611
      seymour1                 0.003         0.003          329          885        0.146    0.145          0.682
      sp150x300d               0.000         0.000          148          124        1.000    0.000          0.000
      supportcase18            0.081         0.081          178         1372        0.000   -0.000          0.870
      supportcase26            0.224         0.231        11191        20287        0.031    0.031          0.465
      supportcase33           27.788         0.371           15           28       -1.000   -0.987         -0.975
      supportcase40            0.086         0.094           50          111        0.087    0.087          0.589
      supportcase42            0.033         0.050           76          256        0.340    0.340          0.804
      swath1                   0.000         0.000          311          372        1.000    0.000          0.000
      swath3                   0.110         0.113         1442         2800        0.020    0.020          0.495
      timtab1                  0.126         0.094        22112        25367       -0.333   -0.250         -0.139
      tr12-30                  0.002         0.002         8941        14896        0.019    0.019          0.394
      traininstance2              ∞             ∞           412          821        0.000    0.000          0.498
      traininstance6          29.355            ∞          2549         6376        1.000    1.000          1.000
      trento1                  3.885         3.885            4            7       -0.000   -0.000          0.429
      uct-subprob              0.249         0.195          225          263       -0.276   -0.216         -0.084
      var-smallemery-m6j6      0.062         0.062           95          224       -0.002   -0.002          0.575
      wachplan                 0.125         0.125          422          712        0.000    0.000          0.407
      Mean                       —             —         16538        19673        0.140    -0.013          0.208


D.3   MINLPLIB RESULTS

Table 5: Results on MINLPLIB (Bussieck et al., 2003) after 45s runtime. Note that we filter out
problems in which less than 5 nodes were explored as those problems cannot gain meaningful ad-
vantages even with perfect node selection. “Name” refers to the instances name, “Gap Base/Ours”
corresponds to the optimization gap achieved by the baseline and our method respectively (lower
is better), “Nodes Base/Ours” to the number of explored Nodes by each method, and “Reward”,
“Utility” and “Utility Node” to the different performance measures as described in Section 5. For
all three measures, higher is better.

   Name                        Gap Ours      Gap Base    Nodes Ours   Nodes Base      Reward    Utility   Utility/Node
   ball mk4 05                     0.000         0.000         1819        1869        1.000     0.000          0.000
   ball mk4 10                        ∞             ∞         31684       37656        0.000     0.000          0.159
                                                                                                Continued on next page


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                          Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   ball mk4 15                         ∞          ∞          1773        2415     0.000    0.000           0.266
   bayes2 20                           ∞          ∞          3171        2719     0.000    0.000          -0.143
   bayes2 30                           ∞          ∞          4462        4992     0.000    0.000           0.106
   bayes2 50                           ∞          ∞          2934        2530     0.000    0.000          -0.138
   blend029                         0.000      0.000          812         804     1.000    0.000           0.000
   blend146                         0.097      0.105        12390       18066     0.075    0.075           0.365
   blend480                         0.071      0.000         4878        6312    -1.000   -1.000          -0.999
   blend531                         0.000      0.000         3150        7161     1.000    0.000           0.000
   blend718                         0.898      0.796        22652       26060    -0.127   -0.113           0.020
   blend721                         0.000      0.000         4650        2708     1.000    0.000           0.000
   blend852                         0.021      0.000         7726        5413    -1.000   -1.000          -0.997
   camshape100                      0.076      0.074        18839       22205    -0.027   -0.026           0.128
   camshape200                      0.145      0.147         8199        9921     0.012    0.012           0.183
   camshape400                      0.198      0.195         4324        5275    -0.016   -0.016           0.167
   camshape800                      0.222      0.226         1504        1627     0.019    0.019           0.093
   cardqp inlp                      1.436      1.660         4316        7232     0.135    0.135           0.484
   cardqp iqp                       1.089      1.660         4766        7285     0.344    0.344           0.571
   carton7                          0.000      0.000           55          73     1.000    0.000           0.000
   carton9                          0.000      0.000         9848        7406     1.000    0.000           0.000
   catmix100                           ∞          ∞           186        8750     0.000    0.000           0.979
   catmix200                           ∞          ∞           123        3870     0.000    0.000           0.968
   catmix400                           ∞          ∞           146        3498     0.000    0.000           0.958
   catmix800                           ∞          ∞            75         333     0.000    0.000           0.775
   celar6-sub0                         ∞          ∞             4           6     0.000    0.000           0.333
   chimera k64ising-01              0.701     16.469           18          21     0.957    0.957           0.964
   chimera k64maxcut-01             0.523      0.199           57         198    -1.000   -0.618           0.246
   chimera k64maxcut-02             0.368      0.239           72         381    -0.536   -0.349           0.710
   chimera lga-02                   0.893      0.893            5           6     0.000    0.000           0.167
   chimera mgw-c8-439-onc8-001      0.045      0.021          127         521    -1.000   -0.529           0.482
   chimera mgw-c8-439-onc8-002      0.067      0.046           72         526    -0.449   -0.310           0.802
   chimera mgw-c8-507-onc8-01       0.232      0.233           26          99     0.003    0.003           0.738
   chimera mgw-c8-507-onc8-02       0.188      0.346           14          25     0.455    0.455           0.695
   chimera mis-01                   0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   chimera mis-02                   0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   chimera rfr-01                   1.029      1.153           70          61     0.108    0.108          -0.023
   chimera rfr-02                   1.148      1.061           74          63    -0.082   -0.076          -0.213
   chimera selby-c8-onc8-01         0.436      0.224           34         111    -0.941   -0.485           0.406
   chimera selby-c8-onc8-02         0.439      0.232           40          92    -0.895   -0.472           0.176
   clay0203m                        0.000      0.000           19          30     1.000    0.000           0.000
   clay0204m                        0.000      0.000          266         400     1.000    0.000           0.000
   clay0205m                        0.000      0.000         4058        3908     1.000    0.000           0.000
   clay0303m                        0.000      0.000          107          45     1.000    0.000           0.000
   clay0304m                        0.000      0.000          337         897     1.000    0.000           0.000
   clay0305m                        0.000      0.000         4057        4204     1.000    0.000           0.000
   color lab3 3x0                   1.445      1.725          320         576     0.162    0.162           0.534
   color lab3 4x0                   5.581      5.455          265         434    -0.023   -0.023           0.375
   crossdock 15x7                   4.457      8.216          654        1080     0.458    0.458           0.672
   crossdock 15x8                   8.578     84.148          391         717     0.898    0.898           0.944
   crudeoil lee1 06                 0.000      0.000           48          57     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee1 07                 0.000      0.000           57          92     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee1 08                 0.000      0.000          161         121     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee1 09                 0.000      0.000          107          99     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee1 10                 0.000      0.000           78         109     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee2 05                 0.000      0.000           10          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee2 06                 0.000      0.000           45         109     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee2 07                 0.000      0.000          286          81     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee2 08                 0.000      0.000          150         308     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee2 09                 0.142      0.015           44          41    -1.000   -0.897          -0.904
   crudeoil lee3 05                 0.000      0.000         1435        1820     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee3 06                 0.057      0.013          352        1349    -1.000   -0.764          -0.095
   crudeoil lee4 05                 0.000      0.000          306         118     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee4 06                 0.000      0.000          129          60     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee4 07                 0.000      0.000          193          89     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil lee4 08                 0.000      0.001           41          53     0.187    0.184           0.371
   crudeoil li01                    0.049      0.017        16819       11797    -1.000   -0.657          -0.758
   crudeoil li02                    0.013      0.013        12172       10426    -0.027   -0.027          -0.165
   crudeoil li03                       ∞          ∞           198         899     0.000    0.000           0.780
   crudeoil li05                    0.157      0.142          553        1031    -0.104   -0.095           0.408
   crudeoil li06                       ∞          ∞            41         322     0.000    0.000           0.873
   crudeoil li11                       ∞          ∞            20          70     0.000    0.000           0.714
   crudeoil pooling ct1             0.943      0.988         2415        6356     0.046    0.046           0.638
   crudeoil pooling ct2             0.000      0.000         1480        1589     1.000    0.000           0.000
   crudeoil pooling ct3            42.222    120.618          101         101     0.650    0.650           0.650
   crudeoil pooling ct4             0.000      0.000         7631        9217     0.365    0.153           0.041
   du-opt                           0.000      0.000        11282       14174     1.000    0.000           0.000
   du-opt5                          0.000      0.000           83          60     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross10-030                  0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
                                                                                          Continued on next page


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                      Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   edgecross10-040              0.000      0.000           30          39     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross10-050              0.000      0.000          487         469     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross10-060              0.000      0.000         2058        2138     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross10-070              0.321      0.220          255         329    -0.457   -0.314          -0.115
   edgecross10-080              0.077      0.077          352         668     0.001    0.001           0.474
   edgecross10-090              0.000      0.000            7           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross14-039              0.000      0.000          624         731     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross14-058              1.251      0.549           84         157    -1.000   -0.561          -0.180
   edgecross14-078              1.843      1.865           12          14     0.012    0.012           0.153
   edgecross14-098              1.120      1.129           24          31     0.007    0.007           0.232
   edgecross14-117              0.963      0.947            9          17    -0.017   -0.017           0.462
   edgecross14-137              0.537      0.552           20          30     0.028    0.028           0.352
   edgecross14-156              0.338      0.353           13          13     0.042    0.042           0.042
   edgecross14-176              0.089      0.080           37         135    -0.117   -0.105           0.694
   edgecross20-040              0.000      0.000           71          57     1.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross20-080              3.943      3.943            7           7     0.000    0.000           0.000
   edgecross22-048              0.615      0.000           56          81    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
   edgecross24-057              5.219      5.219            7           6     0.000    0.000          -0.143
   elf                          0.000      0.000          115         112     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 1                      0.000      0.000           17          17     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 10                     0.000      0.000           13          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 5                      0.000      0.000           17          19     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 6                      0.000      0.000           13          13     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 7                      0.000      0.000         1523        1831     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 8                      0.000      0.000           75          93     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex2 1 9                      0.000      0.000         3735        3947     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex3 1 1                      0.000      0.000          405         271     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex3 1 3                      0.000      0.000           21          27     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex3 1 4                      0.000      0.000           23          23     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex4                          0.000      0.000           23          29     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex5 2 2 case1                0.000      0.000           39          19     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex5 2 2 case2                0.000      0.000           57          31     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex5 2 4                      0.000      0.000          251         227     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex5 2 5                      0.359      0.346        30403       33492    -0.038   -0.036           0.058
   ex5 3 2                      0.000      0.000           33          31     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex5 3 3                      0.339      0.331        29464       31558    -0.024   -0.024           0.044
   ex5 4 2                      0.000      0.000           41          35     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex8 3 2                     23.252     23.608         8907        8680     0.015    0.015          -0.011
   ex8 3 3                     23.004     23.004         9636       10365     0.000    0.000           0.070
   ex8 3 4                      1.817      1.793         9447        9563    -0.013   -0.013          -0.001
   ex8 3 5                    143.677    143.677         9427        9699     0.000    0.000           0.028
   ex8 3 8                      2.071      2.071         2293        3677     0.000    0.000           0.376
   ex8 3 9                     12.106     12.106        14272       17310     0.000   -0.000           0.176
   ex8 4 1                      0.000      0.000          670         650     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex9 2 3                      0.000      0.000           25          31     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex9 2 5                      0.000      0.000           27          29     1.000    0.000           0.000
   ex9 2 7                      0.000      0.000           11          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   faclay20h                    1.727      1.727           16          15     0.000    0.000          -0.062
   faclay25                     2.468      2.468            6           6     0.000    0.000           0.000
   forest                       0.003      0.020        29002       25913     0.860    0.859           0.831
   gabriel01                    0.139      0.139         6753        9744    -0.000   -0.000           0.307
   gabriel02                    0.556      0.585         1107        1675     0.050    0.050           0.372
   gabriel04                       ∞       1.308          129         285    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
   gabriel05                       ∞          ∞           141         326     0.000    0.000           0.567
   gasprod sarawak01            0.000      0.000           11           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   gasprod sarawak16            0.004      0.009          506        1052     0.585    0.585           0.800
   genpooling lee1              0.000      0.000          690         676     1.000    0.000           0.000
   genpooling lee2              0.000      0.000         1299        2989     1.000    0.000           0.000
   genpooling meyer04           0.957      0.691        12855       17889    -0.385   -0.278           0.005
   genpooling meyer10           1.276      1.385         1910        2815     0.078    0.078           0.375
   genpooling meyer15           6.080      0.691           97         413    -1.000   -0.886          -0.516
   graphpart 2g-0099-9211       0.000      0.000           18          14     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 2pm-0077-0777      0.000      0.000            5           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 2pm-0088-0888      0.000      0.000            9           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 2pm-0099-0999      0.000      0.000           16          12     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3g-0334-0334       0.000      0.000           21          41     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3g-0344-0344       0.000      0.000           61          19     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3g-0444-0444       0.000      0.000          424         562     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3pm-0244-0244      0.000      0.000           21          15     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3pm-0334-0334      0.000      0.000           20          38     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3pm-0344-0344      0.000      0.000          590         619     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart 3pm-0444-0444      0.058      0.000          755        1348    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
   graphpart clique-20          0.000      0.000           22          24     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart clique-30          0.000      0.000          421         337     1.000    0.000           0.000
   graphpart clique-40          1.018      0.920          297         609    -0.106   -0.096           0.461
   graphpart clique-50          5.638      6.032           97         191     0.065    0.065           0.525
   graphpart clique-60         17.434      9.335          109         204    -0.868   -0.465           0.002
                                                                                      Continued on next page


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                           Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   graphpart clique-70              30.409     35.053           16          27     0.132    0.132           0.486
   haverly                           0.000      0.000           45          57     1.000    0.000           0.000
   himmel16                          0.000      0.000         2193        2089     1.000    0.000           0.000
   house                             0.000      0.000        58675       58399     1.000    0.000           0.000
   hvb11                             0.018      0.182        19172       15631     0.899    0.899           0.875
   hydroenergy1                      0.007      0.007        15060       18149    -0.088   -0.081           0.095
   hydroenergy2                      0.016      0.016         4834        6712     0.038    0.038           0.306
   hydroenergy3                      0.022      0.023          565        1060     0.006    0.006           0.470
   ising2 5-300 5555                 0.508      0.407           57         220    -0.248   -0.199           0.677
   kall circles c6a                  3.180      2.094        42813       46497    -0.519   -0.342          -0.285
   kall circles c6b                  2.635      1.452        38722       45596    -0.815   -0.449          -0.351
   kall circles c6c                     ∞          ∞         33357       36374     0.000    0.000           0.083
   kall circles c7a                  1.482      1.376        38682       43723    -0.077   -0.072           0.047
   kall circles c8a                     ∞          ∞         32114       36262     0.000    0.000           0.114
   kall circlespolygons c1p12        0.000      0.000        44439       64102    -1.000   -0.733          -0.106
   kall circlespolygons c1p13        0.000      0.000         8621        7914     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall circlespolygons c1p5a           ∞          ∞         12369       13200     0.000    0.000           0.063
   kall circlespolygons c1p6a           ∞          ∞           404         628     0.000    0.000           0.357
   kall circlesrectangles c1r12      0.000      0.000        42587       48285     0.121    0.114           0.061
   kall circlesrectangles c1r13      0.000      0.000         4372        3739     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall circlesrectangles c6r1          ∞          ∞          5850        7908     0.000    0.000           0.260
   kall circlesrectangles c6r29         ∞          ∞          4181        5220     0.000    0.000           0.199
   kall circlesrectangles c6r39         ∞          ∞          2570        2966     0.000    0.000           0.134
   kall congruentcircles c31         0.000      0.000          101          95     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c32         0.000      0.000          133         139     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c41         0.000      0.000           27          31     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c42         0.000      0.000          205         125     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c51         0.000      0.000         4197        4987     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c52         0.000      0.000         1767        1446     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c61         0.000      0.000        27338       35199     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c62         0.000      0.000         2879        6037     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c63         0.000      0.000         2043        1729     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall congruentcircles c71            ∞          ∞         39102       43349     0.000    0.000           0.098
   kall congruentcircles c72         0.000      0.000        14686       14089     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall diffcircles 10               2.276      4.054        32475       41241     0.439    0.439           0.558
   kall diffcircles 5a               0.000      0.000         2020        1218     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall diffcircles 5b               0.000      0.000         6360        5774     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall diffcircles 6                0.000      0.000         2827        2383     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall diffcircles 7                0.000      0.000         9408        9518     1.000    0.000           0.000
   kall diffcircles 8                0.406      0.219        48924       57747    -0.851   -0.460          -0.362
   kall diffcircles 9                1.676      1.052        42056       48915    -0.594   -0.373          -0.270
   knp3-12                           1.846      1.963         1987        2132     0.060    0.060           0.124
   lop97ic                              ∞          ∞            19          33     0.000    0.000           0.424
   lop97icx                          0.008      0.000         3041        1711    -1.000   -0.999          -0.998
   maxcsp-langford-3-11                 ∞          ∞          1356        4038     0.000    0.000           0.664
   ndcc12                               ∞          ∞          1394        3975     0.000    0.000           0.649
   ndcc12persp                          ∞          ∞          1092        2994     0.000    0.000           0.635
   ndcc13                               ∞          ∞           298         787     0.000    0.000           0.621
   ndcc13persp                       0.536      0.546         2982        5662     0.018    0.018           0.483
   ndcc14                            1.030      1.048          234         499     0.018    0.018           0.539
   ndcc14persp                       1.044      1.080          572        1052     0.033    0.033           0.474
   ndcc15                               ∞          ∞          1293        2120     0.000    0.000           0.390
   ndcc15persp                          ∞          ∞          5227        6549     0.000    0.000           0.202
   ndcc16                               ∞          ∞           407         396     0.000    0.000          -0.027
   ndcc16persp                          ∞          ∞          1035        2183     0.000    0.000           0.526
   netmod dol2                       0.047      0.000          112         250    -1.000   -1.000          -1.000
   netmod kar1                       0.000      0.000          425         285     1.000    0.000           0.000
   netmod kar2                       0.000      0.000          275         285     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nous1                             0.000      0.000         3092        2816     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nous2                             0.000      0.000           81          71     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nuclearvb                            ∞          ∞          1821        3817     0.000    0.000           0.523
   nuclearvc                            ∞          ∞          1905        1530     0.000    0.000          -0.197
   nuclearvd                            ∞          ∞          3781        2521     0.000    0.000          -0.333
   nuclearve                            ∞          ∞           877        5464     0.000    0.000           0.839
   nuclearvf                            ∞          ∞           256        3596     0.000    0.000           0.929
   nvs13                             0.000      0.000            9           9     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nvs17                             0.000      0.000           89          78     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nvs18                             0.000      0.000          121          75     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nvs19                             0.000      0.000          161         154     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nvs23                             0.000      0.000          465         523     1.000    0.000           0.000
   nvs24                             0.000      0.000         2060        1944     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 10b 5p 2d m                0.000      0.000          353         326     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 10b 5p 3d m                0.000      0.000         1204        1032     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 10b 5p 4d m                0.000      0.000         1424        1765     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 10b 7p 3d m                0.000      0.000         6178        6151     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 15b 5p 2d m                0.000      0.000         1377        2068     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 20b 5p 2d m                0.000      0.000         1610        2039     1.000    0.000           0.000
                                                                                           Continued on next page


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                      Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   p ball 20b 5p 3d m           0.000      0.000        10647       11510     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 30b 10p 2d m             ∞          ∞          3795        4965     0.000    0.000           0.236
   p ball 30b 5p 2d m           0.000      0.000         2827        3275     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 30b 5p 3d m           0.000      0.000        10150       11489     1.000    0.000           0.000
   p ball 30b 7p 2d m              ∞          ∞          8511       11906     0.000    0.000           0.285
   p ball 40b 5p 3d m              ∞          ∞          9620       13718     0.000    0.000           0.299
   p ball 40b 5p 4d m              ∞          ∞          8100       11826     0.000    0.000           0.315
   pedigree ex485               0.019      0.019          315         962     0.030    0.030           0.682
   pedigree ex485 2             0.000      0.000          121         344     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pedigree sim400              0.061      0.053         1094        1533    -0.156   -0.135           0.175
   pedigree sp top4 250         0.053      0.036           61         173    -0.482   -0.325           0.477
   pedigree sp top4 300         0.014      0.015          294         670     0.014    0.014           0.567
   pedigree sp top4 350tr       0.000      0.014          365        1096     1.000    0.999           1.000
   pedigree sp top5 250         0.050      0.057           28          39     0.125    0.125           0.372
   pinene200                       ∞          ∞            12          12     0.000    0.000           0.000
   pointpack06                  0.000      0.000         2099        2051     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pointpack08                  0.015      0.000        35620       34315    -1.000   -0.999          -0.978
   pointpack10                  0.612      0.613        18366       22179     0.001    0.001           0.173
   pointpack12                  0.854      0.839        15197       17796    -0.018   -0.018           0.131
   pointpack14                  1.535      1.537         8919        9550     0.001    0.001           0.067
   pooling adhya1pq             0.000      0.000          383         365     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya1stp            0.000      0.000          737         638     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya1tp             0.000      0.000          611         806     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya2pq             0.000      0.000          569         588     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya2stp            0.000      0.000          832         934     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya2tp             0.000      0.000          345         288     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya3pq             0.000      0.000          377         289     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya3stp            0.000      0.000          834        1078     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya3tp             0.000      0.000          675         585     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya4pq             0.000      0.000          274         150     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya4stp            0.000      0.000          385         686     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling adhya4tp             0.000      0.000          317         387     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling bental5stp           0.000      0.000         2818        4434     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling digabel16            0.000      0.000        27577       35207    -1.000   -0.715          -0.160
   pooling digabel18            0.013      0.008         4109        5110    -0.496   -0.331          -0.168
   pooling digabel19            0.001      0.001        14953       18095     0.168    0.166           0.267
   pooling foulds2stp           0.000      0.000           36          25     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling foulds3stp           0.000      0.000         1084         416     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling foulds4stp           0.000      0.000          717         339     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling foulds5stp           0.019      0.000         1808        2741    -1.000   -0.999          -0.999
   pooling haverly2stp          0.000      0.000           10          12     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling rt2pq                0.000      0.000          237         431     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling rt2stp               0.000      0.000          109         195     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling rt2tp                0.000      0.000           53          57     1.000    0.000           0.000
   pooling sppa0pq              0.038      0.031         2424        3666    -0.230   -0.187           0.187
   pooling sppa0stp             2.829      2.865         2577        3068     0.012    0.012           0.170
   pooling sppa0tp              0.179      0.183         2804        3623     0.021    0.021           0.242
   pooling sppa5pq              0.037      0.018          709         781    -0.995   -0.499          -0.448
   pooling sppa5stp             3.959      3.959          220         278     0.000    0.000           0.209
   pooling sppa5tp              1.579      1.579          299         448     0.000    0.000           0.333
   pooling sppa9pq              0.007      0.007          222         295     0.000    0.000           0.247
   pooling sppb0pq              0.098      0.098          223         301     0.000   -0.000           0.259
   popdynm100                      ∞          ∞          7556       11105     0.000    0.000           0.320
   popdynm25                       ∞          ∞         14627       19046     0.000    0.000           0.232
   popdynm50                       ∞          ∞         12085       15252     0.000    0.000           0.208
   portfol classical050 1       0.000      0.000          651         817     1.000    0.000           0.000
   portfol classical200 2       0.141      0.125          396         491    -0.134   -0.118           0.086
   portfol robust050 34         0.000      0.000           94          49     1.000    0.000           0.000
   portfol robust100 09         0.000      0.000          489         361     1.000    0.000           0.000
   portfol robust200 03         0.182      0.189           95          75     0.034    0.034          -0.183
   portfol shortfall050 68      0.000      0.000          467         375     1.000    0.000           0.000
   portfol shortfall100 04      0.010      0.010          595        1398    -0.055   -0.052           0.551
   portfol shortfall200 05      0.033      0.028          224         232    -0.169   -0.145          -0.114
   powerflow0009r               0.000      0.000        15230       13141    -1.000   -0.037          -0.003
   powerflow0014r               0.001      0.001         8052        8041     0.368    0.366           0.346
   powerflow0030r               0.023      0.034          369         403     0.328    0.328           0.384
   powerflow0039r               0.017      0.016          212         224    -0.058   -0.054          -0.001
   product                      0.028      0.034          236         650     0.197    0.197           0.708
   qap                        198.418         ∞           709        3352     1.000    1.000           1.000
   qapw                       351.271         ∞           874        2437     1.000    1.000           1.000
   qp3                             ∞          ∞         29875       32155     0.000    0.000           0.071
   qspp 0 10 0 1 10 1           0.849      1.238         3860        3982     0.314    0.314           0.335
   qspp 0 11 0 1 10 1           1.071      1.886         1314        3036     0.432    0.432           0.754
   qspp 0 12 0 1 10 1           1.674      2.102          794        1847     0.204    0.203           0.658
   qspp 0 13 0 1 10 1           1.893      4.660          935        1380     0.594    0.594           0.725
   qspp 0 14 0 1 10 1           3.038      3.200          299        1081     0.050    0.050           0.737
   qspp 0 15 0 1 10 1           4.356      4.293          229         544    -0.015   -0.015           0.573
                                                                                      Continued on next page


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                    Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   ringpack 10 1              0.082      1.000         5346        6348     0.918    0.918           0.931
   ringpack 10 2              0.082      0.811         5402        6366     0.899    0.899           0.914
   ringpack 20 1              1.551      3.527          525         492     0.560    0.560           0.531
   ringpack 20 2              9.000      9.000          239         183     0.000    0.000          -0.234
   ringpack 20 3              6.251      6.251          272         243     0.000    0.000          -0.107
   ringpack 30 2             14.000     14.000           36          49     0.000    0.000           0.265
   sep1                       0.000      0.000           39          29     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay04h                    0.000      0.000            8           8     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay04m                    0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay05h                    0.000      0.000           64         119     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay06h                    0.000      0.000          120         208     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay06m                    0.000      0.000            8           8     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay07h                    0.000      0.000          420         952     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay07m                    0.000      0.000          218         501     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay08h                    0.000      0.000          513        1181     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay08m                    0.000      0.000          193         554     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay09h                    0.104      0.135          612         488     0.229    0.229           0.033
   slay09m                    0.000      0.000          324         212     1.000    0.000           0.000
   slay10h                    0.103      0.407          703         451     0.746    0.745           0.603
   slay10m                    0.000      0.000         3933        4138     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr1b010-011      0.000      0.000          324         264     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr1b020-022      0.000      0.000          657         906     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr1b050-055      0.000      0.000         6083        4430     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr1b100-110      0.000      0.000        15366       34917     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr1b150-165      0.000      0.001        26952       40900     1.000    0.986           0.730
   smallinvDAXr1b200-220      0.000      0.001        38238       46021     0.348    0.342           0.269
   smallinvDAXr2b010-011      0.000      0.000          254         358     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr2b020-022      0.000      0.000         1204        2016     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr2b050-055      0.000      0.000         7868        6682     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr2b100-110      0.000      0.000        12971       14333     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr2b150-165      0.000      0.000        39670       68543     1.000    0.966           0.421
   smallinvDAXr2b200-220      0.000      0.000          712         651     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b010-011      0.000      0.000          260         358     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b020-022      0.000      0.000         1676         906     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b050-055      0.000      0.000         5716        5024     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b100-110      0.000      0.000        39948       13726     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b150-165      0.000      0.000        34109       22132     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr3b200-220      0.000      0.000         1078         433     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b010-011      0.000      0.000          272         292     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b020-022      0.000      0.000         1078         990     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b050-055      0.000      0.000         3098        2666     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b100-110      0.000      0.000        17899       26316     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b150-165      0.000      0.000        32042       56419     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr4b200-220      0.000      0.000          935         612     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr5b010-011      0.000      0.000          242         381     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr5b020-022      0.000      0.000         1798         884     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr5b050-055      0.000      0.000         4276        3312     1.000    0.000           0.000
   smallinvDAXr5b100-110      0.000      0.000        37028       72501     1.000    0.980           0.570
   smallinvDAXr5b150-165      0.000      0.000        40757       78031     1.000    0.966           0.414
   smallinvDAXr5b200-220      0.000      0.000          783         585     1.000    0.000           0.000
   sonet22v5                  3.752      2.911          105         356    -0.289   -0.224           0.620
   sonet23v4                  1.407      1.366           79         181    -0.030   -0.029           0.550
   sonet24v5                  4.070      3.914           21         212    -0.040   -0.038           0.897
   sonet25v6                  5.161      4.812           10          45    -0.072   -0.068           0.762
   sonetgr17                  2.252      2.602          400        1247     0.134    0.134           0.722
   space25                       ∞          ∞           154         143     0.000    0.000          -0.071
   spectra2                   0.000      0.000            8           8     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl010-025               0.000      0.000        71985       75945     0.692    0.000           0.000
   squfl010-040               0.000      0.000        18478       20101     0.529    0.000           0.000
   squfl010-080               0.000      0.000         4509        8339     0.568   -0.000           0.000
   squfl010-080persp          0.000      0.000            6           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl015-060               0.000      0.000         7372       10223     0.608   -0.000           0.000
   squfl015-060persp          0.000      0.000            6           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl015-080               0.000      0.001         3475        6667     1.000    0.993           0.976
   squfl020-040               0.000      0.000         8358       10679     0.570    0.000           0.000
   squfl020-050               0.000      0.000         4094        8025     0.365   -0.000           0.000
   squfl020-150               0.014      0.014            9           7     0.000    0.000          -0.222
   squfl020-150persp          0.000      0.000           16          16     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl025-025               0.000      0.000        15093       11992     0.997   -0.000          -0.000
   squfl025-025persp          0.000      0.000           12          12     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl025-030               0.000      0.000         5523       14798     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl025-030persp          0.000      0.000            6           6     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl025-040               0.000      0.000         6438        7860     0.519    0.000           0.000
   squfl025-040persp          0.000      0.000           12          12     1.000    0.000           0.000
   squfl030-100               0.000      0.000         1291        1402     0.289    0.000           0.000
   squfl040-080               0.000      0.001         1034        1477     1.000    0.983           0.983
   squfl040-080persp          0.000      0.000            8           8     1.000    0.000           0.000
                                                                                    Continued on next page


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Name                      Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
   sssd08-04persp               0.000      0.000        20080       17359     1.000    0.000           0.000
   sssd12-05persp               0.131      0.133        63030       73358     0.016    0.016           0.154
   sssd15-04persp               0.188      0.181        76121       77773    -0.041   -0.039          -0.018
   sssd15-06persp               0.285      0.260        43387       47623    -0.095   -0.087           0.002
   sssd15-08persp               0.235      0.234        30374       41340    -0.005   -0.005           0.261
   sssd16-07persp               0.232      0.214        41858       46101    -0.086   -0.079           0.014
   sssd18-06persp               0.200      0.188        40346       48551    -0.063   -0.059           0.117
   sssd18-08persp               0.383      0.372        31676       41841    -0.028   -0.027           0.221
   sssd20-04persp               0.202      0.202        63012       69887     0.002    0.002           0.100
   sssd20-08persp               0.202      0.195        27951       34670    -0.036   -0.035           0.164
   sssd22-08persp               0.228      0.212        31593       33795    -0.077   -0.071          -0.007
   sssd25-08persp               0.178      0.172        27400       33837    -0.038   -0.037           0.159
   st bsj2                      0.000      0.000           17          15     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st e05                       0.000      0.000           59          75     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st e24                       0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st e25                       0.000      0.000           15          15     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st e30                       0.000      0.000           47          61     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st e31                       0.000      0.000          593         490     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp7a                      0.000      0.000          297         345     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp7b                      0.000      0.000          349         341     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp7c                      0.000      0.000          253         449     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp7d                      0.000      0.000          277         355     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp7e                      0.000      0.000         1605        1831     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st fp8                       0.000      0.000           69          63     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st glmp ss1                  0.000      0.000           23          25     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st ht                        0.000      0.000           13          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st iqpbk1                    0.000      0.000           37          37     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st iqpbk2                    0.000      0.000           39          37     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st jcbpaf2                   0.000      0.000            9          13     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st m1                        0.000      0.000          783         383     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st m2                        0.000      0.000          637         619     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st pan1                      0.000      0.000           11          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st ph11                      0.000      0.000           11          11     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st ph12                      0.000      0.000           13          13     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st ph13                      0.000      0.000            9           9     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st qpc-m1                    0.000      0.000           15          17     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st qpc-m3a                   0.000      0.000         1269        1291     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st qpk1                      0.000      0.000            7           7     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st qpk2                      0.000      0.000           27          27     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st qpk3                      0.000      0.000          137         133     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv1                       0.000      0.000          107          81     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv2                       0.000      0.000          133         119     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv3                       0.000      0.000          511         629     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv7                       0.000      0.000         1143        1153     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv8                       0.000      0.000         1047        1269     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st rv9                       0.000      0.000         3349        1875     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st testgr1                   0.000      0.000           38          21     1.000    0.000           0.000
   st z                         0.000      0.000            9           9     1.000    0.000           0.000
   supplychain                  0.000      0.000          119          95     1.000    0.000           0.000
   tln12                        0.295      0.217        20517       22942    -0.362   -0.266          -0.179
   tln4                         0.000      0.000           13          25     1.000    0.000           0.000
   tln6                         0.000      0.000           40          38     1.000    0.000           0.000
   tln7                         0.075      0.121        52425       60523     0.375    0.375           0.457
   toroidal3g7 6666             0.200      0.117           51         213    -0.706   -0.414           0.592
   tricp                           ∞          ∞           275         356     0.000    0.000           0.228
   util                         0.000      0.000           48          38     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater02m1               0.000      0.000           43          43     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater02m2               0.000      0.000           35          31     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater04m1               0.000      0.000          117          81     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater04m2               0.000      0.000           25          25     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater05m1               0.000      0.000         2561        3047     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater05m2               0.000      0.000         4068        7429     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater11m1               0.116      0.131        40219       43385     0.113    0.113           0.177
   wastewater11m2               0.385      0.431        15161       15304     0.106    0.106           0.114
   wastewater12m1               0.099      0.045        23070       28082    -1.000   -0.541          -0.440
   wastewater12m2               0.460      0.654         7232        7822     0.296    0.296           0.349
   wastewater13m1               0.446      0.370        12150       16381    -0.207   -0.171           0.105
   wastewater13m2               0.538      0.538         6204        6129     0.000    0.000          -0.012
   wastewater14m1               0.151      0.122        38064       42510    -0.236   -0.191          -0.096
   wastewater14m2               0.191      0.209        11743       13355     0.084    0.084           0.194
   wastewater15m1               0.000      0.000         7735        8130     1.000    0.000           0.000
   wastewater15m2               0.000      0.000        54228       59163     0.982   -0.000          -0.000
   watercontamination0303       0.000      0.000            9           9     1.000    0.000           0.000
   watercontamination0303r         ∞          ∞            22          37     0.000    0.000           0.405
   waterund01                   0.000      0.000        49001       57176    -0.022   -0.021           0.056
   waterund08                   0.000      0.000        38355       41489     0.335    0.083           0.003
   waterund11                   0.001      0.001        35021       40695    -0.736   -0.420          -0.241
                                                                                      Continued on next page


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Name                     Gap Ours   Gap Base   Nodes Ours   Nodes Base   Reward   Utility   Utility/Node
    waterund14                  0.009      0.009         9789       10684    -0.012   -0.012          0.072
    waterund17                  0.001      0.001        35708       36527     0.549    0.545          0.436
    waterund18                  0.001      0.001        34080       36286     0.049    0.048          0.085
    waterund22                  0.016      0.017        10195       10702     0.016    0.016          0.062
    waterund25                  0.080      0.094        11100       10382     0.154    0.153          0.095
    waterund27                  0.089      0.089         2253        2835     0.001    0.001          0.206
    waterund28                  0.080      0.080           18          17     0.000    0.000         -0.056
    waterund36                  0.100      0.082         1841        2443    -0.217   -0.178          0.083
    Mean                          —          —           6315        7463     0.487   0.000           0.114


D.3.1      KOCHETOV-UFLP

To demonstrate the generalizability of the learned heuristics, we test our method on the Uncapaci-
tated Facility Location Problem (see Appendix B) without further finetuning, i.e., we only train on
TSP instances and never show the algorithm any other linear or nonlinear problem. For testing, we
generate 1000 instances using the well-known problem generator by Kochetov & Ivanenko (2005),
which was designed to have large optimality gaps, making these problems particularly challenging.
Our method performs very similar to the highly optimized baseline, despite never having seen the
UFL problem, see Table 6. We argue that this is specifically because our method relies on tree-
wide behaviour, rather than individual features to make decisions. We further hypothesize that the
reason for the advantage over the baseline being so small is due to the fact that UFLP consists
of “adversarial examples” to the branch-and-bound method where cuts have reduced effectiveness.
This means clever node-selection strategies have limited impact on overall performance.
An interesting aspect is that our method processes more nodes than the baseline, which also leads
to the loss in node-efficiency. This implies that our method selects significantly easier nodes, as
ordinarily our solver is slower just due to the additional overhead. Considering that this benchmark
was specifically designed to produce high optimality gaps, it makes sense that our solver favours
node quantity over quality, which is an interesting emergent behaviour of our solver.


E    A RCHITECTURE

Our network consists of two subsystems: First, we have the feature embedder that transforms the raw
features into embeddings, without considering other nodes this network consists of one linear layer
|df eatures | → |dmodel | with LeakyReLU (Xu et al., 2015) activation followed by two |dmodel | →
|dmodel | linear layers (activated by LeakyReLU) with skip connections. We finally normalize the
outputs using a Layernorm (Ba et al., 2016) without trainable parameters (i. e., just shifting and
scaling the feature dimension to a normal distribution).
Second, we consider the GNN model, whose objective is the aggregation across nodes according to
the tree topology. This consists of a single LeakyReLU activated layer with skip-connections. We
use ReZero (Bachlechner et al., 2020) initialization to improve the convergence properties of the
network. Both the weight and value heads are simple linear projections from the embedding space.
Following the guidance in (Andrychowicz et al., 2020), we make sure the value and weight networks
are independent by detaching the value head’s gradient from the embedding network.


F    N ECESSITY OF GNN

In addition to the tests done above, we also investigated running the model without a GNN: We found
that when removing the GNN, the model tended to become very noisy and produce unreproducible
experiments. Considering only the cases where the GNN-free model did well, we still found the
model needed roughly 30% more nodes than the SCIP or our model with a GNN. More importantly,
we notice the GNN-free model diverges during training: starting with a reward of roughly zero,
the model diverges down to a reward of ≈ −0.2, which amounts to a score roughly 20% worse
than SCIP. We therefore conclude that, at least for our architecture, the GNN is necessary for both
robustness and performance.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    R ESULTS ON TRAINING SET

                            Table 6: Performance on the training set.
    Benchmark      Reward   Utility   Utility/Node    Win-rate   geo-mean Ours   geo-mean SCIP
    Training set   0.102    0.116        0.383          0.76         0.506           0.582


                                                 25
