Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CONTROL: A C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING F RAMEWORK
FOR OPEN - WORLD S EMI -S UPERVISED L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In recent years, open-world semi-supervised Learning has received tremendous
         attention. This is largely due to the fact that unlabeled real-world data often en-
         compasses unseen classes – those that are not represented in labeled datasets. Such
         classes can adversely affect the performance of traditional semi-supervised learning
         methods. The open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms are designed to
         enable models to distinguish between both seen and unseen classes. However,
         existing algorithms still suffer from the problem of insufficient classification of
         unseen classes and may face the risk of representation collapse. In order to better
         address the aforementioned issues, we propose a contrastive learning framework
         called CONTROL that integrates three optimization objectives: nearest neighbor
         contrastive learning, supervised contrastive learning, and unsupervised contrastive
         learning. The significance of the framework is explained by theoretically proving
         the optimization of contrastive learning at the feature level benefits unseen clas-
         sification, and the uniformity mechanism in contrastive learning further helps to
         prevent representation collapse. Serving as a unified and efficient framework, CON-
         TROL is compatible with a broad range of existing open-world semi-supervised
         learning algorithms. Through empirical studies, we highlight the superiority of
         CONTROL over prevailing state-of-the-art open-world semi-supervised learning
         algorithms. Remarkably, our method achieves significant improvement in both
         unseen class classification and all class classification over previous methods on
         both CIFAR and ImageNet datasets.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the development of deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016), numerous significant works have
been proposed in various fields such as natural language processing (Otter et al., 2020) and image
recognition (Rawat & Wang, 2017). However, these advancements rely on expensive and hard-to-
obtain labeled data. Therefore, the effective utilization of unlabeled data in semi-supervised learning
has received increasing attention.
Traditional semi-supervised learning assumes that labeled and unlabeled data follow the same
distribution. Nevertheless, maintaining this assumption is challenging in practical applications.
Consequently, open-world semi-supervised learning, which contemplates more realistic scenarios,
is currently gaining popularity. As shown in Figure 1, the major distinction between traditional
and open-world traditional semi-supervised learning is that open-world semi-supervised learning
incorporates unseen classes into consideration and emphasizes the classification of both known (seen)
and unknown (unseen) classes.
In real-world situations, there are often numerous new categories that arise or have not been timely
labeled by humans. As mentioned in (Cao et al., 2022), in the context of social media classification,
we aim to effectively categorize both known customer groups and newly emerging user groups.
Similarly, object recognition tasks in supermarkets encounter thousands of new items every day, and
promptly annotating these is financially taxing (Han et al., 2020). Therefore, the significance of
open-world semi-supervised learning becomes apparent.
The key to solving open world semi-supervised learning problem (Cao et al., 2022) lies in how to
ensure the model achieves satisfactory performance in classifying both seen and unseen classes. Since
seen classes can be learned directly and efficiently from labeled data while unseen classes can not, it


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Labeled             Unlabeled                    Test
                            Data                 Data                       Data


                           cat                                        cat          Novel 2
                                     dog


                                     dog                                             dog
                           cat                                     Novel 1


Figure 1: Open-World SSL: the unseen classes present in unlabeled data (the samples in the red box )
do not appear in the labeled data, and the unlabeled data share the same distribution with the test data.
In the testing phase, both seen classes and unseen classes should be classified.


is important to prevent unseen class samples from being overfitted to seen classes. We feature out
that how to select unlabeled samples to obtain efficient seen and unseen clustering results becomes
the key to solving the problem. A mainstream approaches just like ORCA (Cao et al., 2022) and
NACH (Guo et al., 2022) aim at making the logits vector of each unlabeled sample and its nearest
neighbor as similar as possible, it is easy to see that these methods classify seen and unseen classes
by selecting pairs of plausible samples and we call them BCE-based methods since BCE loss is used
to optimize the logits similarity between chosen sample pairs. There are also other algorithms that
consider the similarity between all unlabeled samples and use all the similarity as a guide for further
optimization, and we call these other methods such as OpenLDN (Rizve et al., 2022a) and TRSSL
(Rizve et al., 2022b).
In open world semi-supervised learning problem, high quality chosen samples are utilized to give
the model the ability to classify both seen and unseen classes. The strategy for selecting the samples
is critical, we figure out that BCE-based methods can choose sample pairs in a more flexible way.
Taking NACH (Guo et al., 2022) as an example, the selection of which sample pairs need to be
pulled closer can be flexibly determined through the use of filter. Conversely, in OpenLDN(Rizve
et al., 2022a), the similarity function is honed by directly computing the MSE loss between feature
similarity of all sample pairs and their logits counterparts. However, not all the similarity of sample
pairs can efficiently guide the subsequent learning process since unseen class samples are prone to
be mislabeled as seen classes in initial training phases. Therefore, BCE-based methods are more
suitable for choosing high quality samples since these methods can choose samples pairs in a more
flexible way.
However, despite the current flexibility demon-
strated by BCE-based methods in selecting sim-
ilar sample pairs, the ratio of seen-unseen pairs
(the most similar sample of an unlabeled unseen
classes data is from seen classes) in the chosen
sample pairs still remains high as shown in Fig-
ure 2. The reason is that current BCE-based
methods focus on pairwise clustering only at the
logits level which could lead to poor classifica- Figure 2: Ratio of seen-unseen pairs when NACH
tion performance of unseen classes. We notice combined or not combined with CONTROL.
that whether pairs should be aligned at the logits
level depends on the similarity at the feature level. Therefore, we theoretically demonstrate that
optimizing at the feature level benefits pairwise clustering at the logits level. Additionally, it is
crucial to note that despite the presence of entropy loss regularization in the current open-world
semi-supervised learning algorithms, there still exists a risk of representation collapse for unseen
classes. Thus we introduce contrastive learning as a means to obtain superior representations for
open-world semi-supervised learning and further avoid the collapse of the unseen classes. We also
note that OpenCON (Sun & Li, 2022) proposed a paradigm that only utilizes contrastive learning loss
to address the open-world semi-supervised learning problem. However with this learning paradigm,


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


existing losses widely used in semi-supervised learning (such as cross entropy loss, BCE loss) are
difficult to be directly combined with OpenCON since it only focus on the optimization of the
feature-level. In other word, it is incapable of sustaining continuous optimization of representations
during the process of semi-supervised learning. It could be regarded as providing a superior backbone
for existing open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms. Thus, a problem naturally arises:

    Can we design a unified contrastive learning framework that can further gain performance
         improvement specifically for open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms?

To tackle this challenge, we propose a supervised contrastive learning loss and a nearest neighbor
contrastive learning loss to enhance the classification of BCE loss. We also propose an unsupervised
contrastive learning loss as a consistency regularization to further avoid unseen class collapse. Our
framework is evaluated on various representative datasets. The whole framework achieves 6.4%
improvement in unseen classes classification and 2.1% improvement in all classes classification on
the CIFAR-100 dataset than the state-of-the-art method NACH (Guo et al., 2022).
To sum up, this paper makes the following three contributions:

      • We proposed a simple and efficient CONTRastive learning framework for Open World
        semi-supervised Learning CONTROL, which can be easily adapted to open-world semi-
        supervised learning algorithms.

      • We theoretically demonstrate that the proposed CONTROL can not only enhance the
        classification of BCE loss but also avoid unseen classes collapse.

      • Extensive experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of the overall framework and its
        individual components.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Traditional Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL). Traditional SSL assumes that labeled, unlabeled,
and test data are drawn from the same distribution. The mainstream of SSL algorithms can be broadly
classified into entropy minimization methods (Lee, 2013; Grandvalet & Bengio, 2004), consistency
regularization methods (Miyato et al., 2019; Sajjadi et al., 2016; Laine & Aila, 2017; Tarvainen &
Valpola, 2017), and hybrid methods (Sohn et al., 2020; Berthelot et al., 2019; 2020; Xu et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2021). However, traditional semi-supervised learning algorithms fail to address the open
world problem with numerous unseen classes that we aim to solve.
Open world Semi-Supervised Learning. This paradigm is to address such a problem: in the training
phase, i.e., unseen classes appear in the unlabeled data. While during the testing phase, samples from
unseen classes could also appear. Open world semi-supervised learning algorithms aim at classifying
both seen classes and unseen classes. Existing methods can be generally categorized into two groups:
BCE-based methods, including (Cao et al., 2022) and (Guo et al., 2022); and other methods, such
as (Rizve et al., 2022a) and (Rizve et al., 2022b). As mentioned earlier, optimization at the feature
level is crucial for open world semi-supervised learning algorithms. However, this aspect has not
received sufficient attention, which is also the biggest distinction between our proposed framework
and previous algorithms.
Contrastive Learning for Semi-Supervised Learning. Semi-supervised learning algorithms com-
bined with contrastive learning have also developed rapidly (Li et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022).
CACSSL (Yang et al., 2022) is a contrastive learning framework as a general confirmation bias allevi-
ation method for pseudo-label-based SSL methods. And Comatch (Li et al., 2021) takes advantage
of graph-based contrastive learning to learn better representations for corresponding classification
tasks. However, none of these methods have focused on the more realistic problem of open world
semi-supervised learning. Although OpenCon (Sun & Li, 2022) considered the open world semi-
supervised learning problem, it is incapable of sustaining continuous optimization of representations
during the process of semi-supervised learning, which is the key differentiation between OpenCon
and CONTROL.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 DOG


                                                                          Seen Heads

                                                                 CAT
                                                      Model


                                                       …
                                                                Novel 1


                                                                          Unseen Heads

                                                                Novel 2


                 Figure 3: Model designed for open world semi-supervised learning.

3     P RELIMINARY AND BACKGROUND

In this section, we introduce the open-world semi-supervised learning setting and the existing BCE-
based methods and representative contrastive learning loss which will be used in the next section.

3.1   O PEN - WORLD S EMI - SUPERVISED L EARNING

As shown in Figure 3, we are given a set of labeled data includes n instances and we are also given a
set of unlabeled data from an unknown distribution, which includes m instances Du = {x1 , · · · , xm }.
Here, x ∈ X ∈ RD , y ∈ Y = {1, · · · , CU } where D is the number of input dimension and CU is
the total number of classes in unlabeled data. We use CL to represent the total number of classes in
labeled data. Note that in the Traditional Semi-Supervised Learning, CL = CU while in open-world
semi-supervised learning, total number of seen classes Cseen = CL , and total number of unseen
classes Cunseen = CU \ CL .

3.2   R EVISIT OF BCE- BASED M ETHODS

We now describe how BCE-based methods design optimization objectives for open-world semi-
supervised learning. We use LOWSSL to represent the overall optimization objective for existing
BCE-based methods, we have

                              LOWSSL = LCE + LBCE + LEntropy + LBalance ,                                 (1)

LCE is usually defined as cross-entropy loss for labeled data, and LEntropy aims at regularizing the
predictive distribution of the training data to be close to a prior probability distribution to prevent the
model from classifying all unseen classes into a single class. To enhance model’s           ability of  unseen
                                                           1
                                                               P                           ⊤
classes classification, LBCE is defined as LBCE = − m+n           xi ∈Dl ∪Du log   p (x i )   p (e
                                                                                                 x  )
                                                                                                   i , where
x
ei is the most similar sample to xi in this batch. In NACH, a filtering mechanism is proposed to
further avoid seen-unseen pairs. To balance the learning pace of seen classes and unseen classes, a
variety of LBalance are proposed, in Cao et al. (2022) LBalance is a margin cross-entropy to mitigate
the classification pace of seen classes while in Guo et al. (2022), an adaptive threshold based on
pseudo-label selection is proposed to accelerate the learning pace of unseen classes.

3.3   C ONTRASTIVE L OSSES

We introduce the generalized contrastive Loss based on the L2-normalized feature embedding
z = ϕ(x; θ). Then the following loss function is calculated for each sample x:

                                                                       exp z ⊤ · z + /τ

                                         1     X
            Lϕ (x; τ, P(x), N (x)) = −                        log P                 ⊤     −
                                                                                              ,           (2)
                                       |P(x)| +                    z − ∈N (x) exp (z · z /τ )
                                                   z ∈P(x)

where P(x) is the positive set of embeddings w.r.t z + , and N (x) is the negative set of embeddings
w.r.t z − and τ > 0 is the adjustable temperature parameter. Such a loss function pulls together the
anchor x and its positive set P(x) and pushes apart samples from its negative set N (x).


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     P ROPOSED CONTROL F RAMEWORK

Despite the success of BCE-based methods, we observe that these methods still encompass two major
challenges. The first is to correctly classify same-class unseen pairs. Note that there are no labeled
samples available for the unseen classes. The second challenge for the BCE-based methods is to
avoid the collapse of the unseen classes.
In this paper, we intend to solve these two major challenges by introducing additional alignment
and uniformity on the feature level. Specifically, in Section 4.1, we show that BCE loss suffers
from incorrect unseen pairs, whereas contrastive loss is able to make correct alignments. Thus, we
introduce the supervised contrastive loss for the seen classes and nearest neighbor contrastive loss
for all classes, which aligns both the seen and unseen pairs on the feature embedding space. Then
in Section 4.2, we demonstrate that the uniformity term in contrastive losses serves as an additional
term to avoid unseen class collapse. In Section 4.3, we show that unsupervised contrastive loss serves
as a consistency regularization on the feature level and also guarantees consistency on the logit level.
Finally, in Section 4.4, we introduce the overall method of our CONTROL framework containing
three contrastive losses.

4.1   C ONTRASTIVE L OSS E NHANCES CLASSIFICATION OF BCE L OSS

For BCE-based methods, it is difficult to identify same-class unseen pairs through only logit-level
nearest-neighbor sample selection, since the nearest-neighbor sample may not necessarily belong to
the same class, especially when the model is not yet well trained. Further, when the different-class
unseen pairs are aligned by the BCE loss LBCE , the overall accuracy will be harmed.
Mathematically, given a nearest-neighbor unseen class pair (x, v), we denote their marginal prob-
ability as PX and PV , respectively. We can interpret the aligning procedure of pairs into a binary
classification with label 1 when (x, v) are positive same-class pairs sampled from the joint distribution
PXV , and with label 0 when x and v are independently sampled from the marginal distributions
PX and PV . As the nearest neighbor has some probability of not being the same class sample, we
denote η ∈ (0, 1) as the misclassification rate of the nearest-neighbor sample, and denote the joint
probability of the nearest-neighbor pair (x, v) as
                                  PηXV = (1 − η)PXV + ηPX PV .                                       (3)
This joint probability can be interpreted as x and v having probability 1 − η to be the same-class
samples and probability η to be different-class ones.
Then for the BCE loss, we show that the different-class unseen pairs harm the classification of
unseen-class samples. Denote g(z; θ′ ) as the logits of feature embedding z. Then

EPηXV LBCE = EPηXV − log g(ϕ(x))⊤ g(ϕ(v))
            = (1 − η)E(x,v)∼PXV − log g(ϕ(x))⊤ g(ϕ(v)) + ηEx∼PX Ev∼PV − log g(ϕ(x))⊤ g(ϕ(v))
            := (1 − η)EPXV LBCE + ηM.                                                                (4)
Because x ∼ PX and v ∼ PV are independent, g(ϕ(x)) and g(ϕ(v)) are also independent, and
therefore we have g(ϕ(x))⊤ g(ϕ(v)) = 0 and thus M → −∞. This reveals a great gap between the
BCE risk under distributions PηXV and PXV , indicating that the different-class nearest-neighbor pairs
could severely harm the classification accuracy when using BCE loss.
On the other hand, contrastive losses are less affected. Specifically, we have

                                                  exp ϕ(x)⊤ · ϕ(v + )/τ

             EPηXV Lϕ = EPηXV − log P                                ⊤      −
                                           ϕ(v − )∈N (ϕ(x)) exp (ϕ(x) · ϕ(v )/τ )

                        = (1 − η)EPXV Lϕ + η · Ex∼PX Ev+ ∼PV − ϕ(x)⊤ · ϕ(v + )/τ
                                                  X
                                                         exp ϕ(x)⊤ · ϕ(v − )/τ

                        + η · Ex∼PX Ev− ∼PV log
                                                   ϕ(v − )∈N (x)

                        = (1 − η)EPXV Lϕ + η · log(|N (x)|),                                         (5)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last equation holds because ϕ(x), ϕ(v + ), and ϕ(v − ) are independent. Note that log(|N (x)|)
is a constant, and therefore EPηXV Lϕ and EPXV Lϕ result in the same optimal classifier, indicating
that contrastive losses are less affected by different-class nearest-neighbor pairs.
This motivates us to incorporate contrastive losses to realize the feature-level alignment and to
enhance the classification of the BCE loss.
Supervised Contrastive Loss. Recall that in the BCE-based methods for open-world semi-supervised
learning, the labels are correct and the labeled examples are aligned through same-class pairs.
Similarly, for the labeled examples, we also align same-class pairs on the feature level by introducing
the supervised contrastive learning loss (Khosla et al., 2020), which is well known for its ability to
improve representation quality by aligning features within the same class. The form of supervised
contrastive loss is
                                                              exp z ⊤ · z + /τ

                                   1        X
                   LSupSeen = − S                  log P                   ⊤     −
                                                                                     ,               (6)
                               |P (x)| + S                z − ∈N (x) exp (z · z /τ )
                                         z ∈P (x)
            S
where the P (x) denotes the collection of same-class pairs. Note that LSupSeen only applies to labeled
data. After choosing an anchor, the positive set S(x) includes samples with the same label as the
anchor, and the negative set N (x) includes samples from all classes.
Nearest Neighbor Contrastive Loss. Recall that the BCE loss is the key to classifying unseen classes
for the BCE-based algorithms. For the unlabeled samples including both seen- and unseen-class
samples, the pairs are selected as nearest-neighbor samples. As we discussed earlier, the falsely
aligned different-class pairs could harm the classification performance of BCE loss, therefore we turn
to incorporate the lessly affected nearest neighbor contrastive loss LSupNN to achieve feature-level
alignment. The specific form is
                                                               exp z ⊤ · z + /τ

                                   1        X
                  LSupNN = − N                      log  P                  ⊤     −
                                                                                      ,            (7)
                                |P (x)| + N                z − ∈N (x) exp (z · z /τ )
                                         z ∈P   (x)
            N
where the P (x) denotes the collection of nearest-neighbor pairs. Note that LSupNN is a feature-level
counterpart for the BCE loss. It applies to both labeled data and unlabeled data. After choosing an
anchor, the positive set P N (x) includes the nearest neighbor of the anchor, and the negative set N (x)
includes all the other samples.
LSupNN allows similar sample pairs to have more similar feature representations, which naturally
facilitates BCE loss to learn more similar logits, and in turn increase the proportion of same-class
pairs in all nearest-neighbor pairs. As a result, LSupNN guides the model for better seen/unseen
classification.

4.2   U NIFORMITY IN C ONTRASTIVE L OSS AVOIDS U NSEEN C LASS C OLLAPSE

It is easy to see that a trivial solution to the BCE loss on the unseen classes is to classify all samples
into one class, whereas this will severely harm the classification accuracy on the unseen classes too.
Despite the introduction of the entropy loss LEntropy , the distinguishment among unseen classes still
remains to be a great challenge.
Aside from providing feature-level alignment, we demonstrate that contrastive losses naturally avoid
logit collapse of unseen classes. Specifically, by Wang & Isola (2020), the contrastive loss can be
decomposed into an alignment term and a uniformity term, i.e.
          lim     E Lϕ (x; τ, P(x), N (x)) − log K = −Ez,z+ ∈P(x) exp(z ⊤ · z + /τ )                     (8)
      |N (x)|→∞

                                                          + Ez∈P(x) log Ez− ∈N (x) exp(z ⊤ · z − /τ ),   (9)
where equation 8 represents the alignment term that aligns the feature representations of the positive
pairs, and equation 9 represents the uniformity term which forces the representations to be uniformity
distributed throughout the entire feature embedding space and thus avoids feature collapse.
Naturally, as both logit-level and feature-level alignment is achieved, g(·) maintains the spatial
structure between feature representations and logits. Therefore, by avoiding feature-level collapse,
the contrastive losses also avoid logit-level collapse of the unseen classes.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   U NSUPERVISED C ONTRASTIVE L OSS S ERVES AS C ONSISTENCY R EGULARIZATION

Moreover, recall that for the open-world semi-supervised learning problem, consistency regular-
ization is often used to further boost the classification performance, where logit-level consistency
regularization aligns the logits of two augmented views. Similarly, as data augmentation is widely
used and well-studied in contrastive learning, we naturally introduce unsupervised contrastive loss to
achieve feature-level consistency regularization. The specific form is
                                                              exp z ⊤ · z + /τ

                                   1       X
                  LSimAll = − A                    log P                   ⊤     −
                                                                                     ,           (10)
                               |P (x)| + A                z − ∈N (x) exp (z · z /τ )
                                                        z ∈P (x)

where the P A (x) denotes the collection of positive pairs augmented from the same natural sample.
LSimAll applies to both labeled data and unlabeled data which is beneficial to classifying both seen
classes and unseen classes.

4.4   OVERALL


                              Aug.     The same class
            Positive Set                                                    Aug.                       Nearest Neighbor(NN)

                 Anchor                                   Anchor                           Anchor


            Negative Set

                               Different classes              Except Anchor and its Aug.     Except Anchor and its NN


                             Figure 4: The framework of our proposed CONTROL.
In conclusion, our proposed CONTROL consists of a replaceable open-world semi-supervised
learning module and a simple but efficient contrastive learning module as shown in Figure 4. For
different open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms, we will all use LOWSSL to represent
the original loss. To strengthen the open-world semi-supervised learning algorithm, our proposed
CONTROL contains supervised contrastive learning part LSupSeen , unsupervised contrastive learning
part LSimAll and nearest neighbor contrastive learning part LSupNN which are iteratively optimized
together with LOWSSL during the training process:

                           LCONTROL = LOWSSL + λ1 LSupSeen + λ2 LSimAll + λ3 LSupNN ,                                         (11)

where λ1 , λ2 and λ3 in the formula are trade-off parameters.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   S ETUP

Datasets. We evaluate our framework CONTROL combined with representative open-world semi-
supervised learning algorithms on common SSL datasets: CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky &
Hinton, 2009) and ImageNet-100. On CIFAR-10 we choose 5 classes as seen classes and the rest as
unseen classes. On CIFAR-100 and ImageNet-100 we choose 50 classes as seen classes and the rest
as unseen classes. Following the same principles as NACH and ORCA, we select 50% samples of the
seen classes as labeled data, i.e. the unlabeled dataset is a 1:2 mix of samples from seen classes and
unseen classes.
Baselines. We choose NACH and ORCA as our baseline methods and use these baseline methods to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.


                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Classification accuracy of compared methods on seen, unseen and all classes on CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009). We use the hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) to
evaluate unseen classes accuracy and all classes accuracy, and seen classes accuracy is evaluated
directly by whether the labeled data are divided into the right classes. For a fairer comparison, all
experiments use the same backbone ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) as (Cao et al., 2022). Following (Cao
et al., 2022), we also show the results of traditional semi-supervised learning method Fixmatch (Sohn
et al., 2020), the open set semi-supervised algorithms DS3L (Guo et al., 2020), CGDL (Sun et al.,
2020), and the novel class discovering algorithms DTC (Han et al., 2019)and Rankstats (Han et al.,
2020). In particular, we evaluate our proposed framework by combining ORCA (Cao et al., 2022)
and NACH (Guo et al., 2022) with the backbone fully unlocked, denoted as ORCA* and NACH*.

                                              CIFAR-10                    CIFAR-100
           Method                      Seen    Unseen     all      Seen     Unseen  all
           Fixmatch                    71.5     50.4      49.5     39.6      23.5     20.3
           DS3L                        77.6     45.3      40.2     55.1      23.7     24.0
           CGDL                        72.3     44.6      39.7     49.3      22.5     23.5
           DTC                         53.9     39.5      39.3     31.3      22.9     18.3
           Rankstats                   86.6     81.0      82.9     36.4      28.4     23.1
           OpenCon                     87.1     90.7      89.4     70.4      50.2     55.5
           ORCA                        88.2     90.4      89.7     66.9      43.0     48.1
           ORCA + CONTROL              88.4     91.9      90.7     67.6      44.8     49.6
           ORCA*                       89.0     90.0      89.3     67.0      42.2     48.8
           ORCA* + CONTROL             90.6     90.6      90.4     69.5      47.2     53.2
           NACH                        89.5     92.2      91.3     68.7      47.0     52.1
           NACH + CONTROL              89.9     93.4      92.2     70.1      48.5     53.0
           NACH*                       93.3     94.1      94.1     73.5      50.1     56.8
           NACH* + CONTROL             93.5     95.0      94.3     74.1      53.3     58.0


Table 2: Classification results on ImageNet-100 (Russakovsky et al., 2015). All experimental results
are the average of three runs. + denotes the combination of CONTROL. For a fair comparison, all
experiments use the same backbone ResNet50 as (Cao et al., 2022).

  Method    Fixmatch     DS3L    Rankstats     OpenCon     ORCA       ORCA+         NACH     NACH+
  Seen         65.8       71.2      47.3         90.4       88.7          89.4      90.4      90.9
  Unseen       36.7       32.5      28.7         80.6       72.3          77.8      75.6      81.8
  All          34.9       30.8      40.3         83.2       77.4          81.0      79.6      84.0


5.2   M AIN R ESULTS

The classification mean accuracy over three runs on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 is in Table 1. The
results show that our proposed method is an effective framework for open-world semi-supervised
learning algorithms. We take CIFAR100 for example, on seen classes classification, we achieved
3.7% improvement on ORCA and 0.8% improvement on NACH. On unseen class classification,
we achieved 11.8% improvement on ORCA and 6.4% improvement on NACH. On all classes
classification, we also achieved 9% improvement on ORCA and 2.1% improvement on NACH. The
performance improvement for unseen classes mentioned above mainly stems from the enhancement
of BCE loss in our framework, while the performance improvement for all class classifications
primarily comes from the uniformity component in CONTROL, which further mitigates the collapse
of existing methods.
The results also show that compared with OpenCon, we achieved 5.2% improvement on seen classes,
2.2% improvement on unseen classes, and 4.5% improvement on all classes. These performance
improvements show that compared with the contrastive learning method only, the semi-supervised
learning part combined with CONTROL can also achieve the best results. As shown in Table 2, we
also conducted our experiments on a more realistic dataset ImageNet-100 (Russakovsky et al., 2015),
and we achieved consistent performance improvement with CONTROL as mentioned above.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Ablation Studies: Seen, Unseen and All classes classification accuracy for LSupSeen , LSimAll ,
LSupNN on CIFAR-100 combined with NACH.

                       LSupSeen   LSimAll    LSupNN     Seen    Unseen      All
                       W.O.        W.O.       W.O.      73.5      50.1     56.8
                       W.          W.O.       W.O.      74.0      50.2     56.9
                       W.O.         W.        W.O.      73.6      50.7     57.0
                       W.O.        W.O.        W.       74.0      51.4     56.9
                       W.           W.         W.       74.1      53.3     58.0

5.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

Analysis on LSupSeen and LSimAll . As we analyzed before, LSupSeen can align features within the
same classes which can be regarded as an enhancement of BCE loss and LSimAll can be regarded as a
form of consistency regularization that enables the model to learn a better representation from the
sample level. Therefore, as shown in Table 3, combined with LSupSeen and LSimAll , we achieved 0.2%
improvement on seen classes, 2.7% improvement on unseen classes and 1.1% improvement on all
classes. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our CONTROL framework in both avoiding unseen
class collapse and enhancing classification accuracy through additional consistency regularization.
Analysis on LSupNN . As shown in Table 3, combined with LSupNN , we achieved 0.7% improvement
on seen classes, 2.6% improvement on unseen classes and 0.2% improvement on all classes. The ex-
perimental results are consistent with our previous theoretical analysis. In CONTROL, the utilization
of LSupNN allows similar sample pairs to have more similar representations at the feature level, and
BCE loss will learn more similar logits to better guide the model for unseen classes classification.

5.4   F URTHER ANALYSIS

Based on our theoretical analysis, we will use the following experiments to further illustrate why our
proposed framework is useful for improving the classification accuracy of unseen classes based on
BCE loss. In Table 4, we show the ratio of unseen class prediction and the ratio of unseen-unseen
pairs to figure out why our proposed framework is useful. For the ratio of unseen classes prediction,
we take the sample of unseen classes whose prediction is unseen classes as the numerator, we take the
total number of unseen classes samples as the denominator. A larger ratio means that the algorithm is
better at classifying unseen classes since our goal is to have less confusion between seen classes and
unseen classes. The results show that, after using our framework, we gained 2.77% improvement. For
the ratio of unseen-unseen pairs, we take the sum of unseen class samples whose nearest neighbors
are also unseen class samples as the numerator, we take the total number of unseen class samples as
the denominator. A larger ratio means that the algorithm is better at classifying unseen classes since
the larger it is, the less seen-unseen pairs happen. The results show that, after using our framework,
we gained 2.35% improvement.

Table 4: Ratio of unseen classes prediction and Ratio of unseen-unseen pairs for NACH with or
without CONTROL. All experimental results are the average of three runs on CIFAR-100.

    Method                    Ratio of unseen class prediction     Ratio of unseen-unseen pairs
    NACH                                    79.37                                 87.77
    NACH + CONTROL                          82.14                                 90.12


6     C ONCLUSION
We propose a simple and efficient contrastive learning framework CONTROL, which can be easily
adapted to open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms. The importance of our framework in
improving the unseen classification performance of open-world semi-supervised learning algorithms
has been validated theoretically. Additionally, our proposed framework can further mitigate the risk
of representation collapse. We have also designed experiments to demonstrate why CONTROL is
effective in classifying unseen classes.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A
  Raffel. Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 5050–5060, 2019.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin D Cubuk, Alex Kurakin, Kihyuk Sohn, Han Zhang, and Colin
  Raffel. Remixmatch: Semi-supervised learning with distribution alignment and augmentation
  anchoring. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Kaidi Cao, Maria Brbic, and Jure Leskovec. Open-world semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings
  of the 10th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
  MIT Press, 2016.
Yves Grandvalet and Yoshua Bengio. Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 529–536, 2004.
Lan-Zhe Guo, Yi-Ge Zhang, Zhi-Fan Wu, Jie-Jing Shao, and Yu-Feng Li. Robust semi-supervised
  learning when not all classes have labels. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 3305–3317, 2022.
LanZhe Guo, ZhenYu Zhang, Yuan Jiang, YuFeng Li, and ZhiHua Zhou. Safe deep semi-supervised
  learning for unseen-class unlabeled data. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 3897–3906, 2020.
Kai Han, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Learning to discover novel visual categories via
  deep transfer clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision, pp. 8401–8409, 2019.
Kai Han, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Sebastien Ehrhardt, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Au-
  tomatically discovering and learning new visual categories with ranking statistics. In Proceedings
  of the 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 18661–18673, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Tech
  Report, 2009.
Harold W Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics
  Quarterly, 2(1-2):83–97, 1955.
Samuli Laine and Timo Aila. Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of
  the 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Dong-Hyun Lee. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for deep
  neural networks. In Workshop on challenges in representation learning, ICML, volume 3, pp. 896,
  2013.
Junnan Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven CH Hoi. Comatch: Semi-supervised learning with contrastive
  graph regularization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 9475–9484, 2021.
Takeru Miyato, Shin-ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, and Shin Ishii. Virtual adversarial training: a
  regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41(8):1979–1993, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel W Otter, Julian R Medina, and Jugal K Kalita. A survey of the usages of deep learning for
  natural language processing. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 32(2):
  604–624, 2020.
Waseem Rawat and Zenghui Wang. Deep convolutional neural networks for image classification: A
 comprehensive review. Neural computation, 29:2352–2449, 2017.
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Navid Kardan, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah.
 Openldn: Learning to discover novel classes for open-world semi-supervised learning. In European
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 382–401, 2022a.
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Navid Kardan, and Mubarak Shah. Towards realistic semi-supervised
 learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 437–455, 2022b.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
  challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
Mehdi Sajjadi, Mehran Javanmardi, and Tolga Tasdizen. Regularization with stochastic transforma-
 tions and perturbations for deep semi-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, pp. 1163–1171, 2016.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Zizhao Zhang, Han Zhang, Colin A Raffel, Ekin Do-
  gus Cubuk, Alexey Kurakin, and ChunLiang Li. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning
  with consistency and confidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  596–608, 2020.
Xin Sun, Zhenning Yang, Chi Zhang, Keck-Voon Ling, and Guohao Peng. Conditional gaussian
  distribution learning for open set recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13480–13489, 2020.
Yiyou Sun and Yixuan Li. Opencon: Open-world contrastive learning. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2022.
Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consis-
  tency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, pp. 1195–1204, 2017.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Yi Xu, Lei Shang, Jinxing Ye, Qi Qian, YuFeng Li, Baigui Sun, Hao Li, and Rong Jin. Dash:
  Semi-supervised learning with dynamic thresholding. In Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11525–11536, 2021.
Fan Yang, Kai Wu, Shuyi Zhang, Guannan Jiang, Yong Liu, Feng Zheng, Wei Zhang, Chengjie
  Wang, and Long Zeng. Class-aware contrastive semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14421–14430, 2022.
Bowen Zhang, Yidong Wang, Wenxin Hou, Hao Wu, Jindong Wang, Manabu Okumura, and Takahiro
  Shinozaki. Flexmatch: Boosting semi-supervised learning with curriculum pseudo labeling. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 18408–18419, 2021.


                                                11
