Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ROM I NTERPOLATION TO E XTRAPOLATION : C OM -
PLETE L ENGTH G ENERALIZATION FOR A RITHMETIC
T RANSFORMERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT
             Since its introduction, the transformer model has demonstrated outstanding per-
             formance across various tasks. However, there are still unresolved issues regard-
             ing length generalization, particularly in algorithmic tasks. In this paper, we in-
             vestigate the inherent capabilities of transformer models in learning arithmetic
             algorithms, such as addition and multiplication. Through experiments and atten-
             tion analysis, we identify a number of crucial factors for achieving optimal length
             generalization. We show that transformer models are able to generalize to long
             lengths with the help of targeted attention biasing. We then introduce Attention
             Bias Calibration (ABC), a calibration stage that enables the model to automati-
             cally learn the proper attention biases, which we link to mechanisms in relative
             position encoding. We demonstrate that using ABC, the transformer model can
             achieve unprecedented perfect length generalization on certain arithmetic tasks. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
The Transformer architecture has been the fundamental building block of many SOTA solutions
across a wide range of machine learning tasks, including recent phenomenal Large Language Models
(LLMs). However, one serious issue with today’s Transformer models is length generalization, or
extrapolation, defined as “a model’s ability to continue performing well as the number of input
tokens during validation increases beyond the number of tokens on which the model was trained”
(Press et al., 2022). Many models achieve good accuracy with small inputs but fail to produce
meaningful results with long inputs (Ruoss et al., 2023). The problem has been extensively studied
in language models, as extending the context window sizes of LLMs is an urgent and hot topic (Anil
et al. (2022); Chi et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023)).
In this paper, we investigate Transformer’s performance in learning arithmetic algorithms, which
presents a unique context for studying length generalization. Deletang et al. (2023) relate sequence
prediction to formal language theory by treating sequences as elements of infinite formal languages
generated by a grammar. Many sequence-to-sequence tasks can be seen as language transduc-
tion tasks, where the goal is to learn the underlying generation rules. Arithmetic tasks fall in this
paradigm and the existence of such rules provides a convenient setting where we can examine the
internal mechanisms of the model.
Thus our goal is to obtain complete generalization and study the enabling factors during the process.
There are specially constructed architectures such as Chiang & Cholak (2022); Deshpande et al.
(2021) that achieve generalization on some of the tasks we study. However, like Deletang et al.
(2023), our focus is on the conventional Transformer architecture and regular training process (e.g.,
SGD and variants), since this setting is the case for many SOTA models, especially those successful
LLMs. Along this line, results obtained by previous works are rather gloomy. According to the
extensive study (20910 models, 15 tasks) conducted by very recent work Deletang et al. (2023), the
Transformer can only solve one Regular and one CS task in the Chomsky hierarchy, and fail all
others, regardless of the positional encoding. 2 Similar results are obtained by Ruoss et al. (2023).
This is echoed by the theoretical difficulties discovered in Hahn (2020).
    1
        We will open source our code upon the publication of this paper.
    2
        And their standard of “solving” a task is above 90% accuracy averaged across all lengths.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Length generalization for arithmetic tasks is essentially inductive inference since the ultimate goal
is learning a general rule from a finite number of observations. It is known that inductive inference
requires inductive biases (Mitchell, 1980), additional assumptions that are independent of the data.
This is because any finite number of training samples has infinite possible continuations correspond-
ing to different generation rules.
In this work, we draw attention to the stage of model interpolation. Interpolation is a special form of
in-distribution generalization, and we define it as a model’s ability to perform well on examples that
are novel but with lengths within the same range as those samples from the training set. We show
in section 5 that the patterns that the model acquires during the interpolation stage can be used as a
form of inductive biases to re-train the model to achieve extrapolation.
The contributions of this work include:

                      • We are the first Transformer-based architecture to obtain complete generalization on a num-
                        ber of arithmetic tasks: successor function, parity, addition, and a restricted version of
                        multiplication. Our models produce results with 100% accuracy up to 50 digits.
                      • We show that, for the tasks that we study, (the right) attention is indeed all you need.
                        Transformer can perform well as long as it attends to the right tokens. And we identify a
                        few key factors in achieving such proper attention.
                      • Based on our findings, we introduce attention bias calibration (ABC), a process that au-
                        tomatically collects attention patterns learned from training data and extends them to long
                        lengths. We show that this automizes the above mechanisms. In addition to that, we show
                        ABC’s relation to RPE, which opens the potential for its applications to more complicated
                        tasks.

Figure 1 summarizes the generalization that our ABC scheme achieves on two of the tasks, with com-
parisons against popular alternatives such as ALiBi, RoPE, etc. ABC is the only solution achieving
perfect generalization. We obtain similar results on other tasks which will be discussed in detail in
section 6.

                                        Successor                                   Addition
                       1                                              1
Model Accuracy [%]


                      0.8                                            0.8

                      0.6                                            0.6                           Vanilla
                                                      Vanilla                                      ALiBi
                      0.4                                            0.4
                                                      ALiBi                                         ABC
                      0.2                              ABC           0.2                            RPE
                                                      RoPE                                         RoPE
                       0                                              0
                                10      20     30      40       50          10      20     30      40        50
                                         Length                                      Length

Figure 1: Extrapolation results for models trained on Lint ≤ 6 on Successor and Addition.
Length is measured in the number of digits of one operand.


2                    R ELATED W ORK
Besides the line of work on arithmetic algorithms learning mentioned earlier, length generalization
for Transformers is a also very hot topic in other areas. Existing approaches have been focusing on
two aspects: positional encoding (PE) or/and attention bias (AB).
Relative Position Encoding. Relative position encoding (RPE) relies on the relative distance be-
tween tokens to construct position embeddings. This approach is first proposed by Shaw et al. (2018)
and has shown to produce significant improvements over absolute positional encoding in machine


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


translation tasks (Shaw et al., 2018). This leads to its application in numerous machine learning
models and the development of multiple variations such as Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019) and
RoPE (Su et al., 2022).
Attention Biasing. Attention biasing, on the other hand, adds a bias directly to the attention matrix,
allowing the model to extrapolate to longer lengths efficiently. First introduced as ALiBi (Attention
with Linear Biases) by Press et al. (2022), it is quickly followed by similar models such as KER-
PLE (Chi et al., 2022), and Sandwich (Chi et al., 2023), all showing certain improvement in length
extrapolation. Other forms of biases include sliding window (Beltagy et al., 2020) and its varia-
tions. Compared to other relative position encoding schemes, attention biasing typically demands
less computational resources.
These two lines of work are closely related and there are extensive studies on their effectiveness. 3
However, the results are mixed. On one hand, the popular belief is that relative PEs (Shaw et al.,
2018; Dai et al., 2019; Su et al., 2022) are more effective in length generalization than absolute
variants (Vaswani et al., 2017). On the other hand, however, some works (e.g., Kazemnejad et al.
(2023)) point out that such a conclusion is obtained by using language modeling perplexity as the
sole metric, which may not reflect actual performances on downstream tasks. In fact, Kazemnejad
et al. (2023) show that, on a collection of reasoning and mathematical tasks, No Positional Encoding
(NoPE) actually performs the best. Likewise, Deletang et al. (2023) show that state-of-the-art PE or
AB methods do not help Transformer extrapolate on arithmetic tasks.
Our work is also related to the line of research studying the systematic generalization capabilities of
Transformers (Ontanon et al., 2022) which show that various techniques such as embedding scaling
or early stopping (Csordás et al., 2021), copy gate and geometric attention (Csordás et al., 2022),
and randomized positional encoding (Ruoss et al., 2023) are all effective.


3     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

3.1   TASKS

Let N = {0, 1, 2, . . .} be the set of natural numbers. We consider the following arithmetic tasks:

       • Successor function: Maps a natural number to the next one: S(n) = n + 1 for n ∈ N.
       • Addition: y = x1 + x2 for x1 , x2 ∈ N.
       • Parity: Given x ∈ N, this operation returns 1 if the binary representation of x contains an
         odd number of 1’s, and 0 otherwise.
       • N × 1: y = x1 × x2 for x1 ∈ N and x2 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 9}. This is a restricted form of
         multiplication where one of the operands is restricted to single-digit.

These tasks are well-known examples in the theory of computation. The seemingly trivial
Successor function is the basic component of Peano axioms, which formalize the structure of
the natural numbers. Using the digit-based representation, Successor, Addition and N × 1 all
belong to the Type-1 context-sensitive (CS) category of the Chomsky hierarchy. Parity, on the
other hand, is in Type-3 Regular (R) category (Deletang et al., 2023), since it can be solved with a
2-state finite-state machine. N × 1 is a task that is specifically constructed to test if the methods
we develop could be extended to more complex operations such as multiplication. Restricting one
operand to be single-digit results in a simpler attention pattern that allows for easy analysis.
We also conduct experiments on more complex tasks such as multi-digit multiplication and ListOps
(Nangia & Bowman, 2018). The latter is a kind of prefix arithmetic that tests a model’s tree learning
capabilities. It turns out that Transformers with the scale that we study are unable to learn such tasks.
They serve as indications of the limitations of our current solution and we discuss their implications
in section 8.

    3
      Please see Dufter et al. (2022) for a comprehensive review of methods to incorporate position information
into Transformer models.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   T OKENIZATION AND P ROBLEM R EPRESENTATION

Unlike some previous works that study the arithmetic operations within a finite group and treat each
number as a token (e.g., Power et al. (2022)), we use a character-based tokenizer which allows us to
represent an infinite number of integers using a finite set of tokens, enabling unbounded extrapola-
tion testing. Thus in our study the numbers and operators are all encoded in their natural form and
we use a vocabulary of 15 tokens: {0, ..., 9, +, *, $, &, @}, where the last three characters represent
SOS, EOS, and PAD, respectively.
With our tokenization, all tasks are naturally sequence-to-sequence except for Parity which is
classification. We turn Parity into a sequence-to-sequence task as follows. Let xn . . . x1 be the
input sequence of a binary string where xi ∈ {0, 1}, the target is generated as y1 = x1 , yi =
yi−1 ⊗ xi for i = 2, . . . , n, where ⊗ denote bitwise xor.
To facilitate learning, we pad each operand with 0’s to the left to a fixed length. In addition to that,
we reverse the ordering of the tokens in the output sequence to match the natural generation process.
For example, 0123 + 0748 → 1780.

3.3   M ODEL CONFIGURATION

Since our tasks are sequence-to-sequence, we choose an encoder-decoder architecture, with 1 en-
coder layer and 6 decoder layers, all with 8 attention heads. The embedding size is 128 and feed
forward size 512. We tried models with a number of different sizes and found no significant differ-
ence across all variations that could converge. We settled on the model above and did not pursue the
configuration with the optimal size.
We train our models using cross-entropy loss and Adam optimizer, with learning rate 10−5 and a
dropout of 0.3. For training for interpolation, we generate a random permutation Π of numbers in
the range [0, 220 ] and split the set by a 7:1 ratio for training and validation. For binary operations
such as Addition, both operands are drawn independently from Π. Thus both the training and
validation data sets consist of mainly 6-digit numbers, in base 10, with less than 5% 7-digit numbers.
We denote Lint the length of input, measured as the maximum number of digits in the operand(s),
during the interpolation phase. Note that length refers to the number of digits in the operands, not
the total input sequence length.
We define successful extrapolation as the model’s ability to achieve near-perfect accuracy on inputs
with lengths up to 50 digits. For extrapolation testing, for each length L, we randomly sample
min(baseL − baseL−1 , 10000) numbers of length L and compute the accuracy on these samples,
where base is 10 for decimal tasks 4 and 2 for binary ones. The model’s output is considered accurate
if and only if it exactly matches the correct label sequence.
We use greedy decoding for all inferences.


4     (T HE R IGHT ) ATTENTION IS A LL YOU N EED

To develop our ideas, we first train vanilla Transformers with some commonly used length gen-
eralization methods, including the original sinusoidal positional encoding, ALiBi, and RoPE. The
results on Successor and Addition, together with the performance of our ABC scheme, have
been shown in figure 1 at the beginning of the paper. All models achieve some levels of interpolation
but none could extrapolate beyond training length. RoPE and vanilla Transformer perform almost
identically, dropping precipitously to almost 0 accuracy once the length goes beyond 6. We observe
similar patterns with other tasks.
To figure out the causes of failure to extrapolate, we extract and analyze the attention weights of
the vanilla model on Successor and Addition. Figure 2 shows the attention heat maps of one
specific head in the last decoder layer when decoding Successor and Addition tasks. Lighter
colors represent higher weights. More detailed analysis is presented in appendix A.3 but the patterns
are very clear: the vanilla Transformer correctly learns the right attention patterns up to the training
   4
     We actually experimented with different bases, such as 4, 8, 16, etc., for those non-binary tasks. Our code
and the techniques all work seamlessly. For simplicity we only report results on base 10 cases in this paper.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


length and fails beyond that. This correlates perfectly with the extrapolation performance shown in
figure 1.


 (a) Cross Attn     (b) Self Attn       (c) Decoder Cross Attention           (d) Decoder Self Attention

           Figure 2: Attention heat maps for Successor (Left) and Addition (Right).


4.1   ATTENTION B IAS S CAFFOLDING

In this section, we introduce a number of methods that guide the model to attend to the right places.
Assisting model learning is a common practice. Relevant techniques include inputs combination
(Libovický et al., 2018), “arithmetic prompting” (Zhou et al., 2022), representation transformation
(Nogueira et al., 2021), scratch pad (Lee et al., 2023), etc. Indeed, most of our methods are drawn
from these toolboxes as well. However, we use them to target directly at the attention, thus we call
our approach Attention Bias Scaffolding (ABS). In the following we briefly summarize the two most
effective ones. A detailed treatment including visualizations can be found in appendix A.4.
Windowed Attention Biasing. The idea was developed by Lonformer (Beltagy et al., 2020). The
basic intuition is that the most important local dependency is typically restricted by a limited range.
In the context of arithmetic algorithm learning, often local context is the sole determining factor, 5
which can be captured by a sliding window of width w (Beltagy et al., 2020).
Cyclic Position Indexing (CPI). Position indexing refers to how we identify each individual posi-
tion. The simplest way is just to index them 0, 1, . . .. As our tasks have very restricted dependency
contexts which are localized by the windowed attention biasing, the model only needs a way to
differentiate positions within the context window thus long position indexing is not necessary. And
our empirical study shows that it can be harmful sometimes. Therefore we propose Cyclic Position
Indexing (CPI): Let i be the position index of a token. We select a period parameter T and convert
token positions to i mod T before entering into the model. Essentially indices are cycling around
back when they get large.

4.2   R ESULTS OF ABS

To evaluate the effectiveness of the above mechanisms, we conduct extensive experiments on each
of the arithmetic tasks with a number of their combinations. Results and detailed discussion are
presented in table 3 in appendix A.5. We summarize the main findings here:

       • None of the previous works achieves extrapolation on any of the tasks.
       • Our solutions (windowed attention biasing + CPI) achieve complete length generalization
         on all tasks, maintaining 100% accuracy up to 50 digits.
       • Unary tasks (Successor and Parity) appear to be not relying on any positional em-
         bedding at all once the windowed attention biasing is in place.
       • For binary tasks (Addition and N ×1), there appears to be some bad interaction between
         the original sinusoidal PE and windowed attention biasing. Their combination achieves
         only interpolation but not extrapolation.

The Case of Parity. Parity is a well-known failure mode for Transformer due to the theoretical
limitation found by Hahn (2020). Deletang et al. (2023) prove that there exists a Transformer con-
struction that can achieve perfect Parity, but such a construction is not learnable. Ours is the first
learnable Transformer that obtains perfect accuracy and length generalization for the Parity task,
overcoming the difficulties of Hahn (2020) via attention scaffolding.
   5
     This is why the arithmetic calculation algorithms that we humans use could be applied to arbitrarily long
inputs.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above analysis and experiments lead us to believe that the right attention is the key to achieving
good generalization (thus the title of this section). PEs are just means to achieve proper attention.
Methods that target directly at attention might produce superior results on some tasks.

5   ATTENTION B IAS C ALIBRATION (ABC)
Having demonstrated the important role of correct attention in the transformer model’s learning, we
introduce Attention Bias Calibration (ABC), an automatic process that extends the working attention
patterns of a model that achieves successful interpolation to arbitrary lengths while preserving its
near-perfect performance. The idea is, a model trained to full interpolation must be able to produce
the right attention pattern on interpolation data (see section A.3), which captures the local depen-
dencies for recurrent arithmetic algorithms. ABC extracts and aggregates the attention weights and
uses them as attention bias, like Press et al. (2022), to fine-tune the model for long inputs. Similar
to the scaffolding in section 4.1, ABC is also a kind of inductive bias, but it is fully automatic.
Let m × n be the dimensions of the attention matrix of a model that has interpolated and M × N
the dimensions that we would like to extrapolate to. It should hold that m < M and n < N . ABC
proceeds in the following steps:
1. Training for Interpolation: First we train a vanilla transformer model Tint on the dataset Sint
until it is capable of interpolation. By this point, the accuracy of Tint should be near perfect. Then
we use Tint to decode a random subset of training samples Sgen ⊂R Sint and extract the attention
weights. Because this process is identical for all heads, to simplify notation, we omit their indices.
Let xk [i] be the embedding vector for the i-th token in sample k, the attention matrix is extracted as

                                                                      ⊤       ⊤
                                      Aki,j = xk [i]W Q W K xk [j]

where W Q , W K are parameter matrices in the last decoder layer of model Tint .
2. Attention Biases Computation: We then average the attention weights for all data in Sgen :
                                                               |Sgen |
                                                       1        X
                                            Ā =                         Ak
                                                    |Sgen |
                                                                k=1


The next steps average attention weights along a number of lines within the elements of the ma-
trix and extend them along those particular directions. We observe that attention patterns manifest
themselves along lines of the attention matrix and these are the directions we expend them. Theo-
retically, we could explore any direction but empirically we find it suffices to try the diagonal, the
anti-diagonal, and vertical lines. The figure below visualizes the said directions, with line sums
annotated on the sides:

       d0      d1      d2 · · ·            ···      d−2 d−1      d0                   d0      d1       d2    ···
                                                            
            A1,1    A1,2      A1,3         A1,1      A1,2 A1,3                    
                                                                                    A1,1     A1,2     A1,3
                                                                                                             
     d−1                                                     d1                                       
         A         A2,2      A2,3 
                                     A2,1          A2,2 A2,3 
                                     
          2,1                                                                    A         A2,2     A2,3 
     d−2                                                       d2                2,1
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                        
      .. A3,1       A3,2      A3,3     A3,1          A3,2 A3,3    ..
       .                                                           .                A3,1     A3,2     A3,3
             (a) Diagonals.                      (b) Anti-diagonals.                       (c) Verticals.

                    Figure 3: Examples of the different diagonals ABC can take


For all directions we consider, let l be the set of elements on a line, we perform the following steps:
2.1. Averaging across Lines:
                                                       1 X
                                             dl =          Āi,j
                                                      |l|
                                                           (i,j)∈l


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This step effectively “summarizes” each line into a single value.
2.2. Bias Matrix Extension: Next we extend Ā into any arbitrary size Ã ∈ RM ×N via:

                                  dropoff (dl − dmax ), if l exists in Ā
                        Ãi,j =                                                                     (1)
                                  − inf,                otherwise

where dmax is the maximum value of dl ’s among all the lines of Ā, and


                                                      x,     if x > threshold
                                  dropoff (x) =
                                                      − inf, otherwise

What this process does is actually very simple: for the elements along the extension of existing lines
of Ā, it first subtracts dmax from dl , then cuts off at a threshold. Elements not on the extensions
of Ā’s lines will be set to − inf. For our task, the dropout threshold is set to 2σ + µ, where σ and µ
are the standard deviation and the mean of all the dl ’s, respectively. This is a very strict threshold,
meaning that it only preserves really strong patterns. For other tasks where patterns are not that
obvious, a softer threshold value or even no dropout may be used.
2.4. Finalization: The final bias matrix Ã is obtained by performing an element-wise max operation
among the matrices from equation 1 across all directions. We then repeat for each of the heads,
equipping them with independent biases. If the final bias matrix consists of only − inf’s, meaning
that no pattern is picked up, we replace every − inf with 0, effectively leaving it “transparent”.
The complete and detailed algorithm is presented in appendix B.
3. Re-training with Attention Biases: After the attention biases for each head have been con-
structed, we train another model on the same input sequences Sint with the constructed attention
biases added to the attention weights.
                                                      ⊤
                               Ai,j = xi W Q W K x⊤
                                                  j + Ãi,j ,       Ã ∈ RM ×N

Note that in this work the bias matrices are obtained from the last decoder layer and applied to all
layers during re-train. More flexible configuration such as per-layer bias could work better for more
complex tasks.


6       M AIN R ESULTS

A prerequisite of ABC is that the vanilla Transformer must be able to train to interpolate. Among
the tasks we study, as discussed in section A.6, Parity is apparently a failure. Thus we implement
the vanilla Transformer (with sinusoidal PE), ALiBi, RoPE, and ABC, and test on the rest of the
tasks.
The accuracy vs. input length curves of different models on Successor and Addition have been
plotted in figure 1 at the beginning of this paper. The overall performance on all tasks is summarized
in table 1. We observe that ABC performs vastly superior to other models across all tasks, achieving
near-perfect accuracies up to 50 digits.
Figure 4 and 5 visualize the cross attention bias matrices, one for each head, learned by ABC, for
Addition and N × 1, respectively. Since the most meaningful attention activities happen in cross-
attention, where the model is attending to the input sequence, we do not show self-attention biases.
Each color map is plotted using a colorbar scaling of [minh (Ãh ), maxh (Ãh )] for each individual
head. Head bias with a small variance will result in a “transparent” bias matrix with all 0’s after
drop-off, in which case the 0’s are painted black. Note that addition is a binary operation so the
input length is twice the output sequence thus the matrices in figure 4 are rectangles instead of
squares.
    6
        An encoder-only architecture with shared layers.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Extrapolation results measured as percent accuracy (%). Numbers in bold show the best
accuracies achieved for the corresponding input length limit.

                                                  Length (Number of Digits)
                     Task       Model       6        10     15      20      50
                                Vanilla   100.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
                  Successor     ALiBi      1.3       0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
                                 RoPE     100.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
                                 ABC      100.0     100.0   100.0    100.0    100.0
                                Vanilla   100.0      0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
                                ALiBi      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
                   Addition      RoPE     100.0      0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
                                 RPE∗     100.0     99.9     97.2     21.3     N/A
                                 ABC      100.0     100.0    99.9     99.9     99.8
                                Vanilla 100.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
                    N ×1         ABC 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0                  100.0
                              * Data taken from Jelassi et al. (2023). 6


                         Figure 4: ABC cross attention bias for Addition


                            Figure 5: ABC cross attention bias for N × 1


A few interesting patterns emerge. First, since the model generates output tokens in a reversed
order, most of the open elements are along the anti-diagonal direction for both tasks. Second, there
is a clear division of labor among the heads, which is consistent with the findings in A.3. More
specifically, in Addition, heads 1, 4, 7 attend to the first operand, while the remaining heads
attend to the second. In N × 1, most heads attend to the multi-digit number and the multiplication
sign while one of the heads, head 4, attends to the single-digit operand. Note that there are vertical
lines in heads 1, 3, and 7 as well. Third, the different patterns show that our bias generation process
is effective: the anti-diagonal and vertical patterns are learned by searching the (1, 0) and (1, −1)
directions respectively, Note that there is an empty bias consisting of all 0s in 5 (head 5). This
indicates that ABC did not pick up any patterns in that head.
Running Time. ABC requires a retraining stage. However, with the help of attention bias masks,
this stage converges very fast. We observe that the time needed to retrain the model is only 1/100 to
1/10 of the time for training the model to interpolate.

7   ABC AS A G ENERALIZED RPE
It turns out that ABC has a close tie to the relative position encoding (RPE) of Shaw et al. (2018)
which has been shown to be a very robust PE and the foundation of many other variants (Dufter
et al., 2022). Shaw et al. (2018) biases the attention at two places: (1) when computing the dot-
product between query and key; and (2) when producing the weighted sum of value vectors. (2) has
been shown to be not very useful (Shaw et al., 2018). Let xi be the embedding vector of the i-th


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


token, (1) is implemented as follows:
                                                                 ⊤
                                         (xi W Q )(xj W K + aK
                                                             ij )
                                   eij =             √
                                                        dk
                                    K
                                   aij = wclip(j−i,k) .

where w’s are a set of learned vectors and the bias vector aKij is selected from the set by a clipped
indexing scheme: clip(x, k) = max(−k, min(k, x)). That is, tokens more than k units from the
current query token will be clipped to k. Note that the selection of w vector depends solely on the
relative distance between the query token i and the key token j.
It is clear that both RPE and ABC bias the attention matrix. In the case of RPE, this is done by a
vector inside the dot-product, whereas ABC achieves this with a scalar bias on the exterior. If we
view elements in the bias matrices and which parameter determines each of them, then we can see
the remarkable similarities between RPE and ABC. Figure 6 shows a comparison between attention
bias matrices of RPE and ABC for the case extending along the diagonal. ABC averages along each
of the k-diagonals at step 2.1 during its procedure. Thus for query i and key j, the bias is dj−i . The
indexing scheme is exactly the same as that of RPE. And there is an implicit clipping too: for an
attention matrix of dimensions m × n with m ≤ n, the set of possible k values for valid k-diagonals
are {−(m − 1), −(m − 2), . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , (n − 1)}, a total of m + n − 1. When extending to
M × N , any elements outside those lines are set to − inf. Effectively, this is an asymmetric clipping
function: clip(j − i, m − 1, n − 1).
                                                                                
                                                             d0    d1     d2
                w0     w1     w2                                              
                                                         d        d0     d1 
            w−1       w0     w1                           −1                
                                                                            
             w−2       w−1    w0                             d−2     d−1    d0

               Figure 6: Factors determining bias weights in RPE (left) and ABC (right).


One difference between RPE and ABC is that RPE learns these parameters during training, whereas
in ABC, the biases are calculated from correct interpolation results. In a sense, ABC is more general
and, by scanning more directions, it has the potential to discover more regularities automatically.

8   D ISCUSSION

It is important to clarify the scope and limitations of our work. Ours is an initial attempt to study
the roles of attention in transformer’s learning. And our definition of learning is achieving complete
length generalization. To this end, we need to find tasks on which transformers can generalize.
Surprisingly, even for tasks as simple as addition, no previous transformer model ever succeeded. We
take this as an indication that our understanding of the model’s learning mechanism is inadequate.
Therefore, the successful cases obtained in this paper, either via ABS or ABC, even though only
on simple recurrent patterns and task-specific models, solve a few long-standing difficult or even
“impossible” tasks (e.g., Parity) and represent a significant step forward.
In order for ABC to work, the vanilla model must be able to interpolate, achieving near perfect
accuracy within the training lengths. With the model scales we experimented and the amount of
resources we had, we only made a few tasks work. Besides the tasks we have presented, we could
only solve a simplified single-operator, single-depth ListOps task via ABS. Detailed solution is
presented in appendix C. More complex tasks, such as multi-digit multiplication and multi-depth
ListOps, appear to require composition of those simple patterns. Learning such compositions may
require scaling up the model dramatically, as the heuristic in the NDR paper (Csordás et al., 2022)
indicates. We leave them as future research.
There are a lot of opportunities for future exploration. The connection between ABC and RPE
indicates that ABC could have potential applications in other fields such as NLP as well. We believe
its potential in these fields is a direction worth investigating.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Johan Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur.
  Exploring length generalization in large language models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal,
  Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zSkYVeX7bC4.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Shouyuan Chen, Sherman Wong, Liangjian Chen, and Yuandong Tian. Extending context window
  of large language models via positional interpolation, 2023.
Ta-Chung Chi, Ting-Han Fan, Peter J. Ramadge, and Alexander I. Rudnicky. Kerple: Kernelized
  relative positional embedding for length extrapolation, 2022.
Ta-Chung Chi, Ting-Han Fan, Alexander Rudnicky, and Peter Ramadge. Dissecting transformer
  length extrapolation via the lens of receptive field analysis. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13522–
  13537, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.756. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.756.
David Chiang and Peter Cholak. Overcoming a theoretical limitation of self-attention. In Proceed-
  ings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 7654–7664, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.527. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.527.
Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The neural data router: Adaptive control flow
  in transformers improves systematic generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KBQP4A_J1K.
Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Juergen Schmidhuber. The Devil is in the Detail: Simple Tricks
  Improve Systematic Generalization of Transformers. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang,
  Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
  cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 619–634, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
  Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.49. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.49.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context, 2019.
Gregoire Deletang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt,
  Chris Cundy, Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, Joel Veness, and Pedro A Ortega. Neural networks and
  the chomsky hierarchy. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WbxHAzkeQcn.
Rohan Deshpande, Jerry Chen, and Isabelle G. Lee. Rect: A recursive transformer architecture for
  generalizable mathematical reasoning. In International Workshop on Neural-Symbolic Learn-
  ing and Reasoning, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  239029449.
Philipp Dufter, Martin Schmitt, and Hinrich Schütze. Position Information in Transformers: An
  Overview. Computational Linguistics, 48(3):733–763, 09 2022. ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/
  coli_a_00445. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_a_00445.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00306.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.11.
Samy Jelassi, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Yuhuai Wu, Yuanzhi Li, and François
  Charton. Length generalization in arithmetic transformers, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Inkit Padhi, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Payel Das, and Siva
 Reddy. The impact of positional encoding on length generalization in transformers, 2023.
Nayoung Lee, Kartik Sreenivasan, Jason D. Lee, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
  Teaching arithmetic to small transformers, 2023.
Jindřich Libovický, Jindřich Helcl, and David Mareček. Input combination strategies for multi-
   source transformer decoder. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation,
   Volume 1: Research Papers, pp. 253–260, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2018. Association for Compu-
   tational Linguistics. ISBN 978-1-948087-81-0.
Tom M. Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations. Technical report, Rutgers Uni-
  versity, New Brunswick, NJ, 1980. URL http://dml.cs.byu.edu/~cgc/docs/mldm_
  tools/Reading/Need%20for%20Bias.pdf.
Nikita Nangia and Samuel Bowman. ListOps: A diagnostic dataset for latent tree learning. In Sil-
  vio Ricardo Cordeiro, Shereen Oraby, Umashanthi Pavalanathan, and Kyeongmin Rim (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pp. 92–99, New Orleans, Louisiana,
  USA, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-4013. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N18-4013.
Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, and Jimmy Lin. Investigating the limitations of transformers with
  simple arithmetic tasks, 2021.
Santiago Ontanon, Joshua Ainslie, Zachary Fisher, and Vaclav Cvicek. Making transformers solve
  compositional tasks. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 3591–3607, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.251. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.251.
Bowen Peng, Jeffrey Quesnelle, Honglu Fan, and Enrico Shippole. Yarn: Efficient context window
  extension of large language models, 2023.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gener-
  alization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets, 2022.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
  input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0.
Anian Ruoss, Grégoire Delétang, Tim Genewein, Jordi Grau-Moya, Róbert Csordás, Mehdi Ben-
  nani, Shane Legg, and Joel Veness. Randomized positional encodings boost length general-
  ization of transformers. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 1889–1903, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.161. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.161.
Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani. Self-attention with relative position representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp.
  464–468, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/N18-2074. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-2074.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2022.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Makoto Yamada, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Transformer dissection: An unified understanding for transformer’s attention via
  the lens of kernel. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4344–4353, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
    putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1443. URL https://aclanthology.org/
    D19-1443.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.

Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie
  Sedghi. Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning, 2022.



A     ATTENTION B IAS S CAFFOLDING D ETAILS

In this section we provide more details on the importance of attention and our attention bias scaffold-
ing methods. We develop our ideas through a series of initial experimentations, attention weights
analysis, and final verification.
Existing approaches to optimizing length generalization of Transformer models have been focusing
on two aspects: positional encoding (PE) or/and attention bias (AB). The two concepts are closely
related. In fact, we believe they should be treated as two sides of the same coin: All PEs influence
the attention, and almost all ABs, with the exception of no PE at all such as Kazemnejad et al.
(2023) and ours, rely on position information to determine the bias. However, the best-performing
AB methods’ dependency on positional information is indirect: the bias is often determined by the
distance between tokens, instead of their positions. Examples include ALiBi (Press et al., 2022)
and RPE (Shaw et al., 2018). In addition, as our ABS and ABC schemes show, AB can work well
without any position information. This is consistent with the findings of some previous works. For
example, although Transformer’s attention mechanism is order-invariant, decoder-only Transform-
ers with causal attention mask are not and can model sequences without explicit position information
(Tsai et al., 2019).

A.1    O UR THOUGHTS AND FINDINGS

We have an interesting finding in a similar tune. That is, with our mechanism that enables the model
to attend to the correct tokens, explicit position encoding is indeed not always necessary, even for
achieving perfect generalization. With our architecture, cross-attention allows the model to attend
to the correct input while self-attention relays the information from the previous step.
This leads us to believe that positional encoding or embedding is not the key to achieving good
generalization. The right attention is. PE and AB are just means to attain the latter. Since there is
no universal PE or AB that generalizes well on all tasks, for the tasks that we study in this work,
auxiliary means that target directly at the attention could be used to achieve better generalization.

A.2    I NITIAL E XPERIMENTATION

To develop our ideas, we first train vanilla Transformers with some commonly used length gen-
eralization methods, including the original sinusoidal positional encoding, ALiBi, and RoPE, and
examine the results.
Figure 7 shows the results on Successor and Addition. All models achieve some levels of
interpolation but none could extrapolate beyond training length. Among them, RoPE and vanilla
Transformer perform almost identically, dropping precipitously to almost 0 accuracy once the length
goes beyond 6. Note that the RoPE implementation for Addition must use an embedding size of
512 otherwise it converges very slowly.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Successor                                                                  Addition
                               1                                                                      1
                                                               Vanilla                                                                  Vanilla
                                                               ALiBi                                                                    ALiBi
        Model Accuracy [%]


                                                                                Model Accuracy [%]
                                                               RoPE                                                                     RoPE


                              0.5                                                                    0.5


                               0                                                                      0
                                    0       5       10        15         20                                0        5         10       15         20
                                                  Length                                                                    Length

Figure 7: Extrapolation results for models trained on Lint ≤ 6 on Successor and Addition.
Length is measured in the number of digits of one operand.


We observe similar patterns with other tasks. Table 2 summarizes Vanilla Transformer’s capabilities
for interpolation and extrapolation capabilities on these tasks. We single out the Vanilla model
because our ABC scheme works only when the Vanilla model can interpolate.

                                                                         Interpolation                         Extrapolation
                                                  Successor                   ✓                                     ✗
                                                  Addition                    ✓                                     ✗
                                                  Parity                       ✗                                    ✗
                                                  N ×1                        ✓                                     ✗

                                    Table 2: Vanilla Transformer’s interpolation and extrapolation capabilities.


A.3                     ATTENTION A NALYSIS

To figure out the causes of failure to extrapolate, we extract and analyze the attention weights of the
vanilla model on Successor and Addition. Figure 8 gives an example of the attention heat map
of one specific head in the last decoder layer during a Successor task. Lighter colors represent
higher weights.


                                        (a) Cross Attention                                                             (b) Self Attention

                             Figure 8: Attention heat map on “03611451449241919819” for Successor.


For the sequence 03611451449241919819,                        the correct output should be
03611451449241919820. Note that we reverse the output digits during training so the
model also generates output starting from the lowest digit and working upwards. The model is
correct until the hundred-thousands digit. For an input sequence of length n, to generate the i-th
digit for Successor correctly, the crucial information lies in the (n − i + 1)-th input token and
the (i − 1)-th output token (for possible carry).7 This means that the correct attention pattern should
   7
       Note that the tokens are generated in a lowest-digit first order.


                                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


light up the “anti-diagonal” (the diagonal from top-right to bottom-left) for the cross attention
matrix and “subdiagonal” (the diagonal directly under the main diagonal) for self-attention. From
figure 8 it is clear that the Vanilla Transformer correctly learns the attention pattern up to the
hundred-thousands digit and fails beyond that. This correlates perfectly with the extrapolation
performance shown in figure 7.
For Addition, we look at individual heads. Figure 9 shows an example of the attention heat maps
of two specific heads in the last decoder layer during an addition task.


            (a) Decoder Cross Attention                            (b) Decoder Self Attention

         Figure 9: Attention heat map on “078114514+0241919810” for Addition.


In this case we find that there appears to be a sort of differentiation of tasks, where one head looks
at the first operand and the other looks at the second. The results are consistent with those found
in Successor, that the model does a good job identifying which token to attend to up to the
maximum training length. Again this echoes with the extrapolation performance of figure 7.

A.4   ATTENTION B IAS S CAFFOLDING

To future validate our hypothesis, we introduce a number of methods that guide the model to attend
to the right places. The ideas are inspired by existing methods for assisting model learning. Those
we find effective in arithmetic learning include the following:
Input Alignment
When we humans perform arithmetic computations, input alignment is a common practice that
facilitates the process. For example, for multi-digit addition, we write the numbers one below the
other, aligning them based on place value. We then add from the rightmost digit, propagating through
the left, memorizing carries. Without PE/AB, the original Transformer’s attention is order-invariant,
and, theoretically, the importance of context does not depend on recency. However, certain input
representations result in simplified attention patterns that can be captured by the windowed biasing
introduced next. Therefore we interleave the digits from the two operands for binary operations so
that digits from each operand that should be attended to together are adjacent. Specifically, for a
binary operator ⊕ (such as +), and two n-digit numbers a = an an−1 . . . a1 and b = bn bn−1 . . . b1
where ai and bi are their digits in the proper base representation, the input sequence is transformed
as

                   an an−1 . . . a1 ⊕ bn bn−1 . . . b1 −→ ⊕an bn an−1 bn−1 . . . a1 b1

N × 1 is different since the second operand, say b, is single-digit. In this case, we just insert b into
the right side of each digit of a:

                             an an−1 . . . a1 × b −→ ×an ban−1 b . . . a1 b

Note that input alignment is only used for ABS, to make the attention pattern simply so subsequent
methods could “scaffold” the attention to longer inputs more easily. We do not need to use it for
ABC because ABC could automatically learn the correct patterns. The input to the ABC model is
simply the “natural” expression (e.g., 0123+0456 or 0123*6).
Windowed Attention Biasing


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Biasing towards recency and penalizing attention scores between distant query-key pairs is the basic
idea of ABs such as ALiBi (Press et al., 2022). The windowed attention biasing developed by
Lonformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) uses a sliding window to control which parts of the attention matrix
are “open”. We can customize it according to the attention patterns we want to enforce.
Specifically, recall that omitting head indexing, given query, key, and value matrices, the Trans-
former model (Vaswani et al., 2017) computes attention scores as:

                                                                     QK T
                                       Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax( √ )V
                                                                       d
                     T
Let A0 = QK  √
               d
                  be the original attention weight matrix before softmax, we bias the weights by
A = A0 +Bw , where w is a parameter specifying the window width. The basic idea for constructing
Bw is setting a subset of its elements to 0, and the rest to − inf. This essentially masks out certain
elements of A to − inf, which, after softmax, results in 0 weights for corresponding tokens,
The construction of Bw depends on the recurrent pattern that encodes the inductive bias about the
task (Beltagy et al., 2020). Figure 10 shows the patterns for our tasks. For unary operations, such as
successor and parity, generating the current output token depends on the previous output token and
one input token at the corresponding position, shown by figure 10 (a). Binary operations, such as
addition and N × 1, share the same output token dependency but different input token dependency.
In this case, since we align digits from the two operands, as shown in figure 10 (b), the context
window spans two consecutive input tokens and also slides two positions at a time.

                                                   Input Sequence                                 Output Sequence

                                                                                 Cross Attn


                (a) Step = 1 (Unary Ops):                                                     Self Attn


                                             ...       6      3     9    9                    0           0   ...   ...


                                                                             Cross Attn

                (b) Step = 2 (Binary Ops):
                                                                                              Self Attn


                                             ...       6      3     9    9                    8           0   ...   ...



                          Figure 10: Attention patterns for unary and binary operations.


For an input length S and output length L, the bias for decoder self-attention is

                          0,       if i − k = j for i, j = 1, . . . , L, k = 0, . . . , w
                  Bw =
                          − inf, otherwise

That is, the elements of the matrix are all set to − inf except those on the main diagonal and w
elements below. Note that, following the traditional practice (Vaswani et al., 2017) of decoder
masking, all elements above the main diagonal are set to − inf to prevent the decoder from seeing
future tokens.
Cross attention bias is similar, with three differences: (1) Since the order of output sequence is
reversed, the “open” context windows go along the anti-diagonal direction; (2) Since we align the
input digits, the window spans, and also steps over, two positions for binary operations; (3) The
open context window extends to both left and right w positions. 8
Figure 11 is a visualization for the case of w = 1.

   8
       Self attention bias only extends to the left.


                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Cross Attention                                     Self Attention


                                                                 0   0   0

                                                            0    0   0         0

 Step = 1,                                              0   0    0             0      0
 (Unary Ops):
                                                  0     0   0                         0      0

                                          0       0     0                                    0      0

                                  0       0       0                                                 0      0

                                                                                                           0     0

                                              0
                                                            0    0   0   0

                                                  0     0   0    0
                                                                             Left: Bias matrices for cross attention with
                                                                             window size 1 for unary (top) and binary
 Step = 2,                        0       0       0     0                    (bottom) ops.

 (Binary Ops):            0   0   0       0                                  Right: Bias matrix for self attention with
                                                                             window size 1 for both unary and binary
                                                                             ops.
                  0   0   0   0

                  0   0



                 Figure 11: Attention bias matrices for unary and binary operations.


Cyclic Position Indexing (CPI)
Position indexing refers to how we identify each individual position. The simplest way is just to
index them 0, 1, . . .. Positional embedding mechanisms are then constructed based on this indexing.
Very recently, manipulating position indexing has become an effective and trending method for
expanding context windows for Transformer-based LLMs. For example, Chen et al. (2023) and
its NTK-aware variant (Peng et al., 2023) modify RoPE with “interpolated” position indices to
increase the “density” of positions within the pre-trained context window, thus effectively extending
its length.
The motivation for using CPI in our tasks is that large position indices unseen during training may
confuse the model. And for arithmetic tasks that admit recurrent generation rules, it is not necessary
to identify tokens that are not being currently attended to either. As long as the period is compatible
with the context window, it should provide the model with a clear mechanism to differentiate the
relevant tokens without diverting its attention. For arithmetic tasks, our empirical study shows that
the model is not sensitive to the value of T as long as it produces an open window whose width
is approximately that of the bias context window as shown in figure 10. We believe it might be of
independent interest for other application secenarios.

A.5      VALIDATION R ESULTS

To evaluate the effectiveness of the above mechanisms, we conduct extensive experiments on each
of the arithmetic tasks with the following configurations:

      (A) Vanilla: Vanilla Transformer with sinusoidal PE.
      (B) + w = 1: (A) + windowed attention biasing with w = 1.
      (C) + T = 3: (B) + additional CPI with a period of T = 3.
      (D) NoPE + w = 1: Windowed attention biasing only, without PE at all, with w = 1.

We experimented with a few different w and T values and found that slight variations do not produce
very different results thus we report the best-performing configurations above.
Results are presented in table 3. None of the previous works achieves extrapolation on any of the
tasks. RPE (Jelassi et al., 2023) maintains 90+% accuracy up to 20 digits but does not go beyond.
Vanilla Transformer and RoPE could interpolate, achieving 100% accuracy for 6-digit inputs, for all


                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Extrapolation results measured as percent accuracy (%). Numbers in bold show the best
accuracies achieved for the corresponding input length limit.

                                                      Length (Number of Digits)

            Task           Model           6        10           15            20       50
                             Vanilla     100.0     0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                            +w=1         100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                            +T =3        100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
         Successor     NoPE + w = 1      100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                              ALiBi       1.3      0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                              RoPE       100.0     0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                             Vanilla     100.0     0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                            +w=1         100.0     0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                            +T =3        100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
          Addition     NoPE + w = 1      99.95    99.81         99.84        99.76    99.35
                              ALiBi       0.0      0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                              RoPE       100.0      0             0            0        0
                              RPE∗       100.0    99.9          97.2         21.3      N/A
                        Transformer†                        52.00† /52.60‡
           Parity           +w=1         100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                            +T =3        100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                       NoPE + w = 1      100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                             Vanilla     100.0     0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
                            +w=1         100.0     6.0          0.19          0.0      0.0
           N ×1             +T =3        100.0    100.0         100.0        100.0    100.0
                       NoPE + w = 1      99.89    99.63         99.49        99.39    98.31
                              RoPE       100.0      0             0            0        0
* Data taken from Jelassi et al. (2023) which is an encoder-only architecture with shared layers.
† Data taken from Deletang et al. (2023) which evaluates five encodings (none, sin/cos, RoPE,
ALiBi, and the relative positional encoding from Transformer-XL) and reports the best-performing
variant.
‡ Data taken from Ruoss et al. (2023) which uses randomized positional encodings to boost length
generalization.


the tasks. ALiBi does not even interpolate. Its accuracies drop to near 0s on all tasks beyond 3 or 4
digits (figure 7).
On the other hand, our solutions (windowed attention biasing + CPI) achieve complete length gen-
eralization on all tasks, maintaining 100% accuracy up to 50 digits. Unary tasks (Successor and
Parity) appear to be not relying on any positional embedding at all once the windowed attention
biasing is in place, which is also robust against possible perturbation of any PE.
For binary tasks (Addition and N ×1), on the other hand, there appears to be some bad interaction
between the original sinusoidal PE and windowed attention biasing. Both the original sinusoidal PE
and +w = 1 (sinusoidal PE with windowed bias) configurations only achieve interpolation but not
extrapolation. Windowed biasing without any PE at all (NoPE+w = 1) results in a slightly imperfect
generalization for both binary tasks.

A.6   T HE C ASE OF PARITY

The case of Parity deserves more explanation. Parity is a well-known failure mode for Trans-
formers. Hahn (2020) shows that, for self-attention models with soft attention (e.g., a typical Trans-
former), the change in activation at the decoder layer that changing a single input symbol can cause
is bounded by O(1/n) where n is the input length (Lemma 5). This means that for tasks that are


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sensitive to changes of a small number of input symbols, such as Parity, Transformer models
cannot make accurate predictions for long sequences, as softmax is unable to produce very different
predictions for inputs that result in similar activations. This is consistent with other works such as
Deletang et al. (2023), all of which obtain performances slightly better than random guessing. Dele-
tang et al. (2023) prove that there exists a Transformer construction that can achieve perfect Parity,
but such a construction is not learnable.
Ours is the first learnable Transformer that obtains perfect accuracy and length generalization for the
Parity task. We overcome the difficulties of Hahn (2020) by applying the “scaffolding” methods
introduced earlier. Mathematically, our attention guiding can be seen as allowing the model to
produce (partial) results based on only local tokens, effectively reducing n to a constant window
size.


B    A LGORITHM FOR ABC


Algorithm 1 Attention Bias Calibration (ABC) for non-negative ∆ 9
Input:
Ain : The attention tensor with dimensions [H, m, n], where h represents the number of heads and
m, n represents the number of rows and columns in each attention matrix, respectively.
M, N : The dimensions of the output bias matrix
D: A set of tuples (1, ∆). It represents the set of all directions we want to search for patterns.
Output: Ã, a tensor with the dimensions [H, M, N ], representing the bias matrix for each head.
 1: for h ← 1 to H do
 2:     for (1, ∆) ∈ D do                                                           ▷ Iterate Directions
 3:         for i ← 1 to M do
 4:             for j ← 1 to N do
 5:                 while k + i ≤ m and k∆ + j ≤ n, k ∈ Z do
 6:                     Ãtmp [h][(1, ∆)][i][j]+ = Ain [h][k + i][k∆ + j]
 7:                     size+ = 1
 8:                 end while
 9:                 Ãtmp [h][(1, ∆)][i][j]/ = size                  ▷ Average diagonals (if size ̸= 0)
10:             end for
11:         end for
12:         for i ← 1 to M do
13:             for j ← 1 to N do
14:                 Ãtmp [h][(1, ∆)][i][j] ← Ã[h][i][j] − max(Ã)                         ▷ Normalize
15:             end for
16:         end for
17:         for i ← 1 to M do
18:             for j ← 1 to N do
19:                 Ãtmp [h][(1, ∆)][i][j] ← dropout(Ã[h][i][j])                            ▷ Dropout
20:             end for
21:         end for
22:     end for
23:     for i ← 1 to M do
24:         for j ← 1 to N do
25:             Ã[h][i][j] ← max(Ãtmp [h][(1, ∆)][i][j], Ã[h][i][j)              ▷ Merge directions
26:         end for
27:     end for
28: end for
29: return Ã


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C       S OLUTION TO S INGLE -O PERATOR , S INGLE -D EPTH L IST O PS TASK
A single-operator, single-depth ListOps task is a ListOps task restricted to a single operator and
depth 1. The problem essentially reduces to a prefix arithmetic task of the form

                                         ⊕xn xn−1 . . . x1 → y

where ⊕ is the operator, and xi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 9}. In this task, we only support operators that are
associative. They include SM, MAX, and MIN.
Since the operators are all associative, we turn this task into a sequence-to-sequence form using the
idea similar to how we handle the parity problem. That is, we start with the right-most argument,
and work to the left digit by digit, generating intermediate results and appending them to the target:

                                y1 = x1 , yi = yi−1 ⊕ xi , i = 2, . . . , n.

This is in the exact same form as the Parity problem, except in decimal instead of binary, and we
solve it using the same windowed attention with w = 1 and T = 3.


    9
   The algorithm for negative ∆ is identical except that, before invoking the same procedure, we translate
Ain N − n + 1 elements to the right so that the top-right corners of Ain and Ã align.


                                                    19
