Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ENERAL -P URPOSE I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING
BY M ETA -L EARNING T RANSFORMERS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Modern machine learning requires system designers to specify aspects of the
         learning pipeline, such as losses, architectures, and optimizers. Meta-learning,
         or learning-to-learn, instead aims to learn those aspects, and promises to un-
         lock greater capabilities with less manual effort. One particularly ambitious goal
         of meta-learning is to train general-purpose in-context learning algorithms from
         scratch, using only black-box models with minimal inductive bias. Such a model
         takes in training data, and produces test-set predictions across a wide range of
         problems, without any explicit definition of an inference model, training loss, or
         optimization algorithm. In this paper we show that Transformers and other black-
         box models can be meta-trained to act as general-purpose in-context learners. We
         characterize transitions between algorithms that generalize, algorithms that mem-
         orize, and algorithms that fail to meta-train at all, induced by changes in model
         size, number of tasks, and meta-optimization. We further show that the capabili-
         ties of meta-trained algorithms are bottlenecked by the accessible state size (mem-
         ory) determining the next prediction, unlike standard models which are thought to
         be bottlenecked by parameter count. Finally, we propose practical interventions
         such as biasing the training distribution that improve the meta-training and meta-
         generalization of general-purpose in-context learning algorithms.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Meta-learning is the process of automatically discovering new learning algorithms instead of de-
signing them manually (Schmidhuber, 1987). An important quality of human-engineered learning
algorithms, such as backpropagation and gradient descent, is their applicability to a wide range of
tasks or environments. For learning-to-learn to exceed those capabilities, the meta-learned learn-
ing algorithms must be similarily general-purpose. Recently, there has been significant progress
toward this goal (Kirsch et al., 2019; Oh et al., 2020). The improved generality of the discovered
learning algorithms has been achieved by introducing inductive bias, such as by bottlenecking the
architecture or by hiding information, which encourage learning over memorization. Methods in-
clude restricting learning rules to use gradients (Metz et al., 2019; Kirsch et al., 2019; Oh et al.,
2020), symbolic graphs (Real et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al., 2021), or parameter sharing (Kirsch &
Schmidhuber, 2020; Kirsch et al., 2021).
While enabling generalization, these inductive biases come at the cost of increasing the effort to
design these systems and potentially restrict the space of discoverable learning algorithms. Instead,
we seek to explore general-purpose meta-learning systems with minimal inductive bias. Good can-
didates for this are black-box sequence-models as meta-learners such as LSTMs (Hochreiter et al.,
2001; Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016) or Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). These memory-
based or in-context learners take in training data and produce test-set predictions without any explicit
definition of an inference model, training loss, or optimization algorithm. With recent advances of
in-context learning in large language models (Brown et al., 2020), neural networks can already learn
many concepts from demonstrations. What are the necessary conditions such that those models can
learn from a wide range of demonstrations? To what extent can we elicit in-context learning that
generalizes to a wider range of problems, in a similar way how learning via backpropagation and
gradient descent can generalize?
In this work, we investigate how such in-context meta-learners can be trained to (meta-)generalize
and learn on significantly different datasets than used during meta-training. For this we propose a

                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Transformer-based General-Purpose In-Context Learner (GPICL) which is described with an as-
sociated meta-training task distribution in Section 3. In Section 4.1 we characterize algorithmic
transitions—induced by scaling the number of tasks or the model size used for meta-training—
between memorization, task identification, and general learning-to-learn. We further show in Sec-
tion 4.2 that the capabilities of meta-trained algorithms are bottlenecked by their accessible state
(memory) size determining the next prediction (such as the hidden state size in a recurrent net-
work), unlike standard models which are thought to be bottlenecked by parameter count. Finally,
in Section 4.3, we propose practical interventions that improve the meta-training of general purpose
learning algorithms. Additional related work can be found in Section A.1.

2    BACKGROUND
What is a (supervised) learning algorithm? In this paper, we focus on the setting of meta-
learning supervised in-context learning algorithms. Consider a mapping

                                                         0
                                        {xi , yi }N
                                                  i=1 , x
                                                    D
                                                             7→ y 0                    (1)

from the training (support) set D = {xi , yi }N                           0
                                               i=1 and a query input x to the query’s prediction y
                                                 D                                                      0
            0     Nx       0     Ny                       +
where xi , x ∈ R , yi , y ∈ R and ND , Nx , Ny ∈ N . The subset of these functions that qualify
as learning algorithms are those that improve their predictions y 0 given an increasingly larger training
set D. Meta-learning then corresponds to finding these functions via meta-optimization. As in other
black-box meta-learning models, we use a neural network to represent such functions. Such in-
context learning is different from gradient-based meta-learning (such as MAML (Finn et al., 2017))
in that no explicit gradients are computed at meta-test time. All required mechanisms for learning
are implicitly encoded in the black-box neural network.
What is a general-purpose learning algo-


                                                                                                                      s
                                                                        g


                                                                                                                   sk
                                                                        in


                                                                                                      s


                                                                                                                Ta
                                                                                                      sk
                                                                      iz


rithm? A learning algorithm can be consid-
                                                                     g


                                                                                                    Ta
                                                                   al
                                                                  in


                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                              ee
                                                                er
                                                              n


                                                                                              en
                                                           ar

                                                             en


                                                                                                            ns
ered general-purpose if it learns on a wide range
                                                         Le


                                                                                            Se
                                                                Algorithm Description
                                                                  G


                                                                                                           U
of possible tasks D and their respective related
queries x0 , y 0 . In this paper, we are interested  7     7     Task memorization
in strong generalization across entirely differ-
ent datasets such as MNIST, Fashion MNIST,
                                                                                      Performance
                                                     3     7     Task identification
and CIFAR10. Human-engineered learning al-
gorithms such as gradient-descent on a suit-
able loss function can be considered general-        7     3   Zero-shot generalization
purpose learning algorithms that can be applied
to any of these datasets (where the gradient is                   General-purpose
obtained via backpropagation or other means). 3            3
                                                                 learning algorithm
Meta-learners often don’t generalize that well                                             Examples seen
at meta-test time when we have an entirely new
dataset that we want to learn on. We set out to     Table  1: An  algorithm       encoded   in a neural net-
investigate under which conditions in-context       work  can be classified    along    two different dimen-
learning generalizes well. In comparison to in- sions: To what extent it learns and to what extent
context learning, gradient-based methods like it generalizes.
MAML hard-code the human-engineered learning algorithm of gradient descent and inherit its gen-
eralization properties.

3    G ENERAL -P URPOSE I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING
Due to the small number of inductive biases in black-box models, we can only expect (meta-
)generalization when meta-training with an appropriately broad data distribution. Thus, changes
in the data distribution affect whether and how a model meta-learns and meta-generalizes. We clas-
sify algorithms along two different dimensions: To what extent it learns (improving predictions
given increasingly larger training sets provided at inference time), and to what extent it generalizes
(performs well on instances, tasks, or datasets not seen before). Algorithms can then be categorized
as in Table 1. In task memorization, the model immediately performs well on seen tasks but does
not generalize. In task identification, the model identifies the task and gets better on it at inference
time as it sees more examples but can only do so on tasks very similar to what it was trained on. In


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Meta-Training for General-Purpose In-Context Learning (GPICL) via Augmentation
Require: Dataset D̄ = {x̄i , ȳi }, Number of tasks K ∈ N+
  # Define p(D) by augmenting D̄, here by:
     (k)                 1
  {Aij }Kk=1 ∼ N (0, Nx )                                          . Sample input projections
    (k) K
  {ρ }k=1 ∼ p(ρ)                                                . Sample output permutations
  D(k) = {A(k) x̄i , ρ(k) (ȳi )}
  p(D) := Uniform[{D(k) }K       k=1 ]

  # Meta-Training on p(D)
  while not converged do
     θ ← θ − α∇θ J(θ)                                                                       . Equation 2

zero-shot generalization, the model immediately generalizes to unseen tasks, without observing ex-
amples. Finally, a general-purpose learning algorithm improves as it observes more examples both
on seen and significantly different unseen tasks. We demonstrate algorithmic transitions occurring
between these learning modalities, and empirically investigate these.

3.1   G ENERATING TASKS FOR L EARNING - TO -L EARN

Neural networks are known to require datasets of significant size to effectively generalize. While
in standard supervised learning large quantities of data are common, meta-learning algorithms may
require a similar number of distinct tasks in order to learn and generalize. Unfortunately, the number
of commonly available tasks is orders of magnitudes smaller compared to the datapoints in each task.
Previous work has side-stepped this issue by building-in architectural or algorithmic structure into
the learning algorithm, in effect drastically reducing the number of tasks required. For example,
in Kirsch & Schmidhuber (2020); Kirsch et al. (2021), the authors included symmetries into the
black-box model in the form of input and output permutation invariances. An alternative to this
is the generation of new tasks (Schmidhuber, 2013; Clune, 2019; Such et al., 2020; Parker-Holder
et al., 2022). Unfortunately, it is not easy to generate a wide range of tasks that are both diverse and
contain structure as it can be found in the real world.
In this work, we take an intermediate step
by augmenting existing datasets, in effect
increasing the breadth of the task distribu-
                                                 y′1          y′2           y′3       …
tion based on existing task regularities. We
generate a large number of tasks by taking General-Purpose In-Context Learning Transformer
existing supervised learning datasets, ran-
domly projecting their inputs and permut-                                             …
ing their classification labels. While the                                              Third support set
random projection removes spatial struc-       x1 0        x2 y1         x′3 y2         Third query set
ture from the inputs, this structure is not
believed to be central to the task (for in- Figure 1: Our General-Purpose In-Context Learner
stance, the performance of SGD-trained (GPICL) is based on the vanilla Transformer        0
                                                                                              which is
fully connected networks is invariant to     trained to make  predictions  for  queries x   given    any
                                                                               ND
projection by a random orthogonal matrix prefix of a dataset D := {xi , yi }i=1 as in Equation 2.
(Wadia et al., 2021)). Task augmentation
allows us to investigate fundamental questions about learning-to-learn in the regime of many tasks
without relying on huge amounts of existing tasks or elaborate schemes to generate those.
A task or dataset D is then defined  by its corresponding
                                                          base dataset D̄ = {x̄i , ȳi }, (linear) projec-
tion A ∈ RNx ×Nx , with Aij ∼ N 0, N1x , and output permutation ρ, D = {Ax̄i , ρ(ȳi )}. Unless
noted otherwise, the distribution over output permutations p(ρ) is uniform.

3.2   M ETA - LEARNING AND META - TESTING

Meta-learning Given those generated tasks, we then meta-train jointly on a mini-batch sampled
from the whole distribution. First, we sample datasets D from the augmented task distribution p(D)
and then take a random batch D1:ND from the training set. Second, we minimize J(θ), the sum of


                                                    3
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 Transformer
                  (a) MLP: Accuracy on seen tasks                             (b) Accuracy on seen tasks              (c) Accuracy on unseen tasks
                  224                               1.0                                                                                              1.0
                                                                            224
                  222                                                       222
                  220                               0.8                     220                                                                      0.8
                  218                                                       218
Number of tasks


                                                          Number of tasks
                  216                               0.6                     216
                  214                                                       214                                                                      0.6
                  212                                                       212
                  210                               0.4                     210                                                                      0.4
                   28                                                        28
                   26                                                        26
                   24                               0.2                                                                                              0.2
                   22                                                        24
                   20                                                        22
                                                    0.0                      20                                                                      0.0
                           2
                           4
                           8
                          16
                          32
                          64
                         128
                         256
                         512
                        1024


                                                                                    2
                                                                                    4
                                                                                    8
                                                                                   16
                                                                                   32
                                                                                   64
                                                                                  128
                                                                                  256
                                                                                  512
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                                                       64
                                                                                                                      128
                                                                                                                      256
                                                                                                                      512
                           Hidden size (capacity)                                       Transformer model size              Transformer model size
     Figure 2: GPICL is able to generalize to unseen tasks. Each cell is a separate meta-training run.
     (a) An MLP classifier trained in a multi-task fashion across various numbers of tasks (generated
     based on MNIST) and network sizes is able to fit linearly more tasks, the larger its capacity. (b)
     A sequence model (here the GPICL Transformer) that observes a dataset D of inputs and labels
     transitions into generalizing to an seemingly unbounded number of tasks with an increase in model
     size. This is achieved by switching from a memorization solution to a learning solution that (c)
     generalizes to unseen tasks. This generalization does not occur with the MLP.
     losses on the query prediction after observing any prefix D1:j−1
                                                                               
                                                   XND
                               J(θ) = ED∼p(D)         l(fθ (D1:j−1 , xj ), yj ) ,                                                                  (2)
                                                                                  j=1
     where in the classification setting, l is the cross entropy loss between the label yj and prediction
     y 0 = fθ (D1:j−1 , xj ), fθ is a neural network mapping to predictions y 0 as in Equation 1. Dur-
     ing meta-training, we take gradient steps in J(θ) by backpropagation and Adam (Kingma & Ba,
     2014). To investigate the effect of the data distribution, we train on various numbers of tasks (Al-
     gorithm 1). Finally, we need to choose a black-box model for the function fθ . We use a vanilla
     Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) with learned positional embeddings, visualized in Figure 1. We
     call it the General-Purpose In-Context Learner (GPICL). Each token corresponds to the concatena-
     tion of a transformed input xi and one-hot encoded label yi−1 . The model predicts the corresponding
     logits y 0 = yi for the current input x0 = xi . When querying for the first x1 , no label for the previous
     input is available, so we feed a zero vector.
     Meta-testing At meta-test time, no gradient-based learning is used. Instead, we simply obtain a
     prediction y 0 by evaluating the neural network fθ on a dataset D and query point x0 . The dataset D is
     either derived from the same base dataset (eg MNIST after meta-training on MNIST) or it is derived
     from a different dataset (eg Fashion MNIST or CIFAR10). In both cases a seen or unseen random
     projection is used. Datapoints are taken only from the respective test split of the base dataset.

      4                 E XPERIMENTS ON THE E MERGENCE OF G ENERAL L EARNING -T O -L EARN
     Multi-task training with standard classifiers Given a task distribution of many different classi-
     fication tasks, we first ask under what conditions we expect “learning-to-learn” to emerge. We train
     a single model across many tasks where each task corresponds to a random transformation of the
     MNIST dataset, but where the MLP only receives a single datapoint instead of a whole sequence as
     input. This corresponds to ND = 1 in Equation 2. We would expect such a non-sequential classifier
     to be able to correctly predict for more tasks as its number of parameters increases. When plotting
     the network capacity against the number of tasks, we indeed observe a linear boundary where an
     increasing number of tasks can be fit the larger the network (Figure 2a). This is consistent with
     results in Collins et al. (2016), which found that a constant number of bits about the data distribution
     can be stored per model parameter, across a variety of model architectures and scales.
     Learning-to-learn with large sequential models and data In contrast to the MLP classifier, a
     sequence model that observes multiple observations and their labels from the same task, could ex-
     ceed that linear performance improvement by learning at inference time. Indeed, we observe that
     when switching to a Transformer that can observe a sequence of datapoints before making a pre-
     diction about the query, more tasks can be simultaneously fit (Figure 2b). At a certain model size
     and number of tasks, the model undergoes a transition, allowing to generalize to a seemingly un-
     bounded number of tasks. We hypothesize that this is due to switching the prediction strategy from


                                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


memorization to learning-to-learn. Further, when (meta-)testing the same trained models from the
previous experiment on an unseen task (new random transformation of MNIST), they generalize
only in the regime of large numbers of tasks and model size (Figure 2c). As an in-context learner,
meta-testing does not involve any gradient updates but only running the model in forward mode.
Insight 1: It is possible to learn-to-learn with black-box models Effective learning algorithms
can be realized in-context using black-box models with few inductive biases, given sufficient meta-
training task diversity and large enough model sizes. To transition to the learning-to-learn regime,
we needed at least 213 = 8192 tasks.
In the following, we study learning-to-learn from the perspective of the data distribution, the archi-
tecture, and the optimization dynamics. For the data distribution, we look at how the data diversity
affects the emergence and transitions of learning-to-learn, generalization, and memorization. For
architecture, we analyze the role of the model and state size in various architectures. Finally, we
observe challenges in meta-optimization and demonstrate how memorization followed by general-
ization is an important mechanism that can be facilitated by biasing the data distribution.


4.1   L ARGE DATA : G ENERALIZATION AND A LGORITHMIC T RANSITIONS

Simple data augmentations
lead to the emergence of                             Meta-test learning curve on MNIST Meta-test learning curve on FashionMNIST
                                               1.0
learning-to-learn To verify                           (a)                                 (b)
whether the observed gen-                      0.8
eralizing solutions actually                   0.6
                                    Accuracy


implement learning algorithms                  0.4                                                             Trained on
(as opposed to e.g. zero-shot                                                                                   mnist
                                               0.2                                                              fashion_mnist
generalization), we analyze
the meta-test time behavior.                   0.0
                                                     0    20    40      60      80   100   0    20    40      60      80    100
We plot the accuracy for a                                Number of examples seen               Number of examples seen
given query point for varying       Figure 3: GPICL learns from examples at test time, and gener-
numbers of examples in Fig-         alizes to unseen tasks and datasets. We meta-trained the Trans-
ure 3. As is typical for learning   former on a set of tasks defined by random transformations of ei-
algorithms, the performance         ther MNIST (blue) or FashionMNIST (orange). We then meta-test
improves when given more            on unseen tasks, and seen (ab) or unseen (ba) datasets. The plot
examples (inputs and labels).       shows the accuracy averaged across multiple runs at each inner
Generalization Naturally, the       step, with shading indicating 95% confidence intervals. The in-
question arises as to what ex-      crease in performance at each step suggests we have learned a
tent these learning algorithms      learning algorithm.
are general. While we have
seen generalization to unseen tasks consisting of novel projections of the same dataset, do the learned
algorithms also generalize to unseen datasets? In Figure 3 we observe strong out-of-distribution per-
formance on Fashion MNIST after having trained on MNIST (b, blue), and there is no generalization
gap compared to directly training on Fashion MNIST (b, orange). Similarly, when meta training on
Fashion MNIST and meta testing on MNIST (a, orange) we observe that the learning algorithm
generalizes, albeit with a larger generalization gap.
Comparison to other methods Other datasets and baselines are shown in Table 2. We aim to
validate whether methods with less inductive bias (such as our GPICL), can compete with meth-
ods that include more biases suitable to learning-to-learn. This includes stochastic gradient de-
scent (SGD), updating the parameters online after observing each datapoint. MAML (Finn et al.,
2017) proceeds like SGD, but uses a meta-learned neural network initialization. Both meth-
ods that rely on backpropagation and gradient descent learn more slowly than our Transformer.
In the case of MAML, this may be due to the main mechanism being feature reuse (Raghu
et al., 2020) which is less useful when training across our wider task distribution. For in-
context learners (methods that do not hard-code gradient descent at meta-test time), we test
VSML (Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2020) that discovered learning algorithms significantly general-
izing between tasks. Our GPICL comes surprisingly close to VSML without requiring the as-
sociated inductive bias. GPICL generalizes to many datasets, even those that consist of ran-
dom input-label pairs. We also observe that learning CIFAR10 and SVHN from only 99 ex-
amples with a general-purpose learning algorithm is difficult, which we address in Section 4.4.

                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Meta-test generalization to various datasets after meta-training on augmented MNIST and
seeing 99 examples, predicting the 100th. We report the mean across 3 meta-training seeds, 16
sequences from each task, 16 tasks sampled from each base dataset. GPICL is competitive to other
approaches that require more inductive bias.
                                                                            Fashion
Method          Inductive bias              MNIST                                                      KMNIST           Random        CIFAR10         SVHN
                                                                            MNIST
SGD             Backprop, SGD               70.31%                          50.78%                     37.89%           100.00%       14.84%          10.16%
MAML            Backprop, SGD               53.71%                          48.44%                     36.33%           99.80%        17.38%          11.33%
VSML            In-context, param sharing   79.04%                          68.49%                     54.69%           100.00%       24.09%          17.45%
LSTM            In-context, black-box       25.39%                          28.12%                     18.10%           58.72%        12.11%          11.07%
GPICL (ours)    In-context, black-box       73.70%                          62.24%                     53.39%           100.00%       19.40%          14.58%

Training and testing with longer context lengths                                                  Task             Task           General
improves the final predictions (Appendix A.3).                                                    memorization     identification learning to learn
                                                                                            0.7       Seen MNIST
Using LSTM-based in-context learners per-


                                                     Accuracy improvement within sequence
                                                                                            0.6       Unseen MNIST
forms worse, which we further discuss in Sec-                                                         Unseen FashionMNIST
tion 4.2 among other alternative architectures.                                             0.5       Unseen KMNIST
                                                                                            0.4
Insight 2: Simple data augmentations are
effective for learning-to-learn The general-                                                0.3
ity of the discovered learning algorithm can be                                             0.2
controlled via the data distribution. Even when                                             0.1
large task distributions are not (yet) naturally                                            0.0
available, simple augmentations are effective.
                                                                                            0.1
                                                        2     2    2    2    2        2   2 2    20    3     6      9       12   15     18     21     24
Transitioning from memorization to task                                   Number of tasks
identification to general learning-to-learn Figure 4: Transformers exhibit three differ-
When do the learned models correspond to ent phases in terms of meta-learned behavior.
memorizing, learning, and generalizing solu- (1) When training on a small number of tasks,
tions? In Figure 4, we meta-train across vary- tasks are memorized. (2) Tasks from the train-
ing numbers of tasks, with each point on the ing distribution are identified, which is evident as
x-axis corresponding to multiple separate meta- a within-sequence increase of performance. (3)
training runs. We plot the accuracy difference When training across many tasks, we discover a
between the last and first prediction (how much learning algorithm that generalizes to unseen tasks
is learned at meta-test time) for a seen task, an and unseen datasets.
unseen task, and an unseen task with a different
base dataset. We observe three phases: In the
first phase, the model memorizes all tasks, resulting in no within-sequence performance improve-
ment. In the second phase, it memorizes and learns to identify tasks, resulting in a within-sequence
improvement confined to seen task instances. In the final and third phase, we observe a more general
learning-to-learn, a performance improvement for unseen tasks, even different base datasets (here
FashionMNIST). This phenomenon applies to various other meta-training and meta-testing datasets.
The corresponding experiments can be found in Appendix A.7. In Appendix A.4 we also investigate
the behavior of the last transition.
Insight 3: The meta-learned behavior has algorithmic transitions When increasing the number
of tasks, the meta-learned behavior transitions from task memorization, to task identification, to
general learning-to-learn.

4.2   A RCHITECTURE : L ARGE M EMORY (S TATE ) IS C RUCIAL FOR L EARNING

In the previous experiments we observed that given sufficient task diversity and model size, Trans-
formers can learn general-purpose learning algorithms. This raises the question how essential the
Transformer architecture is and whether other black-box models could be used. We hypothesize that
for learning-to-learn the size of the memory at meta-test time (or state more generally) is particularly
important in order to be able to store learning progress. Through self-attention, Transformers have
a particularly large state. We test this by training several architectures with various state sizes in our
meta-learning setting. In Figure 5a, we observe that when we vary the hyper-parameters which most
influence the state size, we observe that for a specific state size we obtain similar performance of the
discovered learning algorithm across architectures. In contrast, these architectures have markedly
different numbers of parameters (Figure 5b).


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a)             100% permuted labels    (b) 2.40               Training loss          Unseen FashionMNIST                  Unseen MNIST
                      Training
       4              Unseen FashionMNIST          2.35
                      Unseen MNIST


                                            loss
loss

                                                   2.30
       2
                                                   2.25
           0k   10k   20k 30k    40k   50k                0k     20k           40k   0k     20k      40k              0k     20k      40k
                        step                                       step                       step                             step
Figure 6: Meta-training dynamics often involve an extended period where GPICL’s perfor-
mance is stuck on a plateau. (a) Meta-loss vs. meta-training step, for a uniform distribution over
meta-training tasks. Training tasks are generated by random transformations of FashionMNIST. (b)
A zoomed in view of the plateau. The loss only decreases slightly and the model memorize small
biases in the training data (decreasing generalization) before the loss drops sharply.
What corresponds to state (memory) in var-                       Unseen MNIST                      Unseen MNIST
                                                      1.0  LSTM                          1.0
ious architectures? Memory NS in the con-                  Transformer            (a)        (b)
                                                      0.8  Outer-product LSTM            0.8
text of recurrent neural networks corresponds              VSML without symmetries

to the hidden state or context vector of size         0.6                                0.6


                                                                          Accuracy


                                                                                                           Accuracy
NH , thus NS ∈ O(NH ). More generally, we             0.4                                0.4
can describe the state as the information bot-
                                                      0.2                                0.2
tleneck that the sequence has to pass through
before making predictions. In the context of          0.0
                                                            25       28       211    214
                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                 210       212      214
learning-to-learn, this state has to hold informa-                  State size                      Parameter count
tion about everything that has been learned so Figure 5: The state size (accessible memory) of
far. Standard learning algorithms such as neu- an architecture most strongly predicts its per-
ral networks trained via SGD would have a state formance as a general-purpose learning algo-
that corresponds to the neural network parame- rithm. (a) A large state is crucial for learning-
ters, iteratively updated via SGD. In transform- to-learn to emerge. (b) The parameter count cor-
ers, self-attention allows for a particularly large relates less well with learning capabilities.
state of NS ∈ O(NK NL NT ) where NK is the
size of key, value, and query, NL is the number of layers, and NT is the length of the sequence. In
addition to Figure 5, Figure 14 show meta-test performance on more tasks and datasets.
Insight 4: Large state is more crucial than parameter count This suggests that the model size
in terms of parameter count plays a smaller role in the setting of learning-to-learn and Transformers
have benefited in particular from an increase in state size by self-attention. Beyond learning-to-learn,
this likely applies to other tasks that rely on storing large amounts of sequence-specific information.

4.3         C HALLENGES IN M ETA -O PTIMIZATION

Meta-optimization is known to be challenging. Meta gradients (Finn et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018;
Bechtle et al., 2021) and works with parameter sharing or weight updates in their architecture
(Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2020; Pedersen & Risi, 2021; Risi, 2021) observed various difficulties:
Slower convergence, local minima, unstable training, or loss plateaus at the beginning of training
(see Appendix Figure 22). We show that some of these problems also occur with black-box models
and propose effective interventions.
Loss plateaus when meta-learning with black-box models By training across a large number
of randomly transformed tasks, memorizing any task-specific information is difficult. Instead, the
model is forced to find solutions that are directly learning. We observe that this results in (meta-
)loss plateaus during meta-training where the loss only decreases slightly for long periods of time
(Figure 6a). Only after a large number of steps (here around 35 thousand) does a drop in loss
occur. In the loss plateau, the generalization loss increases on unseen tasks from both the same and
a different base dataset (Figure 6b). This suggests that being able to first memorize slightly enables
the following learning-to-learn phase. Furthermore, we observe that all gradients have a very small
norm with exception of the last layer (Appendix Figure 18).
Intervention 1: Increasing the batch size High variance gradients appear to be one reason train-
ing trajectories become trapped on the loss plateau (see Appendix Figures 16, 17). This suggests
increasing the meta-batch size as a straightforward solution. When plotting various batch sizes
against numbers of tasks we obtain three kinds of solutions at the end of meta-training (Figure 7a):
(1) Solutions that generalize and learn, (2) Solutions that memorize, and (3) Solutions that are still


                                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) 24Plateau, overfit, or generalize?                        (b)                                                                              (c)
                     2
                     222                      Generalize
                     220                                                    215                                                                              215
                     218

   Number of tasks
                     216


                                                           Plateau length


                                                                                                                                            Plateau length
                     214
                     212                      Overfit                       214                                                                              214
                     210                                                          # of tasks
                      28                                                                216                                                                                                             Task batch size
                      26                                                                218                                                                                                                     25
                      24                      Plateau                                   220                                                                                                                     27
                      22                                                    213         222                                                                  213                                                29
                      20
                                                                                        224                                                                                                                     211
                              8
                             16
                             32
                             64
                            128
                            256
                            512
                           1024
                           2048
                           4096
                                                                                  25      26   27     28      29          210   211   212                          217         219           221       223         225
                            Task batch size                                                         Task batch size                                                                  Number of tasks

Figure 7: Whether GPICL memorizes, generalizes, or remains trapped on a meta-loss plateau
depends on the number of meta-training tasks, and the meta-training batch size. (a) A phase
diagram showing GPICL’s behavior at the end of meta-training (50k steps). Solutions either mem-
orize, generalize and learn, or remain in the loss plateau. With additional training steps, configura-
tions in the plateau might eventually transition to memorization or generalization. Generalization
only occurs with large enough batch sizes and sufficient, but not too many, tasks. (b) This behavior
is explained by the plateau length decreasing with the increasing batch sizes (reducing the noise
contribution), and (c) increasing with larger numbers of tasks.
in the loss plateau (due to maximum of 50 thousand optimization steps). The larger the batch size,
the more tasks we can train on without getting stuck in a loss plateau. When plotting the length of
the loss plateau against the task batch size (Figure 7b) we observe a power-law relationship with
increasing batch sizes decreasing the plateau length. At the same time, the batch size also increases
the number of total tasks seen in the plateau (Appendix Figure 19). Thus, this intervention relies on
parallelizability. An increase in the number of tasks also increases the plateau length (Figure 7c),
possibly due to a larger number of tasks inhibiting the initial memorization phase.
Intervention 2: Changes in the meta-
optimizer Given that many gradients in the                                                                                        0% permuted labels                                         10% permuted labels
                                                                                                               (a)                                                       (b)
loss plateau have very small norm, Adam would
                                                                                                                      4
rescale those element-wise, potentially allevi-
                                                                                                             loss


ating the issue. In practice, we observe that                                                                         2
the gradients are so small that the   in Adam’s
gradient-rescaling denominator (for numerical                                                                                     90% permuted labels                                       100% permuted labels
stability) limits the up-scaling of small gradi-                                                               (c)                                                       (d)                     Training
ents. Using smaller   results in more than halv-                                                                      4                                                                          Unseen FashionMNIST
ing the plateau length. Alternatively, discarding                                                                                                                                                Unseen MNIST
                                                                                                             loss


the magnitude of the gradient entirely by ap-                                                                         2
plying the sign operator to an exponential mov-
ing average of the gradient (replacing Adam’s                                                                              0k   10k 20k 30k 40k 50k 0k                                     10k 20k 30k 40k 50k
                                                                                                                                      step                                                       step
approximate magnitude normalization with di-
rect magnitude normalization) has a similar ef-                                                                Figure 8: Biasing the training distribution is an
fect while also increasing the numerical sta-                                                                  effective intervention which prevents a meta-
bility over Adam with small   (Appendix Fig-                                                                   loss plateau. A uniform distribution over tasks
ure 20).                                                                                                       leads to a long plateau (d), while increasing the
                                                                                                               training fraction that corresponds to a single task
Intervention 3: Biasing the data distribution                                                                  reduces the plateau (abc).
/ Curricula GPICL mainly relies on the data
distribution for learning-to-learn. This enables
a different kind of intervention: Biasing the data distribution. The approach is inspired by the
observation that before leaving the loss plateau the model memorizes biases in the data. Instead
of sampling label permutations uniformly, we bias towards a specific permutation by using a fixed
permutation for a fraction of each batch. This completely eliminates the loss plateau, enabling a
smooth path from memorizing to learning (Figure 8). Surprisingly, even when heavily biasing the
distribution, memorization is followed by generalization. This biased data distribution can be viewed
as a curriculum, solving an easier problem first that enables the subsequent harder learning-to-learn.
Further investigation is required to understand how this transition occurs. This may be connected
to grokking (Power et al., 2022) which we investigate in Appendix A.7. We hypothesize that many
natural data distributions—including language—contain such sub-tasks that are easy to memorize
followed by generalization.

4.4                    D OMAIN - SPECIFIC AND GENERAL - PURPOSE LEARNING


                                                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We demonstrated the feasibility of meta-             1.0         GPICL without feature embedding
                                                                 GPICL with feature embedding


                                                        Meta-test acurracy of last prediction
learning in-context learning algorithms that are
general-purpose. An even more useful learn-          0.8
ing algorithm would be capable of both gener-
alizing, as well as leveraging domain-specific       0.6
information for learning when it is available.
This would allow for considerably more ef-           0.4
ficient in-context learning, scaling to more
difficult datasets without very long input se-       0.2
quences. Toward this goal, we investigate a
                                                     0.0
simple scheme that leverages pre-trained neu-               MNIST FashionMNIST KMNIST Random CIFAR10          SVHN
                                                         (meta-trained) (unseen) (unseen) (unseen) (unseen) (unseen)
ral networks as features to learn upon. This                                           Meta-test task
could be from an unsupervised learner or a Figure 9: Using pre-trained networks allows
frozen large language model (Radford et al., leveraging domain-specific knowledge while
2021; Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021). Here, we first still generalizing to other datasets GPICL is
project the inputs x̄i of a base-dataset D̄ into meta-trained on MNIST either with the randomly
some latent space using a pre-trained network, transformed raw inputs or randomly transformed
and then proceed with meta-training and meta- pre-trained features. Pre-training helps to acceler-
testing as before, randomly projecting these al- ate meta-test-time in-context learning on datasets
ternative features. For the pre-trained network, that have a matching domain, such as CIFAR10.
we use a ResNet trained on ImageNet and re- With only 100 examples, the learning algorithm
move its final layer. In Figure 9 we have can achieve about 45% accuracy on CIFAR10.
meta-trained GPICL on MNIST either with the The learning algorithms still generalize to a wide
randomly transformed raw inputs or randomly range of datasets. Error bars are 95% confidence
transformed embedded features. At meta-test- intervals of the mean across meta-training runs.
time the learning algorithm generalizes to a
wide range of datasets, measured by the meta-test accuracy of the 100th example. At the same
time, the pre-trained ImageNet helps to accelerate learning on datasets that have a matching domain,
such as CIFAR10. We observe that with only 100 examples, the learning algorithm meta-trained on
MNIST, can achieve about 45% accuracy on CIFAR10.


5    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

By generating tasks from existing datasets, we demonstrated that black-box models such as Trans-
formers can meta-learn general-purpose in-context learning algorithms (GPICL). We observed that
learning-to-learn arises in the regime of large models and large numbers of tasks with several tran-
sitions from task memorization, to task identification, to general learning. The size of the memory
or model state significantly determines how well any architecture can learn how to learn across
various neural network architectures. We identified difficulties in meta-optimization and proposed
interventions in terms of optimizers, hyper-parameters, and a biased data distribution acting as a
curriculum. We demonstrated that in-context learning algorithms can also be trained to combine
domain-specific learning and general-purpose learning. We believe our findings open up new possi-
bilities of data-driven general-purpose meta-learning with minimal inductive bias, including gener-
alization improvements of in-context learning in large language models (LLMs).
An important subject of future work is the exploration of task generation beyond random projections,
such as augmentation techniques for LLM training corpora or generation of tasks from scratch. A
current limitation is the applicability of the discovered learning algorithms to arbitrary input and out-
put sizes beyond random projections. Appropriate tokenization to unified representations may solve
this (Chowdhery et al., 2022). Furthermore, learning algorithms often process millions of inputs
before outputting the final model. In the current black-box setting, this is still difficult to achieve
and it requires new advances for in context length of sequence models. Recurrency-based mod-
els may suffer from accumulating errors, whereas Transformer’s computational complexity grows
quadratically in sequence length.


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul,
 Brendan Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient

                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3981–3989, 2016.
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Johan Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur.
  Exploring length generalization in large language models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal,
  Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2022.
Sarah Bechtle, Artem Molchanov, Yevgen Chebotar, Edward Grefenstette, Ludovic Righetti, Gaurav
  Sukhatme, and Franziska Meier. Meta learning via learned loss. In 25th International Conference
  on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 4161–4168. IEEE, 2021.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Stephanie CY Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K Lampinen, Jane X Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H
  Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-
  context learning in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05055, 2022.
Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Qiuyi Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya
  Kawakami, Greg Kochanski, Arnaud Doucet, Marc’aurelio Ranzato, et al. Towards learning
  universal hyperparameter optimizers with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13320, 2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Jeff Clune. Ai-gas: Ai-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial
   intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10985, 2019.
John D Co-Reyes, Yingjie Miao, Daiyi Peng, Esteban Real, Quoc V Le, Sergey Levine, Honglak
  Lee, and Aleksandra Faust. Evolving reinforcement learning algorithms. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jasmine Collins, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and David Sussillo. Capacity and trainability in recurrent
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09913, 2016.
Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The devil is in the detail: Simple tricks
  improve systematic generalization of transformers. In EMNLP, 2021.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt,
  Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, and Pedro A Ortega. Neural networks and the chomsky hierarchy.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02098, 2022.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl2 : Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR,
  2017.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01066, 2022.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2018.
Felix A Gers, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Fred Cummins. Learning to forget: Continual prediction
  with lstm. Neural computation, 12(10):2451–2471, 2000.
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Sepp Hochreiter, A Steven Younger, and Peter R Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient descent.
  In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 87–94. Springer, 2001.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. Tabpfn: A transformer
  that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. Table Representation Workshop at
  NeurIPS, 2022.
Rein Houthooft, Richard Y Chen, Phillip Isola, Bradly C Stadie, Filip Wolski, Jonathan Ho, and
  Pieter Abbeel. Evolved policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04821, 2018.
Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Róbert Csordás, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Going beyond linear trans-
  formers with recurrent fast weight programmers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7703–7717, 2021.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Meta learning backpropagation and improving it. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2012.14905, 2020.
Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Self-referential meta learning. In Decision Awareness in
  Reinforcement Learning Workshop at ICML 2022, 2022.
Louis Kirsch, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Improving generalization in meta
  reinforcement learning using learned objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04098, 2019.
Louis Kirsch, Sebastian Flennerhag, Hado van Hasselt, Abram Friesen, Junhyuk Oh, and Yu-
  tian Chen. Introducing symmetries to black box meta reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.10781, 2021.
Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, Jeremy Nixon, Daniel Freeman, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Understanding and correcting pathologies in the training of learned optimizers. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4556–4565. PMLR, 2019.
Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, C Daniel Freeman, Ben Poole, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Tasks, stability, architecture, and compute: Training more effective learned optimizers, and using
  them to train themselves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11243, 2020a.
Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, Ruoxi Sun, C Daniel Freeman, Ben Poole, and Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein. Using a thousand optimization tasks to learn hyperparameter search strategies. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2002.11887, 2020b.
Vladimir Mikulik, Grégoire Delétang, Tom McGrath, Tim Genewein, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg,
  and Pedro Ortega. Meta-trained agents implement bayes-optimal agents. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:18691–18703, 2020.
Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-
  learner. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Samuel Müller, Noah Hollmann, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Josif Grabocka, and Frank Hutter. Trans-
  formers can do bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16569–16594.
  PMLR, 2022.
Junhyuk Oh, Matteo Hessel, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Zhongwen Xu, Hado van Hasselt, Satin-
  der Singh, and David Silver. Discovering reinforcement learning algorithms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.08794, 2020.
Pedro A Ortega, Jane X Wang, Mark Rowland, Tim Genewein, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Razvan Pascanu,
  Nicolas Heess, Joel Veness, Alex Pritzel, Pablo Sprechmann, et al. Meta-learning of sequential
  strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03030, 2019.
Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob Foerster, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Evolving curricula with regret-based environment design.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01302, 2022.
Joachim Winther Pedersen and Sebastian Risi. Evolving and merging hebbian learning rules: in-
  creasing generalization by decreasing the number of rules. In Proceedings of the Genetic and
  Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 892–900, 2021.
Joachim Winther Pedersen and Sebastian Risi. Minimal neural network models for permutation
  invariant agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07868, 2022.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature reuse?
  towards understanding the effectiveness of maml. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020.
Esteban Real, Chen Liang, David So, and Quoc Le. Automl-zero: evolving machine learning algo-
  rithms from scratch. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8007–8019. PMLR,
  2020.
Sebastian Risi. The future of artificial intelligence is self-organizing and self-assembling. sebas-
  tianrisi.com, 2021. URL https://sebastianrisi.com/self_assembling_ai.
Mark Sandler, Max Vladymyrov, Andrey Zhmoginov, Nolan Miller, Andrew Jackson, Tom Madams,
 et al. Meta-learning bidirectional update rules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.04657, 2021.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
  learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 1842–1850. PMLR, 2016.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to
   learn: the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning to control fast-weight memories: An alternative to dynamic recurrent
   networks. Neural Computation, 4(1):131–139, 1992.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Reducing the ratio between learning complexity and number of time varying
   variables in fully recurrent nets. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp.
   460–463. Springer, 1993a.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. A ‘self-referential’weight matrix. In International conference on artificial
   neural networks, pp. 446–450. Springer, 1993b.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Powerplay: Training an increasingly general problem solver by continually
   searching for the simplest still unsolvable problem. Frontiers in psychology, 4:313, 2013.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Felipe Petroski Such, Aditya Rawal, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeffrey Clune. Genera-
  tive teaching networks: Accelerating neural architecture search by learning to generate synthetic
  training data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9206–9216. PMLR, 2020.
Yujin Tang and David Ha. The sensory neuron as a transformer: Permutation-invariant neural
  networks for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  22574–22587, 2021.
Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob L Menick, Serkan Cabi, SM Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill. Mul-
 timodal few-shot learning with frozen language models. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, 34:200–212, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Neha Wadia, Daniel Duckworth, Samuel S Schoenholz, Ethan Dyer, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Whitening and second order optimization both make information in the dataset unusable dur-
  ing training, and can reduce or prevent generalization. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10617–10629. PMLR, 2021.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, and David Silver. Meta-gradient reinforcement learning. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Andrey Zhmoginov, Mark Sandler, and Maksym Vladymyrov. Hypertransformer: Model generation
  for supervised and semi-supervised few-shot learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 27075–27098. PMLR, 2022.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schu-
  urmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   R ELATED WORK

Meta-learning: Inductive biases and general-purpose learning algorithms Meta-learning ap-
proaches exist with a wide range of inductive biases, usually inspired by existing human-engineered
learning algorithms. Some methods pre-wire the entire learning algorithm (Finn et al., 2017), pre-
wire backpropagation and the structure of a gradient-based optimizer (Andrychowicz et al., 2016;
Metz et al., 2019; 2020a), or learn the loss function (Houthooft et al., 2018; Kirsch et al., 2019;
Bechtle et al., 2021).
Many methods search over hyper-parameters that alter existing learning algorithms (Xu et al., 2018;
Metz et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2022). Fast weight programmers or hyper-networks update the
weights of the same or another neural network (Schmidhuber, 1992; 1993a; Ha et al., 2017; Irie
et al., 2021; Sandler et al., 2021; Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2022; Zhmoginov et al., 2022), frequently
with various symmetries. There has been growing interest in meta-learning more general-purpose
learning algorithms. Such learning algorithms aim to be general and reusable like other human-
engineered algorithms (e.g. gradient descent). The improved generality of the discovered learning
algorithm has been achieved by introducing inductive bias, such as by bottlenecking the architecture
or by hiding information, encouraging learning over memorization. Methods include enforcing
learning rules to use gradients (Metz et al., 2019; Kirsch et al., 2019; Oh et al., 2020), symbolic
graphs (Real et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al., 2021), or parameter sharing and symmetries (Kirsch &

                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Schmidhuber, 2020; Kirsch et al., 2021). Parameter sharing and symmetries have additionally been
discussed in the context of self-organization (Tang & Ha, 2021; Risi, 2021; Pedersen & Risi, 2022).
In-context learning with black-box models Black-box neural networks can learn-to-learn purely
in their activations (in-context) with little architectural and algorithmic bias (Hochreiter et al., 2001;
Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018; Garnelo et al., 2018).
This requires a feedback or demonstration signal in the inputs that allows for learning such as the
reward in reinforcement learning or label in supervised learning (Schmidhuber, 1993b). While a
frequently used architecture is the LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 2000), this
mechanism has also seen substantial recent attention in Transformer models (Brown et al., 2020;
Chan et al., 2022) under the name of in-context learning. In large language models (LLMs) demon-
strations of a task in the input help solving language-based tasks at inference (meta-test) time (Brown
et al., 2020). This few-shot learning ability has been attributed to the data-distributional properties
of text corpora (Chan et al., 2022). In-context learning has also been interpreted from a Bayesian
inference perspective (Ortega et al., 2019; Mikulik et al., 2020; Nguyen & Grover, 2022; Müller
et al., 2022). Our method GPICL is in the class of these black-box in-context learners. The number
of model parameters has been at the core of scaling up LLMs to unlock greater capabilities and have
been formulated in scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). Our empirical study
suggests that for learning-to-learn, the amount of memory (model state) is even more predictive of
in-context learning capabilities than parameter count.
General-purpose in-context learning While in-context learning has been demonstrated with
black-box models, little investigation of general-purpose meta-learning with these models has been
undertaken. Generalization in LLMs has previously been studied with regards to reasoning and sys-
tematicity (Csordás et al., 2021; Delétang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Anil et al.,
2022). In this work we focus on meta-generalization instead, the extent to which in-context learn-
ing algorithms generalize. In contrast to previous methods, GPICL implements general-purpose
learning algorithms. Independently, Garg et al. (2022) recently studied generalization on synthetic
functions compared to our augmented datasets. VSML (Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2020) also im-
plements in-context learning with black-box LSTMs, but makes use of parameter-sharing to aid
generalization. PFNs (Müller et al., 2022) demonstrated learning to learn on small tabular datasets
when meta-training on synthetically generated problems. Experiments on more complex classi-
fication settings such as Omniglot relied on fine-tuning. In comparison, our method investigated
meta-generalization of learning algorithms directly to datasets such as MNIST, Fashion MNIST,
and CIFAR10 while studying fundamental questions about the conditions necessary for such gener-
alization. TabPFNs (Hollmann et al., 2022) extend PFNs to larger tabular datasets.


A.2    S UMMARY OF I NSIGHTS

Insight 1: It is possible to learn-to-learn with black-box models Effective in-context learning
algorithms can be realized using black-box models with few inductive biases, given sufficient meta-
training task diversity and large enough model sizes. To transition to the learning-to-learn regime,
we needed at least 213 = 8192 tasks.
Insight 2: Simple data augmentations are effective for general learning-to-learn The general-
ity of the discovered learning algorithm can be controlled via the data distribution. Even when large
task distributions are not (yet) naturally available, simple augmentations that promote permutation
and scale invariance are effective.
Insight 3: The meta-learned behavior has algorithmic transitions When increasing the number
of tasks, the meta-learned behavior transitions from task memorization, to task identification, to
general learning-to-learn.
Insight 4: Large state is more crucial than parameter count The specific inductive biases of
each architecture matter to a smaller degree. The driving factor behind their ability to learn how to
learn is the size of their state. Furthermore, this suggests that the model size in terms of numbers
of parameters plays a smaller role in the setting of learning-to-learn and Transformers have bene-
fited in particular from an increase in state size by self-attention. In non-meta-learning sequence
tasks parameter count is thought to be the performance bottleneck (Collins et al., 2016). Beyond
learning-to-learn, this likely applies to other tasks that rely on processing and storing large amounts
of sequence-specific information.

                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    L IMITATIONS

Varying input and output sizes Compared to many previous works in meta-learning (Andrychow-
icz et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017; Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2020), the discovered learning algorithms
are only applicable to an arbitrary input and output size by using random projections. This may make
it more difficult to apply the learning algorithm to a new, unseen problem. This problem also applies
to Transformers applied to multiple tasks and modalities. Related work has solved this problem by
tokenizing inputs to compatible, unified representations (Chowdhery et al., 2022). We expect these
techniques or others to be useful in the learning-to-learn context too.
Processing large datasets Learning algorithms often process millions of inputs before outputting
the final model. In the black-box setting, this is still difficult to achieve. Recurrency-based mod-
els usually suffer from accumulating errors, whereas Transformers computational complexity grows
quadratically in the sequence length. Additional work is required to build models capable of pro-
cessing and being trained on long sequences. Alternatively, parallel processing, similar to batching
in learning algorithms, may be a useful building block.

A.4    T HE TRANSITION TO GENERAL LEARNING - TO - LEARN

In Figure 4 we observe a quick transition from task iden-                           1.6
tification to generalizing learning-to-learn (the second
                                                                                    1.4
dashed line) as a function of the number of tasks. Pre-


                                                                    Training loss
viously, Figure 2 (c) showed a similar transition from no                           1.2
learning to learning on unseen tasks. What happens dur-                             1.0
ing this transition and when do the found solutions cor-
respond to memorizing (task memorization or seen task                               0.8
identification) vs generalizing solutions? To analyze the                           0.6
transition from task identification to general learning to
learn, we perform multiple training runs with varying                                     0k   2k   5k 8k 10k 12k 15k
                                                                                                      Number of tasks
seeds and numbers of tasks on MNIST. This is shown
in Figure 10, reporting the final training loss. We find            Figure 10: Solutions found by GPICL
that the distribution is bi-modal. Solutions at the end of          after meta-training are bi-modal,
training are memorizing or generalizing. Memorization               with a memorization and generaliza-
cluster: The larger the number of tasks, the more difficult         tion mode. Each point represents the
it is to memorize all of them with a fixed model capacity           training loss at the end of meta-training
(or learn to identify each task). Generalization cluster: At        for runs with different seeds and for
a certain number of tasks (here 6000), a transition point is        various numbers of tasks that include
reached where optimization sometimes discovers a lower              the transition boundary previously ob-
training loss that corresponds to a generalizing learning to        served. Almost all solutions are either
learn solution. For larger numbers of tasks the solutions           in a memorization cluster or in a gener-
always settle in the generalizing cluster.                          alization cluster.

A.5    A RCHITECTURAL D ETAILS AND H YPER - PARAMETERS

Transformer details By default, all Transformers have a key, value, and query size of 32, 8 heads,
and 4 layers, and model size of NM = 256. The model size defines the dimensionality of each
token, and the MLP between layers scales this size up to a hidden representation of 4 × NM where
NM corresponds to the model size.
Outer-product LSTM We slightly modify an LSTM by replacing the context state with an outer-
product update and inner-product read-out.
x a n d h = j n p . c o n c a t e n a t e ( [ i n p u t s , p r e v s t a t e . h i d d e n ] , a x i s =−1)

g a t e d = hk . L i n e a r ( 8 ∗ s i z e ∗ s e l f . num heads ) ( x a n d h )
g a t e d = g a t e d . r e s h a p e ( ( b a t c h s i z e , s e l f . num heads , 8 ∗ s i z e ) )
gated = checkpoint name ( gated , ’ gated ’ )

# i = input , g = cell gate , f = forget gate ,
# q = query , o = o u t p u t g a t e
s i z e s = (3 ∗ size , 3 ∗ size , size , s i z e )


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


i n d i c e s = np . cumsum ( s i z e s [ : − 1 ] )
k1 , k2 , q , o = j n p . s p l i t ( g a t e d , i n d i c e s , a x i s =−1)
s c a l e = j a x . nn . s o f t p l u s (
        hk . g e t p a r a m e t e r ( ’ k e y s c a l e ’ , s h a p e = ( ) , d t y p e =k1 . d t y p e ,
                                       i n i t =jnp . zeros ) )
i , g , f = j n p . e i n s u m ( ’ b h k i , b h k j −>k b h i j ’ ,
                                       j a x . nn . t a n h ( s p l i t a x i s ( k1 , ( 3 , s i z e ) ) ) ∗ s c a l e ,
                                       j a x . nn . t a n h ( s p l i t a x i s ( k2 , ( 3 , s i z e ) ) ) )
f = j a x . nn . s i g m o i d ( f + 1 ) # F o r g e t b i a s
c = f ∗ p r e v s t a t e . c e l l + j a x . nn . s i g m o i d ( i ) ∗ g
r e a d = j n p . e i n s u m ( ’ b h i j , b h i −>b h j ’ , c , q )
h = hk . F l a t t e n ( ) ( j a x . nn . s i g m o i d ( o ) ∗ j n p . t a n h ( r e a d ) )

VSML We use a version of VSML with a single layer and self-messages (Kirsch et al., 2021) of
size 8. Each LSTM has a hidden size of 16. For each LSTM update we use two micro-ticks. We
train on 225 tasks with a 90% biased permutation distribution. The task batch size is 8. All images
are scaled to a size of 32 × 32 × 3
VSML without symmetries Before activations are fed to a standard instantiation of VSML, all
inputs are projected using a learnable linear projection. Logits are generated using another lin-
ear projection, followed by a softmax. We use a version of VSML with a single layer and self-
messages (Kirsch et al., 2021) of size 8. The LSTMs are on a grid of k × k LSTMs, where
k ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24}. Each LSTM has a hidden size of 64. For each LSTM update we use
two micro-ticks. We train on 225 tasks with a 90% biased permutation distribution. The task batch
size is 128. All images are scaled to a size of 14 × 14.
LSTM For the results in Table 2, we used a hidden size of 256 and 105 optimization steps. Larger
hidden sizes were harder to optimize. We train on 225 tasks with a 90% biased permutation distri-
bution. The task batch size is 128. All images are scaled to a size of 32 × 32 × 3

A.6    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Most experiments can be run on a single GPU, some require 16 GPUs due to sequence length and
large batch sizes, with sufficient GPU memory (around 16 GB each). Some experiments, such as
Figure 2, require up to 1000 runs of that kind to produce the final heat-map.
Input normalization Each dataset is z-normalized by its mean and standard deviation across all
examples and pixels.
Number of seeds and shading If not noted otherwise, line plots use 8 seeds for meta-training and
at least 512 seeds for meta-testing. Shading indicates 95% confidence intervals.
Random dataset To test the meta-learned learning algorithms on a synthetically generated prob-
lem, we generate classification datasets of 10 datapoints where the input x ∈ R32×32×3 is drawn
from a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. For each datapoint, labels y are drawn from a uniform
categorical distribution of 10 classes.
Figure 2 The MLP has two hidden layers of varying size with relu activations. The Transformer
has the default parameters as defined above.
Figure 3 We use a transformer model with a model size of 256. We train on 225 tasks with a
90% biased permutation distribution. The task batch size is 128. All images are scaled to a size of
32 × 32 × 3 Inputs are z-normalized across the dataset and all input dimensions.
Table 2 The SGD baseline was obtained by sweeping over learning rates from 10−4 to 0.5, opti-
mizers SGD, Adam and Adam with weight decay, one or two layers, and hidden sizes of 32, 64,
or 128 on MNIST. The best configuration (most sample efficient) corresponds to a learning rate of
10−3 , Adam, and no hidden layers. SGD performs updates online on each one out of the 100 data
points. MAML is equivalent to SGD up to the difference that we meta-train the weight initialization
according to Equation 2 where θ are the initial parameters of the classifier that is then updated using
SGD at meta-test time. All black-box approaches do not use gradient descent at meta-test time. All
meta-learning approaches where meta-trained and tuned via grid search on MNIST.
Figure 4 Input normalization is disabled.

                                                         16
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Task             Task           General                                                                         Task             Task           General                                                                   Task             Task           General
                                                  memorization     identification learning to learn                                                               memorization     identification learning to learn                                                         memorization     identification learning to learn
                                        0.7           Seen MNIST                                                                                                      Seen FashionMNIST                                                                              0.6        Seen KMNIST
Accuracy improvement within sequence


                                                                                                                Accuracy improvement within sequence


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy improvement within sequence
                                                      Unseen MNIST                                                                                      0.6           Unseen MNIST                                                                                              Unseen MNIST
                                        0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                      Unseen FashionMNIST                                                                                             Unseen FashionMNIST                                                                                       Unseen FashionMNIST
                                        0.5           Unseen KMNIST                                                                                                   Unseen KMNIST                                                                                             Unseen KMNIST
                                                                                                                                                        0.4                                                                                                          0.4
                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                        0.3                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                        0.1                                                                                                             0.0
                                        0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0

                                        0.1                                                                                                             0.2                                                                                                          0.1
                                              20      23    26     29      212      215   218   221       224                                                 20      23    26     29      212      215   218    221   224                                                 20   23    26     29      212      215   218   221   224
                                                                        Number of tasks                                                                                                 Number of tasks                                                                                           Number of tasks

             Figure 11: Transformers exhibit three different phases in terms of meta-learned behavior on
             various meta training datasets. (1) When training on a small number of tasks, tasks are memo-
             rized. (2) Tasks from the training distribution are identified, which is evident as a within-sequence
             increase of performance. (3) When training across many tasks, we discover a learning algorithm
             that generalizes to unseen tasks and unseen datasets.

                                              Task                     Task           General                                                                 Task                     Task               General                                                           Task             Task           General
                                              memorization             identification learning to learn                                                       memorization             identification     learning to learn                                                 memorization     identification learning to learn
                                                     Seen MNIST                                                                                        0.7           Seen FashionMNIST                                                                               0.7        Seen CIFAR10
Accuracy improvement within sequence


                                                                                                                Accuracy improvement within sequence


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy improvement within sequence
                                                     Unseen MNIST                                                                                      0.6           Unseen MNIST                                                                                               Unseen MNIST
                                       0.6           Unseen FashionMNIST                                                                                             Unseen FashionMNIST                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Unseen FashionMNIST
                                                     Unseen KMNIST                                                                                     0.5           Unseen KMNIST                                                                                   0.5        Unseen KMNIST
                                                     Unseen CIFAR10                                                                                                  Unseen CIFAR10                                                                                             Unseen CIFAR10
                                       0.4           Unseen SVHN                                                                                       0.4           Unseen SVHN                                                                                     0.4        Unseen SVHN
                                                                                                                                                       0.3                                                                                                           0.3
                                       0.2                                                                                                             0.2                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                       0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                             20      23    26     29        212    215    218   221       224                                                20      23    26     29        212    215    218   221    224                                                 20   23    26     29      212      215   218   221   224
                                                                       Number of tasks                                                                                                 Number of tasks                                                                                            Number of tasks

             Figure 12: The algorithmic transitions also happen when using the embeddings from Sec-
             tion 4.4. This enables faster learning on datasets such as CIFAR10 with only 100 training examples
             while still generalizing to various datasets.
             Figure 5 The Transformer uses a task batch size of 512.
             Figure 6 Trained on 216 tasks generated from FashionMNIST with labels fully permuted.
             Figure 7 Trained on 216 tasks generated from FashionMNIST with labels fully permuted.
             Figure 8 Trained on 216 tasks generated from FashionMNIST with label permutations varied.
             Figure 10 We trained a Transformer with model size 64 and 32 seeds for each number-of-tasks-
             configuration.

               A.7                                    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

             Algorithmic transitions on other meta training datasets In Figure 2 and Figure 4 we observe a
             quick transition between task identification and general learning-to-learn as a function of the number
             of tasks. We show these transitions on more meta training datasets in Figure 11. When using
             ImageNet embeddings as discussed in Section 4.4, we observe similar transitions also on CIFAR10
             and other datasets as shown in Figure 12.
             Meta-test loss changes in algorithmic transitions We have observed algorithmic transitions
             across various datasets. In Section A.4 we observed that solutions found by GPICL after meta-
             training cluster into two groups of task memorization/identification and general learning-to-learn.
             As the number of tasks increases, more meta-training runs settle in the generalization cluster. A
             similar behavior can be observed for meta-test losses (on the final predicted example) in Figure 13.
             There is a visible transition to a much lower meta-test loss at a certain number of tasks on MNIST
             and KMNIST. During this transition, separate meta-training runs cluster into two separate modes.
             Also compare with Figure 11 and Figure 12. On FashionMNIST, this transition appears to be sig-
             nificantly smoother but still changes its ‘within sequence learning behavior’ in three phases as in
             Figure 11.
             Large State is Crucial for Learning We show that for learning-to-learn the size of the memory
             NS at meta-test time (or state more generally) is particularly important in order to be able to store
             learning progress. We test this by training several architectures with various NS in our meta-learning
             setting. In addition to Figure 5, Figure 14 show meta-test performance on more tasks and datasets.


                                                                                                                                                                                        17
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                          Full task range                                                                                           Zoomed into transition
                                           task = Seen MNIST         task = Unseen MNIST                                                                  task = Seen MNIST        task = Unseen MNIST
                                  5                                                                                                             5
                                  4                                                                                                             4
                                  3                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                    Test loss
               Test loss

                                  2                                                                                                             2
Trained on MNIST



                                  1                                                                                                             1
                                  0                                                                                                             0
                                      task = Unseen FashionMNIST                                        task = Unseen KMNIST                        task = Unseen FashionMNIST     task = Unseen KMNIST
                                  5                                                                                                             5
                                  4                                                                                                             4
                                  3                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                    Test loss
           Test loss


                                  2                                                                                                             2
                                  1                                                                                                             1
                                  0                                                                                                             0
                                      0k     10k 20k 30k                                           0k         10k 20k 30k                           19k        20k         20k   19k       20k         20k
                                            Number of tasks                                                  Number of tasks                               Number of tasks             Number of tasks
                                           task = Seen KMNIST                                           task = Unseen MNIST                               task = Seen KMNIST        task = Unseen MNIST
                                  5                                                                                                             5
                                  4                                                                                                             4
                                  3                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                    Test loss
                      Test loss


                                  2                                                                                                             2
       Trained on KMNIST


                                  1                                                                                                             1
                                  0                                                                                                             0
                                      task = Unseen FashionMNIST                                        task = Unseen KMNIST                        task = Unseen FashionMNIST     task = Unseen KMNIST
                                  5                                                                                                             5
                                  4                                                                                                             4
                                  3                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                    Test loss
Test loss


                                  2                                                                                                             2
                                  1                                                                                                             1
                                  0                                                                                                             0
                                      0k     10k 20k 30k                                           0k         10k 20k 30k                           17k        18k         18k   17k       18k         18k
                                            Number of tasks                                                  Number of tasks                               Number of tasks             Number of tasks
                                                                                                         task = Seen FashionMNIST                    task = Unseen MNIST
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                   4
                                                                     Trained on FashionMNIST


                                                                                                   3
                                                                                       Test loss


                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                        task = Unseen FashionMNIST                   task = Unseen KMNIST
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                   3
                                                                Test loss


                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                        0k      10k 20k 30k                     0k         10k 20k 30k
                                                                                                               Number of tasks                            Number of tasks
     Figure 13: The meta-test loss transitions at a certain number of tasks. Each point represents
     the meta-test loss on the final predicted example for meta-training runs with different seeds and for
     various numbers of tasks that include the transition boundary previously observed. There is a visible
     transition to a much lower meta-test loss at a certain number of tasks on MNIST and KMNIST. The
     right column zooms into the transition an shows how separate training runs cluster into two separate
     modes. On FashionMNIST, this transition appears to be significantly smoother.
                                                                                                                               18
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Seen MNIST                                    Unseen MNIST                      Unseen FashionMNIST                                 Seen MNIST
            (a) (seen task & seen dataset)                     (unseen task, seen dataset)         (unseen task, unseen dataset)                (b) (seen task & seen dataset)
           1.0                                                                                                                                 1.0
                 LSTM
                 Transformer
           0.8   Outer-product LSTM                                                                                                            0.8
                 VSML without symmetries
           0.6                                                                                                                                 0.6


                                                                                                                                    Accuracy
Accuracy



           0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4

           0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

           0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0
                 24   26   28 210 212      214                24   26     28 210 212    214        24   26   28 210 212       214                       210       212      214
                           State size                                     State size                         State size                                    Parameter count
   Figure 14: The state size (accessible memory) of an architecture most strongly predicts its
   performance as a general-purpose learning algorithm. (a) A large state is crucial for learning-
   to-learn to emerge. (b) The parameter count correlates less well with learning capabilities.


                                                        0.8
                                                        0.7
                                                        0.6
                                                        0.5
                                             accuracy


                                                        0.4
                                                        0.3
                                                        0.2                  task
                                                                        Seen FashionMNIST
                                                        0.1             Unseen FashionMNIST
                                                                        Unseen MNIST
                                                        0.0
                                                                    50                 100           200                400
                                                                                        sequence_length
   Figure 15: Increasing the sequence length during meta-training and meta-testing improves the pre-
   dictive performance of the final query in the sequence. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

   Sequence length In all experiments of the main paper we have meta-trained on a sequence length
   (number of examples) of 100. This is a small training dataset compared to many human-engineered
   learning algorithms. In general, as long as the learning algorithm does not overfit the training data,
   more examples should increase the predictive performance. In Figure 15 we investigate how our
   model scales to longer sequence lengths. We observe that the final accuracy of the last query in the
   sequence consistently increases with longer sequences. The generalization to longer sequences than
   those seen during meta-training is another important direction for future work.
   Gradient and update statistics To better understand the properties of the loss plateau, we visu-
   alize different statistics of the gradients, optimizer, and updates. In Figure 16, we track the expo-
   nential moving average statistics of Adam before the loss plateau and after (dashed vertical line).
   In Figure 17 we investigate how gradients differ between settings with a plateau and settings with a
   biased distribution where the plateau is avoided. We plot the cosine similarity between consecutive
   optimization steps, the gradient L2-norm, and the similarity and norm of the weight updates after
   normalization with Adam. The statistics are plotted cumulatively or smoothed with a Gaussian filter
   for better readability. The gradient and update cosine similarity differ only marginally between cases
   with a plateau and cases without. We observe that the gradient L2-norm in the plateau is half as big
   as in the biased distribution case, although the updates that Adam applies are going towards zero.
   This also results in not moving far from parameter initialization when in the plateau. We hypothesize
   this has to do with varying gradient norms when looking at individual parameter tensors (Figure 18).
   We observe that the gradients have a small norm for most tensors, except for the last layer.
   Batch size and number of tasks influence on plateau length Instead of looking at the plateau
   length in terms of the number of steps (Figure 7), we may also be concerned with the total number
   of tasks seen within the plateau. This is relevant in particular when the task batch is not processed
   fully in parallel but gradients are accumulated. Figure 19 shows the same figure but with the number
   of tasks in the plateau on the y-axis instead. It can be observed that larger batch-sizes actually
   increase the data requirement to leave the plateau, despite decreasing the plateau in terms of the
   number of optimization steps. Similarly, a larger task training distribution requires a larger number
   of tasks to be seen within the plateau.


                                                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               norm_type = MovAvg gradient norm                                 norm_type = MovAvg gradient squared norm

                   0.07                                                            0.0030

                   0.06                                                            0.0025
                   0.05
                                                                                   0.0020
         L2 norm   0.04


                                                                         L2 norm
                                                                                   0.0015
                   0.03
                                                                                   0.0010
                   0.02

                   0.01                                                            0.0005

                   0.00                                                            0.0000
                          0   10000    20000          30000   40000   50000                 0     10000     20000          30000   40000   50000
                                               step                                                                 step
Figure 16: L2-norms of the gradient and squared gradient exponential moving average in Adam.
The dashed line corresponds to the loss drop at the end of the loss plateau.
Adjusting Adam’s   or changing the optimizer As discussed in the main paper and visualized
in Figure 20b, decreasing   significantly shortens the plateau. This is due to the rescaling of very
small gradient magnitudes being limited by  . At the same time it incurs some instability. Directly
normalizing the gradient by applying the sign function element-wise (Figure 20a) to the exponential
gradient average shortens the plateau even further.
When memorization happens, can we elicit grokking? In Figure 7a we have seen that an insuf-
ficiently large task distribution can lead to memorization instead of general learning-to-learn. At
the same time, Figure 8 showed that biasing the data distribution is helpful to avoid loss plateaus.
Power et al. (2022) observed a phenomenon which they called “grokking” in which even after having
converged in terms of training loss, test loss may suddenly decrease. Large amounts of regulariza-
tion, like weight decay with a coefficient of 1.0 were found to facilitate this behavior. Is grokking
connected to the optimization behavior we observe, and if so, do similar interventions help in our
setting? We look in particular at the boundary of memorization and generalization (214 = 16384)
where doubling the number of tasks a few more times would lead to generalization. Figure 21
shows three task settings, 210 , 214 , 216 , and three different weight decay coefficients, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0.
The setting of 216 tasks shows generalization by default and only serves as a baseline for the weight
decay coefficient analysis. In the cases of memorization due to too few tasks, we have not been able
to produce grokking behavior.
Optimization difficulties in VSML Previous work has observed several optimization difficulties:
Slower convergence, local minima, unstable training, or loss plateaus at the beginning of training.
Figure 22 shows some of these difficulties in the context of VSML (Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2020).
Because VSML has permutation invariance and parameter sharing built into the architecture as an
inductive bias, changing the number of tasks has only a small effect. We observe that in particular
deeper architectures make meta-optimization more difficult.


                                                                          20
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a)                                                                 (b)                                                                 (c)
                                                                     1.00
                  2.2                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                     0.75
                  2.0
                                                                     0.50                                                                   0.4


                                                                                                                         smooth_grad_norm
                  1.8


                                              smooth_grad_sim
                        permute_labels_prob                          0.25
  training_loss


                  1.6             0.0
                                  0.1                                0.00                                                                   0.3
                  1.4             0.9
                                  1.0                                0.25                                                                   0.2
                  1.2                                                0.50
                  1.0                                                0.75                                                                   0.1
                  0.8                                                1.00                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                                        140
                  200                                                    100                                                            120

                                                                         80                                                             100
                  150


                                                                                                                      cum_grad_norm
init_param_dist


                                                        cum_grad_sim


                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                         60
                  100                                                                                                                       60
                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                            40
                  50                                                     20                                                                 20
                                                                          0                                                                  0
                   0
                                                                     1.00                                                               0.30
                                                                     0.75                                                               0.25
                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                                   smooth_update_norm
                                              smooth_update_sim


                                                                                                                                        0.20
                                                                     0.25
                                                                     0.00                                                               0.15
                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                     0.50
                                                                     0.75                                                               0.05
                                                                     1.00                                                               0.00


                                                                         400                                                            100

                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                         300
                                                                                                                      cum_update_norm
                                                        cum_update_sim


                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                         100                                                                20

                                                                          0                                                                  0
                                                                               0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                                                                             step                                                               step
  Figure 17: Gradient and Adam update statistics for differently biased data distributions. (a) Plateaus
  in the loss are influenced by the bias in the data distribution. Plateaus result in moving away slowly
  from the parameter initialization. (b) The cosine similarity of both gradients and updates in consec-
  utive steps is only marginally different with or without a loss plateau. (c) While the gradient norm
  is about half as big when a plateau exists, the updates are going towards zero.


                                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          transformer/ln_f/offset/grad_norm                                                      ~/pos_embs/grad_sim
                   transformer/h3_mlp/linear/b/grad_norm                                                transformer/ln_f/scale/grad_sim
                     transformer/h3_ln_2/offset/grad_norm                                              transformer/ln_f/offset/grad_sim
               transformer/h3_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_norm                                      transformer/h3_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_sim
                      transformer/h3_ln_1/scale/grad_norm                                      transformer/h3_mlp/linear/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h3_attn/value/b/grad_norm                                         transformer/h3_mlp/linear/b/grad_sim
                 transformer/h3_attn/query/w/grad_norm                                             transformer/h3_ln_2/scale/grad_sim
                  transformer/h3_attn/query/b/grad_norm                                       transformer/h3_attn/query/w/grad_sim
                 transformer/h3_attn/linear/w/grad_norm                                       transformer/h3_attn/linear/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h3_attn/linear/b/grad_norm                                          transformer/h3_attn/key/w/grad_sim
                     transformer/h3_attn/key/b/grad_norm                                          transformer/h3_attn/key/b/grad_sim
                  transformer/h2_mlp/linear/w/grad_norm                                     transformer/h2_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_sim
                     transformer/h2_ln_2/offset/grad_norm                                   transformer/h2_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_sim
                 transformer/h2_attn/value/w/grad_norm                                             transformer/h2_ln_2/scale/grad_sim
                  transformer/h2_attn/value/b/grad_norm                                     transformer/h3_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_sim
                 transformer/h2_attn/query/w/grad_norm                                            transformer/h2_ln_2/offset/grad_sim
                  transformer/h2_attn/query/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h2_ln_1/scale/grad_sim
                 transformer/h2_attn/linear/w/grad_norm                                       transformer/h2_attn/value/w/grad_sim
                      transformer/h0_ln_1/scale/grad_norm                                      transformer/h2_attn/linear/b/grad_sim
                  transformer/h3_mlp/linear/w/grad_norm                                           transformer/h2_attn/key/w/grad_sim
               transformer/h1_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_norm                                        transformer/h1_attn/value/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h1_mlp/linear/w/grad_norm                                     transformer/h1_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_sim
                     transformer/h2_attn/key/b/grad_norm                                      transformer/h2_attn/linear/w/grad_sim
                   transformer/h1_mlp/linear/b/grad_norm                                    transformer/h1_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h1_ln_2/offset/grad_norm                                   transformer/h0_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_sim
                      transformer/h1_ln_1/scale/grad_norm                                     transformer/h3_attn/value/w/grad_sim
               transformer/h2_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h2_ln_1/offset/grad_sim
               transformer/h1_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_norm                                          transformer/h1_mlp/linear/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h1_ln_1/offset/grad_norm                                         transformer/h1_ln_2/offset/grad_sim
                  transformer/h0_attn/query/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h1_ln_1/scale/grad_sim
                  transformer/h1_attn/query/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h1_ln_2/scale/grad_sim
                     transformer/h1_attn/key/w/grad_norm                                       transformer/h1_attn/linear/b/grad_sim
               transformer/h0_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h1_attn/key/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h1_attn/value/b/grad_norm                                           transformer/h2_attn/key/b/grad_sim
                 transformer/h0_attn/value/w/grad_norm                                         transformer/h0_mlp/linear/w/grad_sim
tensor


                                                                                   tensor

                  transformer/h0_attn/value/b/grad_norm                                            transformer/h0_ln_2/scale/grad_sim
                 transformer/h0_attn/query/w/grad_norm                                            transformer/h0_ln_2/offset/grad_sim
                     transformer/h0_ln_2/offset/grad_norm                                     transformer/h0_attn/query/w/grad_sim
                 transformer/h1_attn/value/w/grad_norm                                             transformer/h0_ln_1/scale/grad_sim
                 transformer/h0_attn/linear/w/grad_norm                                           transformer/h0_ln_1/offset/grad_sim
                     transformer/h2_ln_1/offset/grad_norm                                         transformer/h1_attn/key/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h0_attn/key/b/grad_norm                                       transformer/h0_attn/query/b/grad_sim
                                    linear_out/w/grad_norm                                    transformer/h0_attn/linear/w/grad_sim
                                     linear_out/b/grad_norm                                    transformer/h0_attn/linear/b/grad_sim
                                         linear/w/grad_norm                                   transformer/h2_attn/query/w/grad_sim
                     transformer/h1_attn/key/b/grad_norm                                                               linear/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h1_attn/linear/b/grad_norm                                                                linear/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h0_attn/key/w/grad_norm                                          transformer/h0_attn/key/w/grad_sim
                  transformer/h2_attn/linear/b/grad_norm                                       transformer/h2_attn/query/b/grad_sim
                      transformer/h1_ln_2/scale/grad_norm                                     transformer/h1_attn/query/w/grad_sim
                      transformer/h0_ln_2/scale/grad_norm                                   transformer/h0_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h3_ln_1/offset/grad_norm                                     transformer/h0_attn/value/w/grad_sim
                 transformer/h1_attn/query/w/grad_norm                                         transformer/h1_mlp/linear/w/grad_sim
                     transformer/h3_attn/key/w/grad_norm                                          transformer/h3_ln_2/offset/grad_sim
                      transformer/h2_ln_2/scale/grad_norm                                      transformer/h3_attn/query/b/grad_sim
                      transformer/h2_ln_1/scale/grad_norm                                      transformer/h1_attn/query/b/grad_sim
               transformer/h0_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_norm                                                              linear_1/b/grad_sim
                  transformer/h0_mlp/linear/w/grad_norm                                         transformer/h0_mlp/linear/b/grad_sim
                  transformer/h0_attn/linear/b/grad_norm                                          transformer/h1_ln_1/offset/grad_sim
                      transformer/h3_ln_2/scale/grad_norm                                      transformer/h2_attn/value/b/grad_sim
                                    ~/pos_embs/grad_norm                                       transformer/h3_attn/linear/b/grad_sim
               transformer/h3_mlp/linear_1/b/grad_norm                                         transformer/h0_attn/value/b/grad_sim
                   transformer/h2_mlp/linear/b/grad_norm                                                           linear_1/w/grad_sim
                           transformer/ln_f/scale/grad_norm                                    transformer/h2_mlp/linear/w/grad_sim
                                          linear/b/grad_norm                                       transformer/h3_ln_1/scale/grad_sim
               transformer/h2_mlp/linear_1/w/grad_norm                                          transformer/h2_mlp/linear/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h2_attn/key/w/grad_norm                                      transformer/h1_attn/linear/w/grad_sim
                 transformer/h3_attn/value/w/grad_norm                                         transformer/h3_attn/value/b/grad_sim
                 transformer/h1_attn/linear/w/grad_norm                                           transformer/h0_attn/key/b/grad_sim
                     transformer/h0_ln_1/offset/grad_norm                                         transformer/h3_ln_1/offset/grad_sim
                   transformer/h0_mlp/linear/b/grad_norm                                       transformer/h1_attn/value/b/grad_sim
                                                                      10 9          10 7      10 5     10 3                                           10 1           0.1           0.0       0.1        0.2   0.3
                                                                                      tensor_grad_norm                                                                                   tensor_grad_sim
Figure 18: Gradient L2 norms (left) and gradient cosine similarity for consecutive optimization steps
(right) for different parameter tensors. The last (output) layer has the largest gradients. Most other
gradients are small.

                                        # of tasks                                                                                                 Task batch size
                                  227         216                                                                                            227           25
                                              218                                                                                                          27
   Plateau number of tasks seen


                                                                                                              Plateau number of tasks seen


                                  226         220                                                                                            226           29
                                  225         222                                                                                            225           211
                                              224
                                  224                                                                                                        224
                                  223                                                                                                        223
                                  222                                                                                                        222
                                  221                                                                                                        221
                                  220                                                                                                        220
                                        25      26   27     28      29       210            211       212                                                217               219           221          223      225
                                                          Task batch size                                                                                                        Number of tasks

Figure 19: Instead of plotting the loss plateau length in terms of optimization steps, we look at the
total number of tasks seen within the plateau as a function of the task batch size and the number
of tasks in the training distribution. An increase in the task batch size leads to more tasks to be
processed to leave the plateau.


                                                                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  (a)                                                                                                                      (b)
                                                                                                           # of tasks                                                                                                               # of tasks
                               215                                                                         216                                          215                                                                         216
                                                                                                           218                                                                                                                      218
                                                                                                           220                                                                                                                      220
                               214                                                                         222                                          214                                                                         222
Plateau length


                                                                                                                         Plateau length
                                                                                                           224                                                                                                                      224
                               213                                                                         Optimizer                                    213
                                                                                                           Adam                                                                                                                     10 24
                               212                                                                         Sign                                                                                                                     10 16
                                                                                                                                                        212                                                                         10 8
                               211                                                                                                                      211
                               210
                                     25         26   27        28      29      210   211         212                                                          25         26   27        28      29      210   211         212
                                                             Task batch size                                                                                                          Task batch size

                               227                                                                         # of tasks                                                                                                               # of tasks
                                                                                                           216                                          227                                                                         216
                                                                                                           218                                                                                                                      218
Plateau number of tasks seen


                                                                                                                         Plateau number of tasks seen


                                                                                                                                                        226
                               225                                                                         220                                                                                                                      220
                                                                                                           222                                          225                                                                         222
                                                                                                           224                                                                                                                      224
                               223                                                                         Optimizer                                    224
                                                                                                           Adam                                         223                                                                         10 24
                                                                                                           Sign                                                                                                                     10 16
                               221                                                                                                                      222                                                                         10 8
                                                                                                                                                        221
                               219
                                                                                                                                                        220

                                     25         26   27        28      29      210   211         212                                                          25         26   27        28      29      210   211         212
                                                             Task batch size                                                                                                          Task batch size

                               227                                                                     Task batch size                                                                                                          Task batch size
                                                                                                       25                                               227                                                                     25
                                                                                                       27                                                                                                                       27
Plateau number of tasks seen


                                                                                                                         Plateau number of tasks seen


                                                                                                                                                        226
                               225                                                                     29                                                                                                                       29
                                                                                                       211                                              225                                                                     211
                                                                                                       Optimizer
                               223                                                                     Adam                                             224                                                                     10 24
                                                                                                       Sign                                             223                                                                     10 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10 8
                               221                                                                                                                      222
                                                                                                                                                        221
                               219
                                                                                                                                                        220

                                          217        219            221        223         225                                                                     217        219           221         223         225
                                                           Number of tasks                                                                                                          Number of tasks

Figure 20: (a) When replacing Adam with a sign normalization of the gradient or (b) reducing   the
plateau length is significantly shorter.


                                                                                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    num_tasks = 1024 | weight_decay = 0.01                  num_tasks = 1024 | weight_decay = 0.1                  num_tasks = 1024 | weight_decay = 1.0

       4.0

       3.5

       3.0                    task
                        Training loss
                        Seen FashionMNIST
       2.5              Unseen FashionMNIST
                        Unseen MNIST
loss


       2.0

       1.5

       1.0

       0.5

                    num_tasks = 16384 | weight_decay = 0.01                num_tasks = 16384 | weight_decay = 0.1                 num_tasks = 16384 | weight_decay = 1.0

       4.0

       3.5

       3.0

       2.5
loss


       2.0

       1.5

       1.0

       0.5

                    num_tasks = 65536 | weight_decay = 0.01                num_tasks = 65536 | weight_decay = 0.1                 num_tasks = 65536 | weight_decay = 1.0

       4.0

       3.5

       3.0

       2.5
loss


       2.0

       1.5

       1.0

       0.5

             0   25000 50000 75000 100000125000150000175000200000   0   25000 50000 75000 100000125000150000175000200000   0   25000 50000 75000 100000125000150000175000200000
                                    step                                                   step                                                   step

Figure 21: We investigate whether grokking as defined in Power et al. (2022) can be produced when
we observe memorization on a smaller numbers of tasks. This would correspond to the test loss
decreasing long after the training loss has converged. We have not been able to elicit this behavior
when looking at different numbers of tasks and weight decay coefficients.


                                                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            # of tasks = 20 | 1 layers    # of tasks = 20 | 2 layers    # of tasks = 20 | 3 layers    # of tasks = 20 | 4 layers
                2.25
                                      0% permuted
                2.00                  10% permuted
                1.75                  100% permuted
Training loss


                1.50
                1.25
                1.00
                0.75
                0.50
                            # of tasks = 225 | 1 layers   # of tasks = 225 | 2 layers   # of tasks = 225 | 3 layers   # of tasks = 225 | 4 layers
                2.25
                2.00
                1.75
Training loss


                1.50
                1.25
                1.00
                0.75
                0.50
                       0k      10k 20k 30k 40k 50k 0k        10k 20k 30k 40k 50k 0k        10k 20k 30k 40k 50k 0k        10k 20k 30k 40k 50k
                                     Step                          Step                          Step                          Step

                               Figure 22: Loss plateaus and slow convergence with deeper variants of VSML.


                                                                                   25
