Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NDUCING P RECISION IN L AGRANGIAN N EURAL N ET-
WORKS :   P ROOF OF CONCEPT APPLICATION ON
C HAOTIC SYSTEMS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Solutions of dynamic systems that exhibit chaotic behavior are particularly sen-
         sitive to errors in initial/intermediate state estimates when long term dynamics is
         of interest. Lagrangian Neural Networks (LNN) are a class of physics induced
         learning methods that seamlessly integrate physical conservation laws into func-
         tional solutions, by forming a parametric Lagrangian for the system of interest.
         However it has been seen that the function approximation error associated with
         the parametric Lagrangian modelling could prove to be catastrophic for the pre-
         diction of long term dynamics of chaotic systems. This makes improving the
         precision of the parametric Lagrangian particularly crucial. Considering the same
         in this work a modified LNN approach is proposed, where a customized neural
         network architecture is designed to directly emphasize the relative importance of
         each significant bit in the Lagrangian estimates produced. We evaluate our method
         on two dynamic systems that are well known in the literature in exhibiting deter-
         ministic chaos, namely the double pendulum and Henon-Helies systems. Further,
         we compare the obtained solutions with those estimated by Finite Element solvers
         (under optimal conditions) to validate the relative accuracy. We observe that the
         trajectory deviations as a result of chaotic behavior can be significantly reduced
         by the process of explicitly enforcing the precision requirement for the parametric
         Lagrangian, as modelled using the proposed approach.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Differential Equations (DEs) play a prominent role in the dynamic modelling of virtually every phys-
ical system Braun & Golubitsky (1983); Bandrauk et al. (2007). Accounting for the same, the litera-
ture associated with the solution estimation of differential equations are well versed. The simplest of
which are solution methods involving the estimation of direct symbolic functional forms, note that
the same have been developed only for a minor set of differential equation classes Bluman & Anco
(2008). For the large majority of DEs which are used in the modelling of systems of practical in-
terest, the closed form symbolic functional solutions cannot be estimated. A prominent workaround
involves the use of Finite Element methods Logg et al. (2012), the same estimates point-wise nu-
merical solutions of a given differential equation (for a set of points defined by a mesh-geometry)
and interpolates the same to obtain the solution in a predetermined domain. Physics informed neu-
ral networks (PINNs) are a class of mesh-free alternative that provide functional solutions for DEs.
A most recent study Grossmann et al. (2023) found that PINNs show lower computational cost (2
orders of magnitude) in comparison to Finite Element methods when estimating solutions of DEs
of higher dimensionality, as the latter’s computational complexity scales with the dimensionalilty
due to the increased complexity of mesh required. PINNs being inherently mesh-free accounts for
minimal domain points for solution estimation. PINNs could also integrate system configurations
into the solution space Raissi et al. (2019), eliminating the need for re-estimation of the solution
space in accordance with change of system parameters. Another notable advantage of PINNs is
that they can seamlessly integrate domain information in the form of data collected from real world
settings Raissi et al. (2017) as a set of additional constraints on the solution space. The typical set of
DEs that could be solved using PINNs range from (but are not limited to) integer-order Raissi et al.
(2019), integro-differential equations Sirignano & Spiliopoulos (2018); Lu et al. (2021), fractional


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PDEs Pang et al. (2019), high dimensional-PDEs Zeng et al. (2022) or even stochastic PDEs Zhang
et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2020). The applicability of the standard PINN based procedure carried out
for estimating functional solutions for a given ordinary differential equation is well studied within
multiple domains of science and engineering Bararnia & Esmaeilpour (2022); Misyris et al. (2020);
Cai et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2022). In most PINN settings aimed to solve a governing differential
equation of system (with state x), the functional solution f (x) is approximated by numerical opti-
mization of the neural network parameters Sexton et al. (1998) with the optimization objective as
the residue (Equation 1) obtained from substituting the PINN functional solution and it’s derivatives
into the differential equation of interest.

                                       n                                      2
                       res          1X                 ′        ′′
                             OD =         DE f (xi ), f (xi ), f (xi ), ...                        (1)
                                    n i=0

Note that the residue based objective values are computed at discrete state points within a limited
domain from which coordinate points are sampled in batches at random, the same is inherently effi-
cient as compared to Finite Element alternatives, eliminating the need for complex mesh geometries.
Given any differential equation with state a set of state variables x, the same can be written in the
residual form : DE [f (x)] = 0. The residues can be evaluated by considering a discretized do-
main over the state variables with (n) sample state coordinates (dataset of input variables), usually
obtained through uniform sampling over state variable bounds (domain). Note that another signifi-
cant component is the boundary/initial conditions (BCs) required to form the unique solution of the
corresponding differential equation. For most standard cases of PINN solution estimation the same
could be added directly into the functional solution form, by re-parameterizing the output space
of the PINN model. In the case of a re-parameterized solution p f (x), the overall objective loss
uses in the optimization procedure of the PINN model could be directly estimated by substituting
the same in Equation 1, where the corresponding functional or derivative components required to
solve the differential equation at a given point could be computed using the re-parameterized so-
lution and its corresponding derivatives (which could be computed using automatic differentiation
procedure Baydin et al. (2018)). In its most simple form, the PINN based algorithm for the solution
estimation of a differential equation (DE) is as shown in Algorithm 3. Note that the PINN based
functional modelling as illustrated in Algorithm 3 has been proven to be applicable to many phys-
ical systems, provided that the given set of boundary conditions is sufficient enough to guarantee
a unique solution for the governing equations to be solved. For most cases the same is the only
essential condition for convergence (obtain optimal solution). The gradients (partial derivatives with
respect to functional model parameters) necessary for the back-propagation step (parameter opti-
mization) is computed using the automatic differentiation method for neural networks. Generally
a typical stochastic gradient descent (or its derivatives) based optimization strategy Bottou (2012);
Kingma & Ba (2014) is used to optimize the network weights. Specifically for solving differential
equations using PINNs, the solution as provided by the PINN can be augmented to satisfy exactly
the required initial conditions Lagaris et al. (1998), Dirichlet boundary conditions Sheng & Yang
(2021), Neumann boundary conditions McFall & Mahan (2009); Beidokhti & Malek (2009), peri-
odic boundary conditions Zhang et al. (2020); Dong & Ni (2021), Robin boundary and interface
conditions Lagari et al. (2020). Since the augmentation so performed is inherently functional, the
automatic differentiation procedure can still be followed for all necessary gradient computation op-
erations. Note that the modelling brought in by re-parameterising the solutions so as to inherently
satisfy the boundary conditions are largely efficient as compared to vanilla counterparts such as reg-
ularization terms in optimization objectives; a straightforward argument for the same can be made
by analysing the complexity driven convergence trends of such a weighted objective function. In
addition to the same, if some features of the DE solutions are known a priori, it is also possible to
encode them in network architectures, for example, multi-scale features, even/odd symmetries of
energy conservation Mattheakis et al. (2019), high frequencies Cai et al. (2020) and so on.
Energy conservation is of prime interest in many dynamical systems, which helps in a more robust
modelling of long term dynamics. A classical implementation of the same is by explicit energy
conservation formulations such as gradient based optimization of a weighted objective, in which a
component of the objective function is an explicit comparison between the known total energy of
a system with the energy estimate obtained from predicted quantities. However most of these ap-
proaches fail to generalise or achieve sufficient precision requirements, a prominent reason for the
same would be due to the increase in the variance of the overall objective function used. A much


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


noted alternative that efficiently addresses this problem is the Hamiltonian Neural Network Grey-
danus et al. (2019) (HNN) formulation where instead of a direct modeling of a solutions or explicit
objective components for energy conservation, the Hamiltonian of a system is modelled, from which
quantities of interest that define the complete system dynamics (usually position, momenta) can be
easily derived. Given a set of generalized coordinates {q, p} for a system with N degrees of free-
dom, that is q = {q1 , q2 , ..., qN } and p = {p1 , p2 , ..., pN }. The pair (q, p) represents the complete
state of the system (usually positions and momenta). If the total energy of the of the system is
conserved, the following (Equation 2) can be written in terms of the Hamiltonian analogue H.
                                     ∂q   ∂H                      ∂p    ∂H
                                        =                 ,          =−                                (2)
                                     ∂t   ∂p                      ∂t    ∂q

Note that the left hand side of both equations (in Equation 2) is the constraint used to optimize the
network parameters. In a data driven approach, the same maybe estimated using finite difference in
time where the state evolution, i.e., data required is known. The complete objective function used
for optimizing the Hamiltonian neural network is as shown in Equation 3.
                                                                   2                   2
                                                ∂q ∂H                      ∂p ∂H
                               OHN N =             −                   +      +                        (3)
                                                ∂t   ∂p                    ∂t   ∂q

Similarly Lagrangian neural networks (LNNs) Cranmer et al. (2020) make use of observed states of
a system to model the Lagrangian directly. The advantage of the same over HNNs comes from the
ability of the Lagrangian to be defined over an arbitrary coordinates in space as opposed to strictly
canonical spaces in the case HNNs. Given a set of coordinates xt = (q, q̇) we can make use of
the Lagrangian as modelled using LNNs to estimate q̈ by making use of the modified Lagrangian
equation Hand & Finch (1998) as follows,

                                                        −1
                                              ∂2L                         ∂2L

                                                                  ∂L
                                   q̈ =                              − q̇                              (4)
                                              ∂ q̇ 2              ∂q      ∂q∂ q̇

By integrating Equation 4 after substituting the black-box Lagrangian L, one could re-estimate the
state variables (q, q̇) as functions in time, solved for a specific set of initial condition. The re-
estimated state variables could therefore by compared with pre known state variable data (similar to
the HNN objective) to optimize the LNN. As per Grossmann et al. (2023) the most prominent limi-
tations of differential equation solutions as estimated using vanilla PINNs is the larger relative error
margins in the functional solutions as compared to Finite element alternatives. The time indepen-
dent nature of solutions as estimated by LNNs makes it inherently superior to traditional alternatives,
however the function approximation error in the Neural Network based solution is inherently higher
than the Finite Element alternatives. Note that the same acts as a significant limitation to the LNN
or HNN approach as a reduced precision in the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian parametric model causes
significant solution deviations in systems that exhibit chaotic behavior Cranmer et al. (2020). In
this work we hope to effectively address this limitation by adding explicit modelling constraints to
preserve the numerical precision of the LNN model upto a specified limit.

2    M ETHODOLOGY
As per the Lagrangian Neural Network (LNN) formulation as proposed in Ref Cranmer et al. (2020),
a functional (parametric) Lagrangian could be estimated for any system whose state (xt ) at time (t)
is defined by a set of position and velocity coordinates (q, q̇). Here the data D used consists of valid
trajectory estimates D = {qn , q̇n }. In other words, the dataset D consists of N randomly sampled
trajectory points (initial values) sampled over the space of possible state variable (q, q̇) values. By
doing so one hopes to exhaust a wide range of possible configurations of the system of interest. The
vectorized Lagrangian formulation of any dynamic system can be written as,
                                           d
                                              ∇q̇ L = ∇q L                                     (5)
                                           dt
Expanding the Equation 5 by propagating the time derivative through the gradient of the Lagrangian
and isolating q̈ would result in Equation 6. The LNN models a parametric Lagrangian L, which is


                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the direct predicted quantity of the neural network. Equation 6 can be applied on L so as to obtain
an estimated functional form for q̈pred , valid for a given domain and system specifics/configuration.

                                               −1
                             q̈ = ∇q̇ ∇⊤              ∇q L − (∇q ∇⊤

                                       q̇ L                       q̇ L)q̇                          (6)

Note that trajectory of the state variables can be estimated through numerical integration of q̈pred
obtained using Equation 6. Now one can easily form the basis for the predictive error used for
optimizing the parametric Lagrangian L as modelled by the Lagrangian Neural Network. That is the
optimization constraint is to minimize the predictive error between the trajectory estimates obtained
by integrating the estimated q̈pred and known values of state variables (q, q̇).

2.1   M OTIVATION

This work builds upon the LNN formulation Cranmer et al. (2020), in an effort to effectively address
the function approximation error associated with the modelling of the parametric Lagrangian L.
We show that by adding additional constraints aimed at the numerical precision of the Lagrangian
estimates, the deviations that could occur while estimating long term solutions could be considerably
addressed. That is, as a direct consequence of a more precise Lagrangian estimate obtained, the latter
estimates of quantities (state variables) that emerge from same are also inherently better in terms of
precision. In a mathematical perspective, the precision improved Lagrangian directly results in
a significantly lower cumulative integration error, when estimating the trajectory states (q, q̇) by
numerical integration of q̈pred . This is particularly important for chaotic systems where incurring
numerical errors during the solution estimation process can cause significant changes in the long
term estimates of solutions or trajectories Duit et al. (1998). In this work we introduce a scalable
formulation that can explicitly and independently condition on the accuracy of each significant digit
in the solution space obtained, when using a Lagrangian Neural Network.


Figure 1: Branched Multi-Output Deep Neural Network architecture used in this study, where each
output branch is used to independently predict each significant digit of the output quantity.


2.2   P RECISION C ONSTRAINT

Suppose the dataset D used to train the LNN consists of N sample points (initial values) and let the
predicted state estimate at t = 0 obtained by integrating the q̈pred (obtained from plugging in the
LNN into Eqn. 6) be (qpred , q̇pred ), then the objective loss used for the optimization of the LNN is
the average of L2 norm values (Mean Squared Error) over all residues (each data-point) as shown in
Eqn. 7.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     N
                                 1 X i         i
                       Opred =        ∥q    − qdata ∥2 + ∥q̇pred
                                                            i        i
                                                                 − q̇data ∥2                       (7)
                                 N i=1 pred

The proposed advancement in this work can be split into two parts: 1. The modified neural network
architecture, and 2. The regularization terms added into the overall objective function (loss) during
the parametric optimization process (training) of the LNN. The deep neural network used in this
study follows a doubling sequence neural scheme by which the number of layers of the same could
be scaled to arbitrary values. Also note that the neural network used is infinitely differentiable
(end to end), i.e., the partial derivatives of any order with respect to any input quantity is directly
estimated using automatic graph differentiation Griewank et al. (1989). The typical structure of the
neural network architecture used involves predicting each digit of the output quantity (L) using
a separate branch, the complete architecture is as illustrated in Fig. 1. Note that to effectively
use this method we first fix the required number of digits that are of interest based on the overall
output range. For simplicity we assume that the predicted Lagrangian estimate is the n-bit binary
integer representation of the actual Lagrangian. Sigmoid activation is used to bound and convert
the predicted value (output) of each branch to directly estimate the corresponding bit of the binary
signed integer representation of the quantity being predicted. Equation 8 is used to recover the
value of the Lagrangian post the first stage of model output. Where, B0 is the rounded output value
(rounded value of sigmoid output) of the branch that predicts the sign of the integer, and each Bi
correspond to the rounded output of the branches that predicts the bit value corresponding to each
binary digit. Also note that k is a parameter that directly decides the number of decimal places in
the model output post conversion.
                                                        n
                                                 1     X
                                      Lpred = k B0         2i × Bi                                  (8)
                                                10     i=1

The aim of the added regularization term in the objective function is to ensure that the prediction
of each binary bit is accurate once the parametric optimization process of the neural network is
complete. The expected dataset to train the LNN using the added regularization factor is a set
of initial conditions ( state variables : {qi , q̇i } ) and Analytical Lagrangian (L) values, that are
randomly sampled over a range of possible configurations of state variables. Let us suppose that
the dataset consists of N data-points, each with true Lagrangian estimates Li calculated using the
                                                                                   i
corresponding Lagrangian equation of the system of interest. Further, let BjL be the j th binary
value in the signed binary representation of Li post scaling the same using the factor 10k . Then the
corresponding regularization factor to be added to the overall objective loss of the LNN is estimated
                                                 i
as the binary cross entropy value between BjL and the predicted sigmoid probabilities Bjp for each
corresponding bit as shown in Eqn. 9.

                            N   n
                         −1 X X h Li                        i
                                                                               i
                Oreg =             Bj × log(Bjp ) − (1 − BjL ) × log(1 − Bjp )                     (9)
                         N i=1 j=0

Now, the total objective loss used in the parametric optimization of the modified LNN is the weighted
sum of the prediction loss (Eqn. 7) and the regularization factor (Eqn. 9) as shown in Eqn. 10, where
λ is the scale factor.

                                      Ototal = Opred + λOreg                                      (10)
Although the analytical form of the Lagrangian is know for a large set of physical systems, it’s to
be noted that a significant limitation of this approach is the requirement of the same. The proceed-
ing section explores a notable alternative approach to form intermediate temporal estimates of the
Lagrangian in hope of eliminating the need for an analytical Lagrangian for the system of interest.

2.3   S TEADY S TATE A SSUMPTION - P ROPOSAL

In this section we introduce a regularization strategy to enforce precision using the formulation
mentioned in the preceding section when the explicit Lagrangian equation of the system of interest


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in not known. We base the regularization on the fact that the output estimate of the LNN at epoch
(e − 1) in the model training process should be equivalent to the estimate at epoch (e) when the
modelling is close to being optimal, as the quantity being approximated has no associated stochastic
nature. Let us suppose e Lpred is the predicted output by the LNN, where e denote the epoch count
of the LNN training process, the Lagrangian estimate at epoch e − 1 (just preceding) could be used
as the pseudo true estimate for estimating the precision regularization term (Eqn. 9) for the estimate
at the current epoch (e), acting as an alternative to the true value. The precision based regularization
term can now be estimated using Eqn. 9 considering Lipseudo as the true estimate. Additionally
it’s necessary to enforce that the temporal error on the Lagrangian estimates given by the LNN is
minimized by training progress. This is particularly clucial to ensure the validity assumption on the
invariant nature of the estimates formed under optimal model conditions. We estimate the temporal
convergence regularization term as shown in Eqn. 11, when the training dataset D contains N sample
points.

                                            N
                                        1 X     e                         2
                              OTC =                 Lipred − e−1 Lipred                            (11)
                                        N i=1

Note that in most cases the scale of the quantity being approximated is unknown apriori. Since
stability of the numerical value of the Lagrangian should not depend on the relative scale variations
of the same between sample points, we follow a normalization procedure as outlined in Algorithm 1
for the purposes of estimating Eqn. 11 invariant of the relative scale of each Lagrangian estimate
(Lipred ).

Algorithm 1: Intermediate Estimate for Temporal Convergence Assessment
Data: No of significant digits : n, Model Prediction : Lipred
Result: Obtain : temp Lipred
Estimate Current Scale for Normalization
Ln = log10 ( Lipred );
Ln = ⌊Ln ⌋
Normalize the Output Using Scale Estimate
    Lpred = Lipred × 10−Ln ;
norm i

Upscale to Meet Precision Requirements
temp i
    Lpred = norm Lipred × 10n
Return temp Lipred

Another factor to note is that the output values produced in the initial stages of neural optimiza-
tion procedures are largely transient, enforcing temporal convergence regularization to stabilize the
model predictions at such stages causes sub-optimal convergence. To ensure generality of the overall
algorithm we weight the temporal convergence loss term (OTC ) with an training epoch dependent
factor that increases (linear scaling) with training progress.

                                                         Cepoch
                                        µT C = G                                                   (12)
                                                         Nepochs

A typical example of the scale factor used to relatively scale the temporal convergence component of
the objective is as shown in Equation 12. Where, Cepoch is the current epoch and G is a tunable scalar
hyper-parameter, that decides the overall relative weight of the temporal convergence component to
total objective loss of the LNN. The total objective loss for the LNN optimization can be written as
the relative weighted sum of the three loss components (Opred , Oreg , OTC ) as shown in Eqn. 13.
                            Ototal = Opred + µT C × OT C + λ × Oreg                                (13)

Also note that the presence of regularization terms in the objective function is directly compatible
with any Auto-grad based stochastic gradient strategy used to optimize the weights of the neural
network, since the expected value of the overall objective is still tending to zero in the asymptotic


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2: LNN training process with implicit precision enforcement.
Data: Span of Initial States : D = {qi , q̇i }, Precision : k
Result: Lagrangian Neural Network : LN N ( q, q̇ )
Initialize LNN model with random weights
Model (LN N ) = Create-New-Neural-Function-Approxmiator();
Iterate for no of epochs
for e = 1 to Nepochs do
    Estimate Lpred using current LN N
    e
      Lpred = Forward Pass LN N ( q, q̇ );
    Estimate q̈ using current e Lpred
    q̈pred = estimated using Equation 6 : L =e Lpred ;
    Estimate State Variables : (qpred , q̇pred ) using q̈pred
    qpred , q̇pred = Perform Numerical Integration on : q̈pred ;
    Estimate prediction Objective for state estimate
    Opred obtained using Equation 7;
    Conditional to initialize e−1 Lpred estimate
    if e == 1 then
         Initialize the value of e−1 Lpred
         e−1
             Lpred = e Lpred ;
         Backpropagate prediction loss on LN N weights : w
                          ∂
         wj = wj − α ∂w     j
                              Opred (w);
         Skip next steps in loop
         continue;
    end
    Normalize predicted Lagrangian Estimates
    e−1
         Lpred = Using Algorithm 1 : (e−1 Lpred , k);
    e
      Lpred = Using Algorithm 1 : (e−1 Lpred , k);
    Calculate Temporal Convergence Objective
    OT C = Using Equation 11 : (e−1 Lpred , e Lpred );
    Calculate Precision Regularization Objective
    Oreg = Using Equation 9 : (e−1 Lpred , e Lpred );
    Calculate Total Objective Value
    Ototal = Using Equation 13;
    Backpropagate total loss on LN N weights : w
                     ∂
    wj = wj − α ∂w     j
                         Ototal (w);
    Reset the value of e−1 Lpred
    e−1
         Lpred = e Lpred ;
end
Return final converged LN N ( q, q̇ )



case. However the local behaviors of convergences such as rate of convergence and variance in
objective evolution can significantly change. Further theoretical analysis is required to gain more
clarity regarding the same.


3   E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

The experiments are carried out as a comparative analysis over the proposed setting and existing
alternatives, the analysis is conducted based on the relative error margins. Order four Runge-Kutta
method Tan & Chen (2012) with a tolerance set to 10−13 was used to estimate the acceptable ground
truth (Exact solution) for all systems under consideration. We also evaluate the trajectory deviations
of the best model under long timescale solution estimations for relative comparison of model set-
tings. Training and testing code for all models and settings were developed using the python JAX
framework Schoenholz & Cubuk (2020). All experiments were conducted using an 8 core 9th gen
intel i7 processor and a Tesla P4 GPU.


                                                  7
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3.1   D OUBLE P ENDULUM

     The ability to estimate trajectories with minimal deviations in systems under chaotic behaviour is
     of prime interest for this study, hence, all experiments are conducted on two classical systems that
     are proven to exhibit chaotic behaviour. Firstly we employ the present methodology to approximate
     solutions to a classical system that is proven to have deterministic chaos behavior, which is double
     pendulum. The dynamic equations of the double pendulum used here are as derived in Ref Assencio.

                               l2           m2                                   l1
                          α1 =                          cos(θ1 − θ2 ),    α2 =      cos(θ1 − θ2 )              (14)
                               l1         m1 + m2                                l2


              l2         m2             2             g                         l1 ˙ 2             g
       f1 = −                        θ˙2 sin(θ1 −θ2 )− sin(θ1 ),         f2 =      θ1 sin(θ1 −θ2 )− sin(θ2 ) (15)
              l1       m1 + m2                        l1                        l2                 l2

     To write the governing equations of the double pendulum system in a simplified manner, the follow-
     ing quantities {α1 , α2 , f1 , f2 } are introduced as shown in Equations 14 and 15. The equations of
     motion of the double pendulum could now be written as shown in Equation 16.

                                                f1 − α1 f2               f2 − α2 f1
                                          θ¨1 =            ,       θ¨2 =                                       (16)
                                                1 − α1 α2                1 − α1 α2

     Note that the masses {m1 , m2 } and the lengths {l1 , l2 } decide the configuration of the system, for
     all experimental settings we set them equal to unity and the acceleration due to gravity (g) is assumed
     to be 9.8 m/s2 . The Dataset (D) used to train the LNN on the given double pendulum system
                                                                                                       i     i
     consists of 6 × 105 randomly sampled initial states in the format {q i = (θ1i , θ2i ), q̇ i = (θ˙1 , θ˙2 )}
     and corresponding Lagrangian values here are estimated using Equation 17.


            1                     1
     L=       (m1 + m2 )l12 θ̇12 + m2 θ̇22 + m2 l1 l2 θ̇1 θ̇2 cos(θ1 − θ2 ) + (m1 + m2 )gl1 cos θ1 + m2 gl2 cos θ2
            2                     2
                                                                                                              (17)


(a) Comparison of trajectory estimates obtained using              (b) Absolute error comparison between LNN based
       numerical and LNN based methods.                                      solutions and numerical solver.

       Figure 2: Comparative results obtained on the double pendulum system, starting from t = 0 and
                   given initial state : {q = (θ1 = 3π        3π          ˙       ˙
                                                     7 , θ2 = 4 ), q̇ = (θ1 = 0, θ2 = 0)}



      3.2   H ENON -H EILES

     The second system considered for the evaluation on the applicability of the proposed method is
     the Henon-Heiles system Hénon & Heiles (1964), the same models the non-linear motion of a star


                                                               8
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     around a galactic center with the motion restricted to a plane. In it’s simplest form the Equation of
     motion of the system can be described using Equation 18. Where, the system is described using the
     position q = (x, y) and momentum coordinates q̇ = (px = ẋ, py = ẏ) of the star.


                                   p˙x = −x − 2λxy,     p˙y = −y − λ(x2 − y 2 )                         (18)

     Note that λ is set to 1 for all experimental configurations of the Henon-Heiles system (widely applied
     in the chaos literature). The Dataset (D) used to train the LNN on Henon-Heiles system consists
     of 6 × 105 randomly sampled initial states in the format {q i = (xi , y i ), q̇ i = (pix , piy )} and
     corresponding Lagrangian values can be estimated using Equation 19.

                                         1 2          1                    1
                                   L=     (p + p2y ) − (x2 + y 2 ) − x2 y + y 3                         (19)
                                         2 x          2                    3


(a) Comparison of trajectory estimates obtained using       (b) Absolute error comparison between LNN based
       numerical and LNN based methods.                               solutions and numerical solver.

          Figure 3: Comparative results obtained on the Henon-Heiles system, starting from t = 0 and for
                  the given initial state {q = (x = 0.3, y = −0.3), q̇ = (px = 0.3, py = 0.15)}



      4      C ONCLUSIONS

     In this a work a new augmented form of the Lagrangian Neural Network is introduced which can
     extend the precision of the parametric Lagrangian to arbitrary extends. In our comparison on set-
     ting the precision (k = 5) of the proposed method close to what can be achieved by the original
     LNN formulation Cranmer et al. (2020), it can be seen that (Figures 2 and 3) the proposed method
     obtains comparable solutions and error margins as compared to the LNN approach Cranmer et al.
     (2020). Additionally we showed that the proposed method can scale the precision of the parametric
     Lagrangian to arbitrary numerical precision (at the cost of a larger parametric space) and effectively
     address the shortcomings associated with solution estimation of systems that exhibit deterministic
     chaos behavior. The feasibility of the proposed method to extend the achievable numerical precision
     due to computational limitations is discussed in Appendix C. Even-though there is a relative (but
     feasible) increase in computational resources required, the method is proven to help in maintaining
     the validity of the solution spaces of systems that exhibit chaotic behavior for longer time intervals.
     From relative comparison with the existing literature (Appendix D) it can be seen that the proposed
     approach preserves the arbitrary nature of required coordinates the LNN Cranmer et al. (2020) had,
     with an addition of being able to preserve arbitrary precision standards on the solution space formed.
     In future work we hope to evaluate the applicability of the same in chaotic systems with consider-
     ably larger degrees of freedom and also extend the Lagrangian formulation so as to directly include
     arbitrary configurations (instead of single) of physical systems in the parametric Lagrangain formed.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Diego Assencio. The double pendulum: Lagrangian formulation. URL https://www.diego.
  assencio.com/?index=1500c66ae7ab27bb0106467c68feebc6.
André D Bandrauk, Michel C Delfour, and Claude Le Bris. High-dimensional partial differential
  equations in science and engineering, volume 41. American Mathematical Soc., 2007.
Hassan Bararnia and Mehdi Esmaeilpour. On the application of physics informed neural networks
  (pinn) to solve boundary layer thermal-fluid problems. International Communications in Heat
  and Mass Transfer, 132:105890, 2022.
Atilim Gunes Baydin, Barak A Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind.
  Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey. Journal of Marchine Learning Research,
  18:1–43, 2018.
R Shekari Beidokhti and Alaeddin Malek. Solving initial-boundary value problems for systems of
  partial differential equations using neural networks and optimization techniques. Journal of the
  Franklin Institute, 346(9):898–913, 2009.
Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases. software available from wandb. com.
  2020. URL https://www. wandb. com, 2020.
George Bluman and Stephen Anco. Symmetry and integration methods for differential equations,
  volume 154. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
Léon Bottou. Stochastic gradient descent tricks. Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade: Second
   Edition, pp. 421–436, 2012.
Martin Braun and Martin Golubitsky. Differential equations and their applications, volume 2.
 Springer, 1983.
Shengze Cai, Zhicheng Wang, Sifan Wang, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-
  informed neural networks for heat transfer problems. Journal of Heat Transfer, 143(6), 2021.
Wei Cai, Xiaoguang Li, and Lizuo Liu. A phase shift deep neural network for high frequency
 approximation and wave problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 42(5):A3285–A3312,
 2020.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04630, 2020.
Suchuan Dong and Naxian Ni. A method for representing periodic functions and enforcing exactly
  periodic boundary conditions with deep neural networks. Journal of Computational Physics, 435:
  110242, 2021.
Reinders Duit, Wolff-Michael Roth, Michael Komorek, and Jens Withers. Conceptual change cum
  discourse analysis to understand cognition in a unit on chaotic systems: towards an integrative
  perspective on learning in science. International journal of science education, 20(9):1059–1073,
  1998.
Marc Finzi, Ke Alexander Wang, and Andrew G Wilson. Simplifying hamiltonian and lagrangian
 neural networks via explicit constraints. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 13880–13889, 2020.
Samuel Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Andreas Griewank et al. On automatic differentiation. Mathematical Programming: recent devel-
  opments and applications, 6(6):83–107, 1989.
Tamara G Grossmann, Urszula Julia Komorowska, Jonas Latz, and Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb.
  Can physics-informed neural networks beat the finite element method?   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.04107, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Louis N Hand and Janet D Finch. Analytical mechanics. Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Michel Hénon and Carl Heiles. The applicability of the third integral of motion: some numerical
 experiments. Astronomical Journal, Vol. 69, p. 73 (1964), 69:73, 1964.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization 3rd int. In Conf.
  for Learning Representations, San, 2014.
Mario Köppen. The curse of dimensionality. In 5th online world conference on soft computing in
 industrial applications (WSC5), volume 1, pp. 4–8, 2000.
Pola Lydia Lagari, Lefteri H Tsoukalas, Salar Safarkhani, and Isaac E Lagaris. Systematic construc-
  tion of neural forms for solving partial differential equations inside rectangular domains, subject
  to initial, boundary and interface conditions. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools,
  29(05):2050009, 2020.
Isaac E Lagaris, Aristidis Likas, and Dimitrios I Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving
   ordinary and partial differential equations. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 9(5):987–1000,
   1998.
Anders Logg, Kent-Andre Mardal, and Garth Wells. Automated solution of differential equations by
  the finite element method: The FEniCS book, volume 84. Springer Science & Business Media,
  2012.
Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, Zhiping Mao, and George Em Karniadakis. Deepxde: A deep learning library
  for solving differential equations. SIAM Review, 63(1):208–228, 2021.
Michael Lutter, Christian Ritter, and Jan Peters. Deep lagrangian networks: Using physics as model
 prior for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04490, 2019.
Marios Mattheakis, Pavlos Protopapas, David Sondak, Marco Di Giovanni, and Efthimios Kaxiras.
 Physical symmetries embedded in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08991, 2019.
Kevin Stanley McFall and James Robert Mahan. Artificial neural network method for solution of
  boundary value problems with exact satisfaction of arbitrary boundary conditions. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Neural Networks, 20(8):1221–1233, 2009.
George S Misyris, Andreas Venzke, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. Physics-informed neural networks
  for power systems. In 2020 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5.
  IEEE, 2020.
Guofei Pang, Lu Lu, and George Em Karniadakis. fpinns: Fractional physics-informed neural
  networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 41(4):A2603–A2626, 2019.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics informed deep learn-
 ing (part i): Data-driven solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1711.10561, 2017.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Samuel Schoenholz and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Jax md: a framework for differentiable physics. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11428–11441, 2020.
Randall S Sexton, Robert E Dorsey, and John D Johnson. Toward global optimization of neural
  networks: a comparison of the genetic algorithm and backpropagation. Decision Support Systems,
  22(2):171–185, 1998.
Hailong Sheng and Chao Yang. Pfnn: A penalty-free neural network method for solving a class
  of second-order boundary-value problems on complex geometries. Journal of Computational
  Physics, 428:110085, 2021.
Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Dgm: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial
  differential equations. Journal of computational physics, 375:1339–1364, 2018.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Delin Tan and Zheng Chen. On a general formula of fourth order runge-kutta method. Journal of
  Mathematical Science & Mathematics Education, 7(2):1–10, 2012.
Danshi Wang, Xiaotian Jiang, Yuchen Song, Meixia Fu, Zhiguo Zhang, Xue Chen, and Min Zhang.
  Applications of physics-informed neural network for optical fiber communications. IEEE Com-
  munications Magazine, 60(9):32–37, 2022.
Liu Yang, Dongkun Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed generative adversarial
  networks for stochastic differential equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 42(1):
  A292–A317, 2020.
Shaojie Zeng, Zong Zhang, and Qingsong Zou. Adaptive deep neural networks methods for high-
  dimensional partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 463:111232, 2022.
Dongkun Zhang, Ling Guo, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning in modal space: Solving time-
  dependent stochastic pdes using physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific
  Computing, 42(2):A639–A665, 2020.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Extending lagrangian and hamil-
  tonian neural networks with differentiable contact models. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 34:21910–21922, 2021.


A    VANILLA P HYSICS I NFORMED N EURAL N ETWORKS
Algorithm 3 roughly outlines the original physics informed neural networks based solution esti-
mation strategyRaissi et al. (2017) used to estimate solutions of differential equations for a given
boundary/initial condition.

Algorithm 3: Solution Estimation of Differential Equations using PINN
Data: Domain : [a, b], Differential Equation : DE (f ) = 0, Sufficient BCs
Result: p f (x) = Re-parameterise (FN N (x), BCs)
Initialize model with random weights
Model (FN N ) = Create-New-Neural-Function-Approxmiator();
Iterate for a set number of epochs
for i = 1 to Nepochs do
    Predict solution p f (x) by re-parameterizing current estimate
    p
      fpred (x) = Re-parameterise (FN N (x), BCs);
    Estimate necessary gradients using automatic differentiation
    p ′             ′′
      fpred (x), p fpred (x), ...;
    Estimate prediction loss for current solution estimate
    LD - obtained using Equation 1 within the domain;
    Backpropagate prediction loss
                         ∂
    wj+1 = wj − α ∂w       j
                             OD (w);
end
Return final converged solution p f (x)

It’s worth noting the solution estimated using Algorithm3 is only valid for the limited Domain :
[a, b] and a given boundary/initial condition(s) BCs. Although the method effectively addressed the
curse of dimensionalityKöppen (2000) as shown by finite element solvers, the limited validity of the
solution space is considered as a backdrop which Lagrangian Neural NetworksCranmer et al. (2020)
effectively address.

B    H YPERPARAMETER SETTING USED
Additionally we outline the simplified network architecture tuning mechanism used in this study
Figure 4. The network architecture definition is simplified into three hyperparameters : Minimum
number of Neurons in the last hidden layer (Mn ), Number of hidden layers (Mn ) and Neuron fac-
tor (f). The exact value of these parameters are as mentioned in Table 1.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Hyper Parameter           Value

                               No. Epochs                100000
                               Batch Size                256
                               Objective Loss            Equation 10
                               Optimizer                 Adam
                               Learning Rate             0.005
                               Adam - β1                 0.9
                               Adam - β2                 0.999
                               Adam - ϵ                  1e-08
                               Network - (Mn , Mn , f)   16, 5, 2

Table 1: Hyper-parameter setting used in this study, all hyper-parameters were obtained by grid
search. Experiment tracking done through wandb.aiBiewald (2020).
                                               .


    Figure 4: Illustration of the scheme by which network architecture tuning was carried out.


C    A N OTE ON N ETWORK PARAMETERS



A crucial point of this study is the relative scalability of the introduced method. Although for our
experiments we have used binary representation of integers as the underlying numeral system, the
same is not unique and can be extended to numeral systems with larger integer bases. In which case
the number of branches n of the architecture used 1 could be substantially reduced.
Form Table 2 it can be seen that the number of trainable parameters for each branch (that predicts a
binary bit) in the architecture 1 can be counted as (2080 + 528 + 17 = 2625). An example scaling
of the proposed method could to improve the number of bits, say by the addition of another 16 bits
onto the current architecture. Note that the addition of 4̃2000 parameters per each 16 binary bits is
relevant although feasible computationally.


                                                 13
                                    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Layer : (Branch-Type : No)                                              Output Shape                        No Param

                                                      ReLU Linear : (Common : 1)                                              [batch-size, 512]                   2560
                                                      ReLU Linear : (Common : 2)                                              [batch-size, 256]                   131,328
                                                      ReLU Linear : (Common : 3)                                              [batch-size, 128]                   32,896
                                                      ReLU Linear : (Common : 4)                                              [batch-size, 64]                    8,256
                                                      ReLU Linear : (Branch : 1) x n                                          [batch-size, 32]                    2080 x n
                                                      ReLU Linear : (Branch : 2) x n                                          [batch-size, 16]                    528 x n
                                                      Sigmoid Linear : (Branch : 3) x n                                       [batch-size, 1]                     17 x n

                                                      Trainable params (max): 301,040 (n = 48)
                                                      Non-trainable params: 0
                                                      Total params (max): 301,040

                                    Table 2: Layer-wise parameter count of the Neural Network used under high precision binary setting.


                                    D      A DDITIONAL L ITERATURE C OMPARISON
                                    The proposed work builds upon the Lagrangian Neural Network formulation (LNN) Cranmer et al.
                                    (2020), which enabled Lagrangian modelling of arbitrary dynamic systems represented in arbitrary
                                    coordinates systems. The LNN formulation improved the flexibility of the DeLaN Lutter et al.
                                    (2019) formulation by implicitly modelling the Lagrangian, improving the applicability of the same
                                    and better obeyed conservation laws. Finzi et al. (2020) augmented the LNN Cranmer et al. (2020)
                                    and Greydanus et al. (2019) formulations to work with Cartesian coordinates, which allowed the
                                    explicit addition of common physical constraints that better defines any dynamic system of interest,
                                    improving the data-efficiency and solution accuracy. Zhong et al. (2021) builds upon the Cartesian
                                    coordinate based formulations proposed in Finzi et al. (2020) to add explicit contact modelling
                                    constraints, which proved significant in improving the solution quality in dynamic systems for which
                                    contact forces were of crucial interest. In this work we take a detour from the Cartesian coordinate
                                    based formulations to directly imporve the LNN Cranmer et al. (2020) formulation by explicitly
                                    conditioning on the precision of the solution estimates. By doing so the proposed approach illustrates
                                    a scalable approach to achieve arbitrary precision standards, allowing for long term (time domain)
                                    validity of solutions to systems that exhibit deterministic chaos.
                                                                   HNNs                      DeLaN                  LNN                     CHNN                   CLNN                  CM-CD-CHNN            CM-CD-LNN
                                    Neural Networks   Neural ODE                                                                                                                                                                     This Work
                                                                   Greydanus et al. (2019)   Lutter et al. (2019)   Cranmer et al. (2020)   Finzi et al. (2020)    Finzi et al. (2020)   Zhong et al. (2021)   Zhong et al. (2021)

Model Dynamic Systems                     ✓               ✓                  ✓                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓                      ✓                     ✓                     ✓                ✓

Differential Equation Solutions                           ✓                  ✓                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓                      ✓                     ✓                     ✓                ✓

Exact Conservation Laws                                                      ✓                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓                      ✓                     ✓                     ✓                ✓

Learn from arbitrary coordinates          ✓               ✓                                          ✓                       ✓                                                                                                          ✓

Learn from Cartesian Coordinates          ✓               ✓                                                                                         ✓                      ✓                     ✓                     ✓

Learn arbitrary Lagrangian                                                                                                   ✓                                             ✓                                           ✓                ✓

Explicit system constraints                               ✓                                                                                         ✓                      ✓                     ✓                     ✓

Contact and Collision constraints                         ✓                                                                                                                                      ✓                     ✓

Adaptable to other works                                                                                                                                                                                                                ✓

Arbitrary precision constraints                                                                                                                                                                                                         ✓

Long term solutions: chaos                                                                                                                                                                                                              ✓


                                    Table 3: Outline of the existing literature and their relative strengths on comparision with the work
                                    proposed here.


                                                                                                               14
