M ETA -R EFERENTIAL G AMES TO L EARN C OMPOSI -
TIONAL L EARNING B EHAVIOURS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Human beings use compositionality to generalise from past experiences to novel
         experiences. We assume a separation of our experiences into fundamental atomic
         components that can be recombined in novel ways to support our ability to engage
         with novel experiences. We frame this as the ability to learn to generalise composi-
         tionally, and we will refer to behaviours making use of this ability as compositional
         learning behaviours (CLBs). A central problem to learning CLBs is the resolution
         of a binding problem (BP). While it is another feat of intelligence that human
         beings perform with ease, it is not the case for state-of-the-art artificial agents.
         Thus, in order to build artificial agents able to collaborate with human beings, we
         propose to develop a novel benchmark to investigate agents’ abilities to exhibit
         CLBs by solving a domain-agnostic version of the BP. We take inspiration from the
         language emergence and grounding framework of referential games and propose a
         meta-learning extension of referential games, entitled Meta-Referential Games, and
         use this framework to build our benchmark, the Symbolic Behaviour Benchmark
         (S2B). We provide baseline results and error analysis showing that our benchmark
         is a compelling challenge that we hope will spur the research community towards
         developing more capable artificial agents.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Defining compositional behaviours (CBs) as "the ability to generalise from combinations of trained-
on atomic components to novel re-combinations of those very same components", then we can define
compositional learning behaviours (CLBs) as "the ability to generalise in an online fashion from a
few combinations of never-before-seen atomic components to novel re-combinations of those very
same components”. We employ the term online here to imply a few-shot learning context (Vinyals
et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018) that demands that artificial agents learn from, and then leverage
some novel information, both over the course of a single lifespan, or episode, in our case of few-shot
meta-RL (see Beck et al. (2023) for a review of meta-RL). Thus, CLBs involve a few-shot learning
aspect that is not present in CBs. In this paper, we investigate artificial agents’ abilities for CLBs.
Compositional Learning Behaviours as Symbolic Behaviours. Santoro et al. (2021) states that a
symbolic entity does not exist in an objective sense but solely in relation to an “interpreter who treats
it as such”, and thus the authors argue that there exists a set of behaviours, i.e. symbolic behaviours,
that are consequences of agents engaging with symbols. Thus, in order to evaluate artificial agents in
terms of their ability to collaborate with humans, we can use the presence or absence of symbolic
behaviours. The authors propose to characterise symbolic behaviours as receptive, constructive,
embedded, malleable, separable, meaningful, and graded. In this work, we will primarily focus on
the receptivity and constructivity aspects. Receptivity aspects amount to the fact that the agents
should be able to receive new symbolic conventions in an online fashion. For instance, when a child
introduces an adult to their toys’ names, the adults are able to discriminate between those new names
upon the next usage. Constructivity aspects amount to the fact that the agents should be able to
form new symbolic conventions in an online fashion. For instance, when facing novel situations
that require collaborations, two human teammates can come up with novel referring expressions to
easily discriminate between different events occurring. Both aspects reflect to abilities that support
collaboration. Thus, we develop a benchmark that tests the abilities of artificial agents to perform
receptive and constructive behaviours, and the current paper will primarily focus on testing for CLBs.


                                                   1
Binding Problem & Meta-Learning. Following Greff et al. (2020), we refer to the binding
problem (BP) as the “inability to dynamically and flexibly bind[/re-use] information that is distributed
throughout the [architecture]” of some artificial agents (modelled with artificial neural networks here).
We note that there is an inherent BP that requires solving for agents to exhibit CLBs. Indeed, over
the course of a single episode (as opposed to a whole training process, in the case of CBs), agents
must dynamically identify/segregate the component values from the observation of multiple stimuli,
timestep after timestep, and then (re-)bind/(re-)use/(re-)combine this information (hopefully stored in
some memory component of their architecture) in order to respond correctly when novel stimuli are
presented to them. Solving the BP instantiated in such a context, i.e. re-using previously-acquired
information in ways that serve the current situation, is another feat of intelligence that human beings
perform with ease, on the contrary to current state-of-the-art artificial agents. Thus, our benchmark
must emphasise testing agents’ abilities to exhibit CLBs by solving a version of the BP. Moreover,
we argue for a domain-agnostic BP, i.e. not grounded in a specific modality such as vision or audio,
as doing so would limit the external validity of the test. We aim for as few assumptions as possible to
be made about the nature of the BP we instantiate (Chollet, 2019). This is crucial to motivate the
form of the stimuli we employ, and we will further detail this in Section 3.1.
Language Grounding & Emergence. In order to test the quality of some symbolic behaviours, our
proposed benchmark needs to query the semantics that agents (the interpreters) may extract from
their experience, and it must be able to do so in a referential fashion (e.g. being able to query to
what extent a given experience is referred to as, for instance, ‘the sight of a red tomato’), similarly
to most language grounding benchmarks. Subsequently, acknowledging that the simplest form of
collaboration is maybe the exchange of information, i.e. communication, via a given code, or language,
we argue that the benchmark must therefore also allow agents to manipulate this code/language
that they use to communicate. This property is known as the metalinguistic/reflexive function of
languages (Jakobson, 1960). It is mainly investigated in the current deep learning era within the field
of language emergence( Lazaridou and Baroni (2020), and see Brandizzi (2023) and Denamganaï
and Walker (2020a) for further reviews), via the use of variants of the referential games (RGs) (Lewis,
1969). Thus, we take inspiration from the language emergence and grounding framework of RGs,
where (i) the language domain represents a semantic domain that can be probed and queried, and (ii)
the reflexive function of language is indeed addressed. Then, in order to instantiate different BPs at
each episode (preventing the agent from ‘cheating’ by combining experiences from one episode to
another), we propose a meta-learning extension to RGs, entitled Meta-Referential Games, and use
this framework to build our benchmark. The resulting multi-agent/single-agent benchmark, entitled
Symbolic Behaviour Benchmark (S2B), has the potential to test for more symbolic behaviours
pertaining to language grounding and emergence rather than solely CLBs. In the present paper,
though, we solely focus on the language grounding task of learning CLBs. After review of the
background (Section 2) , we will present our contributions as follows:

       • We propose the Symbolic Behaviour Benchmark to enables evaluation of symbolic be-
         haviours (Section 3), and provide a detailed investigation in the case of CLBs.
       • We present a novel stimulus representation scheme, entitled Symbolic Continuous Stimulus
         (SCS) representation which is able to instantiate a BP, on the contrary to more common
         symbolic representations like the one/multi-hot encoded scheme (Section 3.1);
       • We propose the Meta-Referential Game framework, a meta-learning extension to common
         RGs, that is built over SCS-represented stimuli (Section 3.2);
       • We provide baseline results for both the multi-agent and single-agent contexts, along with
         evaluations of the performance of the agents in terms of CLBs and linguistic compositionality
         of the emerging languages, showing that our benchmark is a compelling challenge that we
         hope will spur the research community (Section 4).

2    BACKGROUND
The first instance of an environment that demonstrated a primary focus on the objective of communi-
cating efficiently is the signaling game or referential game (RG) by Lewis (1969), where a speaker
agent is asked to send a message to the listener agent, based on the state/stimulus of the world that
it observed. The listener agent then acts upon the observation of the message by choosing one of
the actions available to it. Both players’ goals are aligned (it features pure coordination/common


                                                   2
interests), with the aim of performing the ‘best’ action given the observed state.In the recent deep
learning era, many variants of the RG have appeared. Following the nomenclature proposed in
Denamganaï and Walker (2020b), Figure 1 illustrates in the general case a discriminative 2-players
/ L-signal / N -round / K-distractors / descriptive / object-centric variant. In short, the speaker
receives a stimulus and communicates with the listener (up to N back-and-forth using messages of
at most L tokens each), who additionally receives a set of K + 1 stimuli (potentially including a
semantically-similar stimulus as the speaker, referred to as an object-centric stimulus). The task is
for the listener to determine, given communication with the speaker, whether any of its observed
stimuli match the speaker’s. Among the many possible features found in the literature, we highlight
here those that will be relevant to how S2B is built, and then provide formalism that we will abide
by throughout the paper. The number of communication rounds N characterises (i) whether the
listener agent can send messages back to the speaker agent and (ii) how many communication rounds
can be expected before the listener agent is finally tasked to decide on an action. The basic (discrimi-
native) RG is stimulus-centric, which assumes that both agents would be somehow embodied in
the same body, and they are tasked to discriminate between given stimuli, that are the results of one
single perception ‘system’. On the other hand, Choi et al. (2018) introduced an object-centric variant
which incorporates the issues that stem from the difference of embodiment (which has been later
re-introduced under the name Concept game by Mu and Goodman (2021)). The agents are tasked
with discriminating between objects (or scenes) independently of the viewpoint from which they may
experience them. In the object-centric variant, the game is more about bridging the gap between each
other’s cognition rather than (just) finding a common language. The adjective ‘object-centric’ is used
to qualify a stimulus that is different from another but actually present the same meaning (e.g. same
object, but seen under a different viewpoint).
Following the last communication round, the listener
outputs a decision (DiL in Figure 2) about whether
any of the stimulus it is observing matches the one
(or a semantically similar one, in object-centric RGs)
experienced by the speaker, and if so its action index
must represent the index of the stimulus it identifies
as being the same. In the case of a descriptive variant,
it may as well be possible that none of the stimuli
are the same as the target one, therefore the action
of index 0 is required for success. We talk about Figure 1: Illustration of a discriminative 2-
accuracy of the listener agent to refer to its ability to players / L-signal / N -round variant of a RG.
make the correct decision over multiple RGs.
Compositionality, Disentanglement & Systematicity. Compositionality is a phenomenon that
human beings are able to identify and leverage thanks to the assumption that reality can be decomposed
over a set of “disentangle[d,] underlying factors of variations” (Bengio, 2012), and our experience
is a noisy, entangled translation of this factorised reality. This assumption is critical to the field
of unsupervised learning of disentangled representations (Locatello et al., 2020) that aims to find
“manifold learning algorithms” (Bengio, 2012), such as variational autoencoders (VAEs (Kingma and
Welling, 2013)), with the particularity that the latent encoding space would consist of disentangled
latent variables (see Higgins et al. (2018) for a formal definition). As a concept, compositionality
has been the focus of many definition attempts. For instance, it can be defined as “the algebraic
capacity to understand and produce novel combinations from known components”(Loula et al. (2018)
referring to Montague (1970)) or as the property according to which “the meaning of a complex
expression is a function of the meaning of its immediate syntactic parts and the way in which they are
combined” (Krifka, 2001). Although difficult to define, the commmunity seems to agree on the fact
that it would enable learning agents to exhibit systematic generalisation abilities (also referred to as
combinatorial generalisation (Battaglia et al., 2018)). Some of the ambiguities that come with those
loose definitions start to be better understood and explained, as in the work of Hupkes et al. (2019).
While often studied in relation to languages, it is usually defined with a focus on behaviours. In this
paper, we will refer to linguistic compositionality when considering languages, and interchangeably
compositional behaviours and systematicity to refer to “the ability to entertain a given thought implies
the ability to entertain thoughts with semantically related contents”(Fodor et al., 1988).
Linguistic compositionality can be difficult to measure. Brighton and Kirby (2006)’s topographic
similarity (topsim) which is acknowledged by the research community as the main quantitative


                                                   3
metric (Lazaridou et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019; Słowik et al., 2020; Chaabouni et al., 2020; Ren et al.,
2020). Recently, taking inspiration from disentanglement metrics, Chaabouni et al. (2020) proposed
two new metrics entitled posdis (positional disentanglement metric) and bosdis (bag-of-symbols
disentanglement metric), that have been shown to be differently ‘opinionated’ when it comes to
what kind of linguistic compositionality they capture. As hinted at by Choi et al. (2018); Chaabouni
et al. (2020) and Dessi et al. (2021), linguistic compositionality and disentanglement appears to
be two sides of the same coin, in as much as emerging languages are discrete and sequentially-
constrained unsupervisedly-learned representations. In Section 3.1, we further develop this bridge
between the fields of (compositional) language emergence and unsupervised learning of disentangled
representations by asking what would an ideally-disentangled latent space look like? and investigate
how to leverage it in building our proposed benchmark.
Richness of the Stimuli & Systematicity. Chaabouni et al. (2020) found that linguistic composi-
tionality is not necessary to bring about systematicity, as shown by the fact that non-compositional
languages wielded by symbolic (generative) RG players were enough to support success in zero-shot
compositional tests (ZSCTs). They found that the emergence of a (posdis)-compositional language
was a sufficient condition for systematicity to emerge. Finally, they found a necessary condition to
foster systematicity, that we will refer to as richness of stimuli condition (Chaa-RSC). It was framed
as (i) having a large stimulus space |I| = ival iattr , where iattr is the number of attributes/factor
dimensions, and ival is the number of possible values on each attribute/factor dimension, and (ii)
making sure that it is densely sampled during training, in order to guarantee that different values on
different factor dimensions have been experienced together. In a similar fashion, Hill et al. (2019)
also propose a richness of stimuli condition (Hill-RSC) that was framed as a data augmentation-like
regularizer caused by the egocentric viewpoint of the studied embodied agent. In effect, the diversity
of viewpoint allowing the embodied agent to observe over many perspectives the same and unique
semantical meaning allows a form of contrastive learning that promotes the agent’s systematicity.


3     S YMBOLIC B EHAVIOUR B ENCHMARK

The version of the S2B that we present in this paper is focused on evaluating receptive and constructive
behaviour traits via a single task built around 2-players multi-agent RL (MARL) episodes where
players engage in a series of RGs (cf. lines 11 and 17 in Alg. 5 calling Alg. 3). We denote one such
episode as a meta-RG and detail it in Section 3.2. Each RG within an episode consists of N + 2 RL
steps, where N is the number of communication rounds available to the agents (cf. Section 2). At
each RL step, agents both observe similar or different object-centric stimuli and act simultaneously
from different actions spaces, depending on their role as the speaker or the listener of the game.
Stimuli are presented to the agent using the Symbolic Continuous Stimulus (SCS) representation
that we present in Section 3.1. Each RG in a meta-RG follows the formalism laid out in Section 2,
with the exception that speaker and listener agents speak simultaneously and observe each other’s
messages upon the next RL step. Thus, at step N + 1, the speaker’s action space consists solely of a
no-operation (NO-OP) action while the listener’s action space consists solely of the decision-related
action space. In practice, the environment simply ignores actions that are not allowed depending on
the RL step. Next, step N + 2 is intended to provide feedback to the listener agent as its observation
is replaced with the speaker’s observation (cf. line 12 and 18 in Alg. 5). Note that this is the exact
stimulus that the speaker has been observing, rather than a possible object-centric sample. We will
investigate how the nature of the feedback impacts emergent languages in a subsequent work. In
Figure 3, we present SCS-represented stimuli, as observed by a speaker agent over the course of a
typical episode.

3.1   S YMBOLIC C ONTINUOUS S TIMULUS REPRESENTATION

Building about successes of the field of unsupervised learning of disentangled representations, to
the question what would an ideally-disentangled latent space look like?, we propose the Symbolic
Continuous Stimulus (SCS) representation and provide numerical evidence of it in Appendix D.2. It is
continuous and relying on Gaussian kernels, and it has the particularity of enabling the representation
of stimuli sampled from differently semantically structured symbolic spaces while maintaining the
same representation shape (later referred as the shape invariance property), as opposed to the one-
/multi-hot encoded (OHE/MHE) vector representation. While the SCS representation is inspired


                                                    4
Figure 2: Left: Sampling of the necessary components to create the i-th RG (RGi ) of a meta-RG.
The target stimulus (red) and the object-centric target stimulus (purple) are both sampled from
the Target Distribution T Di , a set of O different stimuli representing the same latent semantic
meaning. The latter set and a set of K distractor stimuli (orange) are both sampled from a dataset of
SCS-represented stimuli (Dataset), which is instantiated from the current episode’s symbolic space,
whose semantic structure is sampled out of the meta-distribution of available semantic structure
over Ndim -dimensioned symbolic spaces. Right: Illustration of the resulting meta-RG with a focus
on the i-th RG RGi . The speaker agent receives at each step the target stimulus si0 and distractor
stimuli (sik )k∈[1;K] , while the listener agent receives an object-centric version of the target stimulus
   i
s′ 0 or a distractor stimulus (randomly sampled), and other distractor stimuli (sik )k∈[1;K] , with the
exception of the Listener Feedback step where the listener agent receives feedback in the form
of the exact target stimulus si0 . The Listener Feedback step takes place after the listener agent has
provided a decision DiL about whether the target meaning is observed or not and in which stimuli is
it instantiated, guided by the vocabulary-permutated message MiS from the speaker agent.

by vectors sampled from VAE’s latent spaces, this representation is not learned and is not aimed
to help the agent performing its task. It is solely meant to make it possible to define a distribution
over infinitely many semantic/symbolic spaces, while instantiating a BP for the agent to resolve.
Indeed, contrary to OHE/MHE representation, observation of one stimulus is not sufficient to derive
the nature of the underlying semantic space that the current episode instantiates. Rather, it is only via
a kernel density estimation on multiple samples (over multiple timesteps) that the semantic space’s
nature can be inferred, thus requiring the agent to segregated and (re)combine information that is
distributed over multiple observations. In other words, the benchmark instantiates a domain-agnostic
BP. We provide in Appendix D.1 some numerical evidence to the fact that the SCS representation
differentiates itself from the OHE/MHE representation because it instantiates a BP. Deriving the
SCS representation from an idealised VAE’s latent encoding of stimuli of any domain makes it a
domain-agnostic representation, which is an advantage compared to previous benchmark because
domain-specific information can therefore not be leveraged to solve the benchmark.
In details, the semantic structure of an Ndim -dimensioned symbolic space is the tuple (d(i))i∈[1;Ndim ]
where Ndim is the number of latent/factor dimensions, d(i) is the number of possible symbolic
values for each latent/factor dimension i. Stimuli in the SCS representation are vectors sampled
from the continuous space [−1, +1]Ndim . In comparison, stimuli in the OHE/MHE representation
are vectors from the discrete space {0, 1}dOHE where dOHE = ΣN       i=1 d(i) depends on the d(i)’s.
                                                                       dim

Note that SCS-represented stimuli have a shape that does not depend on the d(i)’s values, this is the
shape invariance property of the SCS representation (see Figure 4(bottom) for an illustration).
In the SCS representation, the d(i)’s do not shape the stimuli but only the semantic structure, i.e.
representation and semantics are disentangled from each other. The d(i)’s shape the semantic by
enforcing, for each factor dimension i, a partitionaing of the [−1, +1] range into d(i) value sections.
Each partition corresponds to one of the d(i) symbolic values available on the i-th factor dimension.
Having explained how to build the SCS representation sampling space, we now describe how to
sample stimuli from it. It starts with instantiating a specific latent meaning/symbol, embodied by
latent values l(i) on each factor dimension i, such that l(i) ∈ [1; d(i)]. Then, the i-th entry of the
stimulus is populated with a sample from a corresponding Gaussian distribution over the l(i)-th
partition of the [−1, +1 range. It is denoted as gl(i) ∼ N (µl(i) , σl(i) ), where µl(i) is the mean of the
Gaussian distribution, uniformly sampled to fall within the range of the l(i)-th partition, and σl(i) is
                                                                                                 2      2
the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution, uniformly sampled over the range [ 12d(i)      , 6d(i) ].
µl(i) and σl(i) are sampled in order to guarantee (i) that the scale of the Gaussian distribution is large
enough, but (ii) not larger than the size of the partition section it should fit in. Figure 3 shows an


                                                      5
example of such instantiation of the different Gaussian distributions over each factor dimensions’
[−1, +1] range.

3.2   M ETA -R EFERENTIAL G AMES

Thanks to the shape invariance property of the SCS repre-
sentation, once a number of latent/factor dimension Ndim is
choosen, we can synthetically generate many different semanti-
cally structured symbolic spaces while maintaining a consistent
stimulus shape. This is critical since agents must be able to deal
with stimuli coming from differently semantically structured
Ndim -dimensioned symbolic spaces. In other words that are
more akin to the meta-learning field, we can define a distribu-
tion over many kind of tasks, where each task instantiates a
different semantic structure to the symbolic space our agent
should learn to adapt to. Figure 2 highlights the structure of an
episode, and its reliance on differently semantically structured
Ndim -dimensioned symbolic spaces. Agents aim to coordinate
efficiently towards scoring a high accuracy during the ZSCTs
at the end of each RL episode. Indeed, a meta-RG is composed
of two phases: a supporting phase where supporting stimuli are
presented, and a querying/ZSCT phase where ZSCT-purposed
RGs are played. During the querying phase, the presented tar-
get stimuli are novel combinations of the component values of
the target stimuli presented during the supporting phase. Al-
gorithms 4 and 5 contrast how a common RG differ from a
meta-RG (in Appendix A). We emphasise that the supporting
phase of a meta-RG does not involve updating the parameter-
s/weights of the learning agents, since this is a meta-learning    Figure 3: Visualisation of the SCS-
framework of the few-shot learning kind (compare positions         represented stimuli (column) ob-
and dependencies of lines 21 in Alg. 5 and 6 in Alg. 4). Dur-      served by the speaker agent at each
ing the supporting phase, each RG involves a different target      RG over the course of one meta-
stimulus until all the possible component values on each laten-    RG, with Ndim = 3 and d(0) = 5,
t/factor dimensions have been shown for at least S shots (cf.      d(1) = 5, d(2) = 3. The support-
lines 3 − 7 in Alg. 5). While it amounts to at least S different   ing phase lasted for 19 RGs. For
target stimulus being shown, the number of supporting-phase        each factor dimension i ∈ [0; 2], we
RG played remains far smaller than the number of possible          present on the right side of each plot
training-purposed stimuli in the current episode’s symbolic        the kernel density estimations of the
space/dataset. Then, the querying phase sees all the testing-      Gaussian kernels N (µl(i) , σl(i) ) of
purposed stimuli being presented.Emphasising further, during       each latent value available on that
one single RL episode, both supporting/training-purposed and       factor dimension l(i) ∈ [1; d(i)].
ZSCT/querying-purposed RGs are played, without the agent’s         Colours of dots, used to represent
parameters changing in-between the two phases, since learning      the sampled value gl(i) , imply the
CLBs involve agents adapting in an online/few-shot learning        latent value l(i)’s Gaussian kernel
setting.                                                           from which said continuous value
                                                                   was sampled. As per construction,
The semantic structure of the symbolic space is randomly sam-
                                                                   for each factor dimension, there is
pled at the beginning of each episode (cf. lines 2 − 3 in Alg. 5)
                                                                   no overlap between the different la-
The reward function proposed to both agents is null at all steps
                                                                   tent values’ Gaussian kernels.
except on the N +1-th step. It is +1 if the listener agent decided
correctly, and, during the querying phase only, −2 if incorrect (cf. line 21 in Alg. 5).
Vocabulary Permutation. We bring the readers attention on the fact that simply changing the
semantic structure of the symbolic space, is not sufficient to force MARL agents to adapt specifically
to the instantiated symbolic space at each episode. Indeed, they can learn to cheat by relying on
an episode-invariant (and therefore independent of the instantiated semantic structure) emergent
language which would encode the continuous values of the SCS representation like an analog-to-
digital converter would. This cheating language would consist of mapping a fine-enough partition of
the [−1, +1] range onto a fixed vocabulary in a bijective fashion (see Appendix C for more details).
Therefore, in order to guard the MARL agents from making a cheating language emerge, we employ


                                                   6
a vocabulary permutation scheme (Cope and Schoots, 2021) that samples at the beginning of each
episode/task a random permutation of the vocabulary symbols (cf. line 1 in Alg. 2).
Richness of the Stimulus. We further bridge the gap between Hill-RSC and Chaa-RSC by allowing
the number of object-centric samples O and the number of shots S to be parameterized in the
benchmark. S represents the minimal number of times any given component value may be observed
throughout the course of an episode. Intuitively, throughout their lifespan, an embodied observer
may only observe a given component (e.g. the value ‘blue’, on the latent/factor dimension ‘color’)
a limited number of times (e.g. one time within a ‘blue car’ stimulus, and another time within a
‘blue cup’ stimulus). These parameters allow the experimenters to account for both the Chaa-RSC’s
sampling density of the different stimulus components and Hill-RSC’s diversity of viewpoints.


4       E XPERIMENTS

Agent Architecture. The architectures of the RL agents that we consider are detailed in Appendix B.
Optimization is performed via an R2D2 algorithm(Kapturowski et al., 2018) and hyperparameters
have been fine-tuned with the Sweep feature of Weights&Biases(Biewald, 2020). More details can be
found in our open-source implementation1 . Initial results show that the benchmark is too complex
for our simple agents. Thus, following the work of Hill et al. (2020), we augment the agent with an
auxiliary reconstruction task to help the agent in learning how to use its core memory module to some
extent. The reconstruction loss consists of a mean squared-error between the stimuli observed by the
agent at a given time step and the output of a prediction network which takes as input the current
state of the core memory module after processing the current timestep stimuli.

4.1      L EARNING CLB S IS O UT-O F -R EACH TO S TATE - OF - THE -A RT MARL

Playing a meta-RG, we highlight that, at Table 1: Meta-RG ZSCT and Ease-of-Acquisition
each episode, the speaker aims to make (EoA) ZSCT accuracies and linguistic compositionality
emerge a new language (constructivity) and measures (% ± s.t.d.) for the multi-agent context after
the listener aims to acquire it (receptivity) a sampling budget of 500k. The last column shows lin-
as fast as possible, before the querying- guist results when evaluating the Posdis-Speaker (PS).
phase of the episode comes around. Crit-
ically, we assume that both agents must                                 Shots                    PS
perform while abiding by the principles
of CLBs as it is the only resolution ap- Metric               S=1              S=2
proach. Indeed, there is no success with- AccZSCT ↑ 53.56 ± 4.68            51.58 ± 2.24        N/A
out a generalizing and easy-to-learn emer- AccEoA ↑        50.56 ± 8.75     50.63 ± 5.78        N/A
gent language, or, in other words, a (lin- topsim ↑       29.58 ± 16.76 21.32 ± 16.55 96.67 ± 0
guistically) compositional emergent lan- posdis ↑         23.74 ± 20.75 13.83 ± 12.75 92.03 ± 0
guage (Brighton and Kirby, 2001; Brighton, bosdis ↑       25.61 ± 22.88 19.14 ± 17.26 11.57 ± 0
2002). Thus, we investigate whether agents
are able to coordinate to learn to perform CLBs from scratch, which is tantamount to learning recep-
tivity and constructivity aspects of CLBs in parallel.
Evaluation. We report on 3 random seeds of an LSTM-based model augmented with both the Value
Decomposition Network (Sunehag et al., 2017) and the Simplified Action Decoder approach (Hu and
Foerster, 2019), in the task with Ndim = 3, Vmin = 2, Vmax = 5, O = 4, and S = 1 or 2. As we
assume no success without emergence of a (linguistically) compositional language, we measure the
linguistic compositionality profile of the emerging languages by, firstly, freezing the speaker agent’s
internal state (i.e. LSTM’s hidden and cell states) at the end of an episode and query what would
be its subsequent utterances for all stimuli in the latest episode’s dataset (see Figure 2), and then
compute the different compositionality metrics on this collection of utterances. We compare the
compositionality profile of the emergent languages to that of a compositional language, in the sense
of the posdis compositionality metric (Chaabouni et al., 2020) (see Figure 4(left) and Table 3 in
Appendix B.2). This language is produced by a fixed, rule-based agent that we will refer to as the
Posdis-Speaker (PS). Similarly, after the latest episode ends and the speaker agent’s internal state
is frozen, we evaluate the EoA of the emerging languages by training a new, non-meta/common
    1
        HIDDEN-FOR-REVIEW-PURPOSE


                                                  7
listener agent for 512 epochs on the latest episode’s dataset with the frozen speaker agent using a
descriptive-only/object-centric common RG and report its ZSCT accuracy (see Algorithm 3).
Results. Table 1 shows the performance and compositionality of the behaviours in the multi-agent
context. As AccZSCT is around chance-level (50%), the meta-RL agents fail to coordinate together,
despite the simplicity of the setting. This shows that learning CLBs from scratch is currently out-
of-reach to state-of-the-art MARL agents, and therefore show the importance of our benchmark.
As the linguistic compositionality measures are very low compared to the PS agent, and since the
chance-leveled AccEoA implies that the emerging languages are not easy to learn, it leads us to think
that the poor multi-agent performance is due to the lack of compositional language emergence.

4.2   R ECEPTIVITY A SPECTS OF CLB S C AN B E L EARNED S UB -O PTIMALLY

Seeing that the multi-agent benchmark is out of reach to state-of-the-art cooperative MARL agents,
we investigate a simplification along two axises. Firstly, we simplify to a single-agent RL problem
by instantiating a fixed, rule-based agent as the speaker, which should remove any issues related
to agents learning in parallel to coordinate. Secondly, we use the Posdis-Speaker agent, which
should remove any issues related to the emergence of assumed-necessary compositional languages,
which corresponds to the constructivity aspects of CLBs. These simplifications allow us to focus our
investigation on the receptivity aspects of CLBs, which relates to the ability from the listener agent to
acquire and leverage a newly-encountered compositional language at each episode.
Hypotheses. We show in Appendix D.1 Table 2: ZSCT accuracies (%) for the LSTM-based agent.
that the SCS representation instantiates a
BP even when O = 1. Thus, we suppose                                          Shots
that when O increases the BP’s complex-
ity increases, as the more object-centric Samples            S=1              S=2             S=4
samples there are, the greater the number O = 1          62.23 ± 3.67 73.45 ± 2.39 74.94 ± 2.25
of steps of relational responding are in- O = 4          62.80 ± 0.75 62.55 ± 1.66 60.20 ± 2.19
volved to estimate the size of each Gaus- O = 16 64.92 ± 1.70 61.96 ± 2.00 61.83 ± 2.11
sian distribution. Thus, it would stand to
reason to expect the ZSCT accuracy to decrease when O increases (Hyp. 1). On the other hand, we
would expect that increasing S would provide the learning agent with a denser sampling (in order to
fulfill Chaa-RSC (ii)) , and thus systematicity is expected to increase as S increases (Hyp. 2). Indeed,
increasing S is tantamount to increasing the number of opportunities given to the agents to estimate
the size of each Gaussian distribution, thus relaxing the instantiated BP’s complexity.
Evaluation. We report ZSCT accuracies on LSTM-based models (6 random seeds per settings) with
Ndim = 3 and Vmin = 2, Vmax = 5.
Results. Table 2 shows the ZSCT accuracies while varying the number of object-centric samples O,
and the number of shots S. The chance threshold is 50%. When S = 1, increasing O is surprisingly
correlated with non-significant increases in systematicity. On the otherhand, when S > 1, accuracy
distributions stay similar or decrease while O increases. Thus, overall, Hyp. 1 tends to be validated.
Regarding Hyp. 2, when O = 1, increasing S (and with it the density of the sampling of the input
space, i.e. Chaa-RSC (ii)) correlates with increases in systematicity. Thus, despite the difference of
settings between common RG, in Chaabouni et al. (2020), and meta-RG here, we retrieve a similar
result that Chaa-RSC promotes systematicity. On the other hand, our results show a statistically
significant distinction between BPs of complexity associated with O > 1 and those associated with
O = 1. Indeed, when O > 1, our results contradict Hyp.2 since accuracy distributions remain the
same or decrease when S increases. We explain these results based on the fact that increasing S also
increases the length of each RL episode, thus the ‘algorithm’ learned by LSTM-based agents fails
to adequately estimate Gaussian kernel densities associated with each component value, possibly
because of LSTMs’ notorious difficulty with integrating/binding information from past to present
inputs over long dependencies. We investigate this issue further in Appendix D.2.1.

5     D ISCUSSION & R ELATED W ORKS
We provided experimental evidence that learning CLBs in an MARL setting is out-of-reach of state-
of-the-art approaches, and that the bottleneck may be located in the constructivity aspects of CLBs


                                                   8
(embodied by the ability from the speaker agent to make compositional languages emerge at each
episode) since artificial agents are able to perform sub-optimally when it comes to receptivity aspects
of CLBs (embodied by the ability from the listener agent to acquire and leverage a compositional
language at each episode). These results validate the need for our benchmark and they highlight that
our main efforts should be focused on constructivity aspects of CLBs.
Our experiments took place in simplest instances of our benchmark, and made use of MARL ap-
proaches not specifically designed for the learning of CLBs. Subsequent works ought to involve novel,
specifically-designed approaches towards addressing more complex instances of our benchmark.
Compositional Behaviours vs CLBs. The learning of compositional behaviours (CBs) is one of
the central study in language grounding with benchmarks like SCAN (Lake and Baroni, 2018) and
gSCAN (Ruis et al., 2020), as well as in the subfield of Emergent Communication (see Brandizzi
(2023) for complete review), but none investigates nor allow testing for CLBs. Thus, towards
developing artificial agents with greater human-cooperation abilities, our benchmark aims to fill in
this gap. Outside of the subfield of Emergent Communication, CLBs have actually been used as a
training paradigm towards enabling systematic compositional behaviours in the works of Lake (2019)
and Lake and Baroni (2023). They propose a meta-learning extension to the sequence-to-sequence
learning setting towards enabling systematicity, in the sense of CBs, on par with human performance.
On the contrary to our work, abilities towards CBs are evaluated after using CLBs as a training
tool only. Given the demonstrated impact of CLBs, we propose a CLB-principled benchmark for
evaluation of CLBs abilities themselves in order to address research questions related to this novel
research direction.
Symbolic Behaviours. Following Santoro et al. (2021)’s definition of symbolic behaviours, there is
currently no specifically-principled benchmark to evaluate systematically whether artificial agents are
able to engage into any symbolic behaviours. Thus, our benchmark aims to fill this gap.
Binding Problem. Similarly, following the definition and argumentation of Greff et al. (2020), while
most challenging benchmark, especially in computer vision, instantiates a version of the BP, there is
currently, to our knowledge, no principled benchmarks that specifically address the question whether
the BP can be solved by artificial agents. Thus, not only does our benchmark fill that gap, but it also
instantiate a domain-agnostic version of the BP, which is critical in order to ascertain the external
validity of conclusions that may be drawn from it. Indeed, making the benchmark domain-agnostic
guards us against any confounder that could make the task solvable without solving the BP, e.g. by
gaming some possibly-domain-specific aspect (Chollet, 2019). We propose experimental evidence in
Appendix D.1 that our benchmark does instantiate a BP.

6   C ONCLUSION
In order to build artificial agents able to collaborate with human beings, we have proposed a novel
benchmark to investigate artificial agents abilities at learning CLBs. Our proposed benchmark
casts the problem of learning CLBs as a meta-reinforcement learning problem, using our proposed
extension to RGs, entitled Meta-Referential Games, containing at its core an instantiation of the BP.
It is made possible by a novel representation scheme, entitled the Symbolic Continuous Stimulus
(SCS) representation, which is inspired from the vectors sampled in the latent space of VAE-like
unsupervised learning approaches.
Previous literature identified richness of the stimuli as an important condition for agents to exhibit
systematicity like the one required when it comes to CLBs. We provide a synthesis of the different
RSCs that has been previously formulated, and made the parameters to this synthesis definition
available in our proposed benchmark.
Finally, we provided baseline results for both the multi-agent tasks and the single-agent listener-
focused tasks of learning CLBs in the context of our proposed benchmark. We provided an analysis
of the behaviours in the multi-agent context highlighting the complexity for the speaker agent to
invent a linguistically compositional language. When the language is already compositional to some
extent, then we found that the listener is able to acquire it and coordinate with the speaker towards
performing sub-optimally, in some of the simplest settings possible. Thus, overall, our results show
that our proposed benchmark is currently out of reach for those agents. Thus, we hope it will spur the
research community towards developing more capable artificial agents.


                                                  9
R EFERENCES
P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Zambaldi, M. Malinowski,
   A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner, C. Gulcehre, F. Song, A. Ballard, J. Gilmer,
   G. Dahl, A. Vaswani, K. Allen, C. Nash, V. Langston, C. Dyer, N. Heess, D. Wierstra, P. Kohli,
   M. Botvinick, O. Vinyals, Y. Li, and R. Pascanu. Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and
   graph networks. 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01261.pdf.
J. Beck, R. Vuorio, E. Z. Liu, Z. Xiong, L. Zintgraf, C. Finn, and S. Whiteson. A survey of
   meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08028, 2023.
Y. Bengio. Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning. Conf. Proc. IEEE
   Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 27:17–37, 2012.
L. Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.wandb.
  com/. Software available from wandb.com.
N. Brandizzi. Towards more human-like AI communication: A review of emergent communication
  research. Aug. 2023.
H. Brighton.  Compositional syntax from cultural transmission. MIT Press, Artifi-
  cial, 2002. URL https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/
  106454602753694756.
H. Brighton and S. Kirby. The survival of the smallest: Stability conditions for the cultural evolution
  of compositional language. In European Conference on Artificial Life, pages 592–601. Springer,
  2001.
H. Brighton and S. Kirby. Understanding Linguistic Evolution by Visualizing the Emergence of
  Topographic Mappings. Artificial Life, 12(2):229–242, jan 2006. ISSN 1064-5462. doi: 10.
  1162/artl.2006.12.2.229. URL http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/
  artl.2006.12.2.229.
R. Chaabouni, E. Kharitonov, D. Bouchacourt, E. Dupoux, and M. Baroni. Compositionality and
  Generalization in Emergent Languages. apr 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.
  09124.
R. T. Q. Chen, X. Li, R. Grosse, and D. Duvenaud. Isolating sources of dis-
  entanglement in VAEs.       https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2018/file/
  1ee3dfcd8a0645a25a35977997223d22-Paper.pdf. Accessed: 2021-3-17.
E. Choi, A. Lazaridou, and N. de Freitas. Compositional Obverter Communication Learning From
   Raw Visual Input. apr 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02341.
F. Chollet. On the Measure of Intelligence. Technical report, 2019.
D. Cope and N. Schoots. Learning to communicate with strangers via channel randomisation methods.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09557, 2021.
K. Denamganaï and J. A. Walker. Referentialgym: A nomenclature and framework for language
  emergence & grounding in (visual) referential games. 4th NeurIPS Workshop on Emergent
  Communication, 2020a.
K. Denamganaï and J. A. Walker. Referentialgym: A framework for language emergence & grounding
  in (visual) referential games. 4th NeurIPS Workshop on Emergent Communication, 2020b.
R. Dessi, E. Kharitonov, and M. Baroni. Interpretable agent communication from scratch (with a
  generic visual processor emerging on the side). May 2021.
J. A. Fodor, Z. W. Pylyshyn, et al. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis.
   Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71, 1988.
A. Graves, G. Wayne, M. Reynolds, T. Harley, I. Danihelka, A. Grabska-Barwińska, S. G. Col-
  menarejo, E. Grefenstette, T. Ramalho, J. Agapiou, et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network
  with dynamic external memory. Nature, 538(7626):471–476, 2016.


                                                 10
K. Greff, S. van Steenkiste, and J. Schmidhuber. On the binding problem in artificial neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05208, 2020.
S. Guo, Y. Ren, S. Havrylov, S. Frank, I. Titov, and K. Smith. The emergence of composi-
  tional languages for numeric concepts through iterated learning in neural agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.05291, 2019.
I. Higgins, D. Amos, D. Pfau, S. Racaniere, L. Matthey, D. Rezende, and A. Lerchner. Towards
   a Definition of Disentangled Representations. dec 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
   1812.02230.
F. Hill, A. Lampinen, R. Schneider, S. Clark, M. Botvinick, J. L. McClelland, and A. Santoro.
   Environmental drivers of systematicity and generalization in a situated agent. Oct. 2019.
F. Hill, O. Tieleman, T. von Glehn, N. Wong, H. Merzic, and S. Clark DeepMind. Grounded language
   learning fast and slow. Technical report, 2020.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780,
  1997.
D. Horgan, J. Quan, D. Budden, G. Barth-Maron, M. Hessel, H. Van Hasselt, and D. Silver. Distributed
  prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00933, 2018.
H. Hu and J. N. Foerster. Simplified action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
D. Hupkes, V. Dankers, M. Mul, and E. Bruni. Compositionality decomposed: how do neural
  networks generalise? aug 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08351.
R. Jakobson. Linguistics and poetics. In Style in language, pages 350–377. MA: MIT Press, 1960.
S. Kapturowski, G. Ostrovski, J. Quan, R. Munos, and W. Dabney. Recurrent experience replay in
   distributed reinforcement learning. In International conference on learning representations, 2018.
H. Kim and A. Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05983, 2018.
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014.
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114,
  2013.
M. Krifka. Compositionality. The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive sciences, pages 152–153, 2001.
B. M. Lake. Compositional generalization through meta sequence-to-sequence learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
B. M. Lake and M. Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills of
  sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2018, 7:4487–4499, oct 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00350.
B. M. Lake and M. Baroni. Human-like systematic generalization through a meta-learning neural
  network. Nature, pages 1–7, 2023.
A. Lazaridou and M. Baroni. Emergent Multi-Agent communication in the deep learning era. June
  2020.
A. Lazaridou, K. M. Hermann, K. Tuyls, and S. Clark. Emergence of Linguistic Communication
  from Referential Games with Symbolic and Pixel Input. apr 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1804.03984.
D. Lewis. Convention: A philosophical study. 1969.
F. Locatello, S. Bauer, M. Lucic, G. Rätsch, S. Gelly, B. Schölkopf, and O. Bachem. A sober look at
   the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations and their evaluation. Oct. 2020.


                                                 11
J. Loula, M. Baroni, and B. M. Lake. Rearranging the Familiar: Testing Compositional Generalization
   in Recurrent Networks. jul 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.07545.
N. Mishra, M. Rohaninejad, X. Chen, and P. Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
R. Montague. Universal grammar. Theoria, 36(3):373–398, 1970.
J. Mu and N. Goodman. Emergent communication of generalizations. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 34:17994–18007, 2021.
Y. Ren, S. Guo, M. Labeau, S. B. Cohen, and S. Kirby. Compositional Languages Emerge in a Neural
   Iterated Learning Model. feb 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.01365.
K. Ridgeway and M. C. Mozer. Learning deep disentangled embeddings with the F-Statistic loss,
  2018.
L. Ruis, J. Andreas, M. Baroni, D. Bouchacourt, and B. M. Lake. A benchmark for systematic
  generalization in grounded language understanding. Mar. 2020.
A. Santoro, A. Lampinen, K. Mathewson, T. Lillicrap, and D. Raposo. Symbolic behaviour in
  artificial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03406, 2021.
A. Słowik, A. Gupta, W. L. Hamilton, M. Jamnik, S. B. Holden, and C. Pal. Exploring Structural
  Inductive Biases in Emergent Communication. feb 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.01335.
P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi, M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Son-
   nerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent
   learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, D. Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one shot learning.
  volume 29, 2016.
Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. Freitas. Dueling network architectures
   for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1995–
   2003. PMLR, 2016.
T. W. Webb, I. Sinha, and J. Cohen. Emergent symbols through binding in external memory. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                12
    A    O N A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS OF M ETA -R EFERENTIAL G AMES

    In this section, we detail algorithmically how Meta-Referential Games differ from common RGs. We
    start by presenting in Algorithm 4 an overview of the common RGs, taking place inside a common
    supervised learning loop, and we highlight the following:

         1. (i) preparation of the data on which the referential game is played (highlighted in green),

         2. (ii) elements pertaining to playing a RG (highlighted in blue),

         3. (iii) elements pertaining to the supervised learning loop (highlighted in purple).

    Helper functions are detailed in Algorithm 1, 2 and 3. Next, we can now show in greater and
    contrastive details the Meta-Referential Game algorithm in Algorithm 5, where we highlight the
    following:

         1. (i) preparation of the data on which the referential game is played (highlighted in green),

         2. (ii) elements pertaining to playing a RG (highlighted in blue),

         3. (iii) elements pertaining to the meta-learning loop (highlighted in purple).

         4. (iv) elements pertaining to setup of a Meta-Referential Game (highlighted in red).



    Algorithm 1: Helper function : DataPrep
    Given :
          • a target stimuli s0 ,
          • a dataset of stimuli Dataset,
          • O : Number of Object-Centric samples in each Target Distribution over stimuli T D(·).
          • K : Number of distractor stimuli to provide to the listener agent.
          • FullObs : Boolean defining whether the speaker agent has full (or partial) observation.
          • DescrRatio : Descriptive ratio in the range [0, 1] defining how often the listener agent is
            observing the same semantic as the speaker agent.
1  s′0 , DT arget ← s0 , 0;
 2 if random(0, 1) > DescrRatio then
 3       s′0 ∼ Dataset − T D(s0 ); ; /* Exclude target stimulus from listener’s
           observation ... */
 4       DT arget ← K + 1; ;       /* ... and expect it to decide accordingly.
          */
 5 end
 6 else if O > 1 then
 7       Sample an Object-Centric distractor s′0 ∼ T D(s0 );
 8 end
 9 Sample K distractor stimuli from Dataset − T D(s0 ): (si )i∈[1,K] ∼ Dataset − T D(s0 );

10 ObsSpeaker ← {s0 }; if FullObs then
11       ObsSpeaker ← {s0 } ∪ {si |∀i ∈ [1, K]};
12 end
                       ′
13 ObsListener ← {s0 } ∪ {si |∀i ∈ [1, K]};
   /* Shuffle listener observations and update index of target
          decision:                                                                        */
                   T arget                             T arget
14 ObsListener , D         ← Shuf f le(ObsListener , D         );
   Output : ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , DT arget ;


                                                     13
    Algorithm 2: Helper function : MetaRGDatasetPreparation
    Given :
          • V : Vocabulary (finite set of tokens available),
          • Ndim : Number of attribute/factor dimensions in the symbolic spaces,
          • Vmin : Minimum number of possible values on each attribute/factor dimensions in the
            symbolic spaces,
          • Vmax : Maximum number of possible values on each attribute/factor dimensions in the
            symbolic spaces,
1 Initialise random permutation of vocabulary: V ′ ← RandomP erm(V )
                                                                  N
2 Sample semantic structure: (d(i))i∈[1,Ndim ] ∼ U(Vmin ; Vmax ) dim ;

3 Generate symbolic space/dataset D((d(i))i∈[1,Ndim ] );
                                      support
4 Split dataset into supporting set D         and querying set Dquery (((d(i))i∈[1,Ndim ] ) is omitted for
   readability);
  Output : V ′ , D((d(i))i∈[1,Ndim ] ), Dsupport , Dquery ;


    Algorithm 3: Helper function : PlayRG
    Given :
          • Speaker and Listener agents,
          • Set of speaker observations ObsSpeaker ,
          • Set of listener observations ObsListener ,
          • N : Number of communication rounds to play,
          • L : Maximum length of each message,
          • V : Vocabulary (finite set of tokens available),
1 Compute message M S = Speaker(ObsSpeaker |∅);
                                                               S
2 Initialise Communication Channel History: CommH ← [M ];
3 for round = 0, N do
                                  L
4      Compute Listener’s reply Mround , _ = Listener(ObsListener |CommH);
                                 L
5      CommH ← CommH + [Mround ];
                                  S
6      Compute Speaker’s reply Mround   = Speaker(ObsSpeaker |CommH);
                                 S
7      CommH ← CommH + [Mround ];
8 end
                                 L
9 Compute listener decision _, D   = Listener(ObsListener |CommH);
  Output : Listener’s decision DL , Communication Channel History CommH;


                                                         14
    Algorithm 4: Common Referential Game inside a Common Supervised Learning Loop
    Given :
          • a dataset of stimuli Dataset,
           • a set of hyperparameters defining the RG:
                   – O : Number of Object-Centric samples in each Target Distribution over stimuli T D(·).
                   – N : Number of communication rounds to play.
                   – L : Maximum length of each message.
                   – V : Vocabulary (finite set of tokens available).
                   – K : Number of distractor stimuli to provide to the listener agent.
                   – FullObs : Boolean defining whether the speaker agent has full (or partial) observation.
                   – DescrRatio : Descriptive ratio in the range [0, 1] defining how often the listener agent
                     is observing the same semantic as the speaker agent.
                   – L : Loss function to use in the agents update.
    Initialize :
           • Speaker(·) and Listener(·) agents.
1  Systematically split Dataset into training and testing dataset, Dtrain and Dtest ;
 2 for epoch = 1, Nepoch do
 3     for target stimulus s0 ∈ Dtrain do
           /* Preparation of observations and target decision:                                     */
 4          ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , DT arget ← DataP rep(Dataset, s0 , O, K, FullObs, DescrRatio)
           /* Play Referential Game:                                                               */
 5          DL , _ = PlayRG(Speaker, Listener, ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , N, L, V );
           /* Supervised Learning Parameters Update on Training
                 Stimulus Only:                                                                    */
 6          Update both speaker and listener agents’ parameters using the loss L(DT arget , DL );
 7     end
 8     Initialise ZSCT accuracy: AccZSCT ← 0;
 9     for target stimulus s0 ∈ Dtest do
           /* Preparation of observations and target decision:                                     */
10          ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , DT arget ← DataP rep(Dataset, s0 , O, K, FullObs, DescrRatio)
           /* Play Referential Game:                                                               */
11          DL , _ = PlayRG(Speaker, Listener, ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , N, L, V );
           /* Update ZSCT Accuracy:                                                                */
                                                T arget    L
12          AccZSCT ← Update(AccZSCT , D                , D );
13     end
14 end


                                                        15
     Algorithm 5: Meta-Referential Game inside a Meta-Learning Loop
     Given :
           • Nepisode , Ndim : Number of episodes, and number of attribute/factor dimensions,
            • S : Minimum number of Shots over which each possible value on each attribute/factor
              dimension ought to be observed by the agents (as part of a target stimulus).
            • Vmin , Vmax : Minimum and maximum number of possible values on each attribute/factor
              dimensions in the symbolic spaces,
            • T SS(D, S, S) : Target stimulus sampling function which samples from dataset D, given a
              set of previously sampled stimuli S, while maximising the likelihood that each possible
              value on each attribute/factor dimension are sampled at least S times.
            • a set of hyperparameters defining the RG:
                    – O : Number of Object-Centric samples in each Target Distribution over stimuli T D(·).
                    – N : Number of communication rounds to play.
                    – L : Maximum length of each message.
                    – V : Vocabulary (finite set of tokens available).
                    – K : Number of distractor stimuli to provide to the listener agent.
                    – FullObs : Boolean defining whether the speaker agent has full (or partial) observation.
                    – DescrRatio : Descriptive ratio in the range [0, 1] defining how often the listener agent
                      is observing the same semantic as the speaker agent.
     Initialize :
            • Speaker(·) and Listener(·) agents.
1  for episode = 1, Nepisode do
       /* Preparation of the symbolic space/dataset:                                                     */
                          support    query
 2     V ′ , Depisode , Depisode  , Depisode ← M etaRGDatasetP reparation(V, Ndim , Vmin , Vmax );
 3     Initialise set of sampled supporting stimuli: S support ← ∅;
 4     repeat
                                                                           support
 5           Sample training-purposed target stimulus si0 ∼ T SS(Depisode          , S support , S)
               support      support       i
 6           S         ←S            ∪ {s0 }; i ← i + 1;
 7     until all values on each attribute/factor dimension have been instantiated at least S times;
 8     Initialise RG index: i ← 0;
       /* Supporting Phase:                                                                              */
 9     for target stimulus si0 ∈ S support do
                                                                 support i
10           ObsiSpeaker , ObsiListener , DiT arget ← DataP rep(Depisode , s0 , O, K, FullObs, DescrRatio);

11            DiL , CommHi = PlayRG(Speaker, Listener, ObsiSpeaker , ObsiListener , N, L, V ′ );
12            _, _ = Listener(ObsiSpeaker |CommHi ) ;         /* Listener-Feedback Step */
13       end
         /* Querying/ZSCT Phase:                                                                         */
14       Initialise ZSCT accuracy: AccZSCT ← 0;
                                         query
15       for target stimulus si0 ∈ Depisode     do
                   i          i            T arget
16            ObsSpeaker , ObsListener , Di        ← DataP rep(Depisode , si0 , O, K, FullObs, DescrRatio);

17       DiL , CommHi = PlayRG(Speaker, Listener, ObsiSpeaker , ObsiListener , N, L, V ′ );
18       _, _ = Listener(ObsiSpeaker |CommHi ) ;       /* Listener-Feedback Step */
         /* Update ZSCT Accuracy:                                                            */
19       AccZSCT ← Update(AccZSCT , DiT arget , DiL ); i ← i + 1;
20    end
      /* Meta-Learning Parameters Update on Whole Episode:                                   */
                                                            T arget      L
                                             1         if D i       == D i
21    Update both agents using rewards Ri = 0           otherwise, during supporting phase ;
                                              −2
                                           
                                                        otherwise, during querying phase
22 end


                                                         16
Figure 4: Top: visualisation on each column of the messages sent by the posdis-compositional
rule-based speaker agent over the course of the episode presented in Figure 3. Colours are encoding
the information of the token index, as a visual cue. Bottom: OHE/MHE and SCS representations
of example latent stimuli for two differently-structured symbolic spaces with Ndim = 3, i.e. on the
left for d(0) = 4, d(1) = 2, d(2) = 3, and on the right for d(0) = 3, d(1) = 3, d(2) = 3. Note the
shape invariance property of the SCS representation, as its shape remains unchanged by the change
in semantic structure of the symbolic space, on the contrary to the OHE/MHE representations.


B    AGENT ARCHITECTURE & TRAINING


The baseline RL agents that we consider use a 3-layer fully-connected network with 512, 256, and
finally 128 hidden units, with ReLU activations, with the stimulus being fed as input. The output
is then concatenated with the message coming from the other agent in a OHE/MHE representation,
mainly, as well as all other information necessary for the agent to identify the current step, i.e. the
previous reward value (either +1 and 0 during the training phase or +1 and −2 during testing phase),
its previous action in one-hot encoding, an OHE/MHE-represented index of the communication
round (out of N possible values), an OHE/MHE-represented index of the agent’s role (speaker or
listener) in the current game, an OHE/MHE-represented index of the current phase (either ’training’
or ’testing’), an OHE/MHE representation of the previous RG’s result (either success or failure), the
previous RG’s reward, and an OHE/MHE mask over the action space, clarifying which actions are
available to the agent in the current step. The resulting concatenated vector is processed by another
3-layer fully-connected network with 512, 256, and 256 hidden units, and ReLU activations, and then
fed to the core memory module, which is here a 2-layers LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)
with 256 and 128 hidden units, which feeds into the advantage and value heads of a 1-layer dueling
network (Wang et al., 2016).
Table 5 highlights the hyperparameters used for the learning agent architecture and the learning
algorithm, R2D2(Kapturowski et al., 2018). More details can be found, for reproducibility purposes,
in our open-source implementation at HIDDEN-FOR-REVIEW-PURPOSE.
Training was performed for each run on 1 NVIDIA GTX1080 Ti, and the average amount of training
time for a run is 18 hours for LSTM-based models, 40 hours for ESBN-based models, and 52 hours
for DCEM-based models.


                                                 17
B.1   ESBN & DCEM

The ESBN-based and DCEM-based models that we consider have the same architectures and
parameters than in their respective original work from Webb et al. (2020) and Hill et al. (2020), with
the exception of the stimuli encoding networks, which are similar to the LSTM-based model.

B.2   RULE - BASED SPEAKER AGENT

The rule-based speaker agents used in the single-agent task, where only the listener agent is a
learning agent, speaks a compositional language in the sense of the posdis metric (Chaabouni et al.,
2020), as presented in Table 3 for Ndim = 3, a maximum sentence length of L = 4, and vocabulary
size |V | >= maxi d(i) = 5, assuming a semantical space such that ∀i ∈ [1, 3], d(i) = 5.


C     C HEATING LANGUAGE                                           Table 3: Examples of the latent
                                                                   stimulus to language utterance map-
The agents can develop a cheating language, cheating in the ping of the posdis-compositional
sense that it could be episode/task-invariant (and thus semantic rule-based speaker agent. Note that
structure invariant). This emerging cheating language would token 0 is the EoS token.
encode the continuous values of the SCS representation like an
analog-to-digital converter would, by mapping a fine-enough          Latent Dims Comp. Language
partition of the [−1, +1] range onto the vocabulary in a bijective
fashion.                                                           #1 #2 #3              Tokens
For instance, for a vocabulary size ∥V ∥ = 10, each symbol can 0           1     2        1, 2, 3, 0
                                  2
be unequivocally mapped onto 10     -th increments over [−1, +1], 1        3     4        2, 4, 5, 0
and, by communicating Ndim symbols (assuming Ndim ≤ 2                      5     0        3, 6, 1, 0
L), the speaker agents can communicate to the listener the 3               1     2        4, 2, 3, 0
(digitized) continuous value on each dimension i of the SCS-         4     3     4        5, 4, 5, 0
represented stimulus. If maxj d(j) ≤ ∥V ∥ then the cheating
language is expressive-enough for the speaker agent to digitize
all possible stimulus without solving the binding problem, i.e. without inferring the semantic
structure. Similarly, it is expressive-enough for the listener agent to convert the spoken utterances to
continuous/analog-like values over the [−1, +1] range, thus enabling the listener agent to skirt the
binding problem when trying to discriminate the target stimulus from the different stimuli it observes.


D     F URTHER EXPERIMENTS :

D.1   O N THE BP INSTANTIATED BY THE SCS REPRESENTATION

Hypothesis. The SCS representation differs from the
OHE/MHE one primarily in terms of the binding prob-
lem (Greff et al., 2020) that the former instantiates while
the latter does not. Indeed, the semantic structure can
only be inferred after observing multiple SCS-represented
stimuli. We hypothesised that it is via the dynamic binding
of information extracted from each observations that an
estimation of a density distribution over each dimension
i’s [−1, +1] range can be performed. And, estimating          Figure 5: 5-ways 2-shots accuracies
such density distribution is tantamount to estimating the     on the Recall task with different stim-
number of likely gaussian distributions that partition each   ulus representation (OHE:blue ; SCS;
[−1, +1] range.                                               orange).
Evaluation. Towards highlighting that there is a binding
problem taking place, we show results of baseline RL
agents (similar to main experiments in Section 4) evaluated on a simple single-agent recall task.
The Recall task structure borrows from few-shot learning tasks as it presents over 2 shots all the
stimuli of the instantiated symbolic space (not to be confused with the case for Meta-RG where all
the latent/factor dimensions’ values are being presented over S shots – Meta-RGs do not necessarily


                                                  18
sample the whole instantiated symbolic space at each episode, but the Recall task does). Each shot
consists of a series of recall games, one for each stimulus that can be sampled from an Ndim = 3-
dimensioned symbolic space. The semantic structure (d(i))i∈[1;Ndim ] of the symbolic space is
randomly sampled at the beginning of each episode, i.e. d(i) ∼ U(2; 5), where U(2; 5) is the uniform
discrete distribution over the integers in [2; 5], and the number of object-centric samples is O = 1, in
order to remove any confounder from object-centrism.
Each recall game consists of two steps: in the first step, a stimulus is presented to the RL agent, and
only a no-operation (NO-OP) action is made available, while, on the second step, the agent is asked
to infer/recall the discrete l(i) latent value (as opposed to the representation of it that it observed,
either in the SCS or OHE/MHE form) that the previously-presented stimulus had instantiated, on
a given i-th dimension, where value i for the current game is uniformly sampled from U(1; Ndim )
at the beginning of each game. The value of i is communicated to the agent via the observation
on this second step of different stimulus that in the first step: it is a zeroed out stimulus with the
exception of a 1 on the i-th dimension on which the inference/recall must be performed when using
SCS representation, or over all the OHE/MHE dimensions that can encode a value for the i-th latent
factor/attribute when using the OHE/MHE representation. On the second step, the agent’s available
action space now consists of discrete actions over the range [1; maxj d(j)], where maxj d(j) is a
hyperparameter of the task representing the maximum number of latent values for any latent/factor
dimension. In our experiments, maxj d(j) = 5. While the agent is rewarded at each game for
recalling correctly, we only focus on the performance over the games of the second shot, i.e. on the
games where the agent has theoretically received enough information to infer the density distribution
over each dimension i’s [−1, +1] range. Indeed, observing the whole symbolic space once (on the
first shot) is sufficient (albeit not necessary, specifically in the case of the OHE/MHE representation).
Results. Figure 3(right) details the recall accuracy over all the games of the second shot of our
baseline RL agent throughout learning. There is a large gap of asymptotic performance depending
on whether the Recall task is evaluated using OHE/MHE or SCS representations. We attribute the
poor performance in the SCS context to the instantiation of a BP. We note again that during those
experiments the number of object-centric samples was kept at O = 1, thus emphasising that the BP is
solely depending on the use of the SCS representation and does not require object-centrism.

D.2     O N THE IDEALLY- DISENTANGLED - NESS OF THE SCS REPRESENTATION

In this section, we verify our hypothesis that the SCS representation yields ideally-disentangled
stimuli. We report on the FactorVAE Score Kim and Mnih (2018), the Mutual Information Gap
(MIG) Chen et al., and the Modularity Score Ridgeway and Mozer (2018) as they have been
shown to be part of the metrics that correlate the least among each other (Locatello et al., 2020),
thus representing different desiderata/definitions for disentanglement. We report on the Ndim = 3-
dimensioned symbolic spaces with ∀j, d(j) = 5. The measurements are of 100.0%, 94.8, and 98.9%
for, respectivily, the FactorVAE Score, the MIG, and the Modularity Score, thus validating our design
hypothesis about the SCS representation. We remark that, while it is not the case of the FactorVAE
Score (possibly due to its reliance on a deterministic classifier), the MIG and Modularity Score are
sensitive to the number of object-centric samples, decreasing as low as 64.4% and 66.6% for O = 1.

D.2.1    I MPACTS OF M EMORY AND S AMPLING B UDGET
Hypothesis. Seeing the discrepancies Table 4: Bottom: ZSCT accuracies (%) for S = 1 and
around the impact of S and O, and O = 1, with a 10M observation budget.
given both (i) the fact that increasing
S inevitably increases the length of the                   LSTM            ESBN           DCEM
episode (thus making it difficult for
LSTMs as they notoriously fail to inte- Acc.(%) 86.00 ± 0.14 89.35 ± 2.77 81.90 ± 0.59
grate information from past to present inputs over long dependencies) and (ii) our results goading
us to think that increasing S when O > 1 is confusing LSTM-based agent rather than helping
them, we hypothesise that using agents with more efficient memory-addressing mechanism (e.g.
attention) and greater algorithm-learning abilities (e.g. with explicit memory) would help the agent
get past the identified hurdles. While we leave it to subsequent work to investigate the impact of
more sophisticated core memory when O > 1, we here propose off-the-shelf baseline results in the
simplest setting and with a greater sampling budget. Indeed, we hypothesis that a denser sampling


                                                  19
of the space of all symbolic spaces ought to be beneficial, as we extrapolate Chaa-RSCH (ii) to its
meta-learning version, and avoid the issues pertaining to long dependencies.
Evaluation. We report on architectures based on the Emergent Symbol Binding Network
(ESBN) (Webb et al., 2020) and the Dual-Coding Episodic Memory (DCEM) (Hill et al., 2020) (resp.
3 and 2 random seeds), in the setting of Ndim = 3, Vmin = 2 and Vmax = 3, with a sampling budget
of 10M observations, as opposed to 5M previously.
Results. Table 4 presents the results, which are slightly in favour of the ESBN-based model. As it is
built over the LSTM-based one, the memory scheme may be bypassed until it provides advantages
with a simple-enough mechanism, as opposed to the case of the DCEM-based model.


D.3    I MPACT OF DIFFERENT C ORE M EMORY M ODULES

In the following, we investigate and compare the performance when using an LSTM (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997) or a Differentiable Neural Computer (DNC) (Graves et al., 2016) as core
memory module.
Regarding the auxiliary reconstruction loss, in the case of the LSTM, the hidden states are used, while
in the case of the DNC, the memory is used as input to the prediction network. Figure 6b shows the
stimulus reconstruction accuracies for both architectures, highlighting a greater data-efficiency (and
resulting asymptotic performance in the current observation budget) of the LSTM-based architecture,
compared to the DNC-based one.
Figure 6a shows the 4-ways (3 distractors descriptive RG variant) ZSCT accuracies of the different
agents throughout learning. The ZSCT accuracy is the accuracy over testing-purpose stimuli only,
after the agent has observed for two consecutive times (i.e. S = 2) the supportive training-purpose
stimuli for the current episode. The DNC-based architecture has difficulty learning how to use
its memory, even with the use of the auxiliary reconstruction loss, and therefore it utterly fails to
reach better-than-chance ZSCT accuracies. On the otherhand, the LSTM-based architecture is fairly
successful on the auxiliary reconstruction task, but it is not sufficient for training on the main task
to really take-off. As expected from the fact that the benchmark instantiates a binding problem that
requires relational responding, our results hint at the fact that the ability to use memory towards
deriving valuable relations between stimuli seen at different time-steps is primordial. Indeed, only the
agent that has the ability to use its memory element towards recalling stimuli starts to perform at a
better-than-chance level. Thus, the auxiliary reconstruction loss is an important element to drive some
success on the task, but it is also clearly not sufficient, and the rather poor results that we achieved
using these baseline agents indicates that new inductive biases must be investigated to be able to
solve the problem posed in this benchmark.


                         (a)                                                (b)

Figure 6: (a): 4-ways (3 distractors) zero-shot compositional test accuracies of different architectures.
5 seeds for architectures with DNC and LSTM, and 2 seeds for runs with DNC+Rec and LSTM+Rec,
where the auxiliary reconstruction loss is used. (b): Stimulus reconstruction accuracies for the
archiecture augmented with the auxiliary reconstruction task. Accuracies are computed on binary
values corresponding to each stimulus’ latent dimension’s reconstructed value being close enough to
the ground truth value, with a threshold of 0.05.


                                                   20
E    B ROADER IMPACT
No technology is safe from being used for malicious purposes, which equally applies to our research.
However, aiming to develop artificial agents that relies on the same symbolic behaviours and the same
social assumptions (e.g. using CLBs) than human beings is aiming to reduce misunderstanding be-
tween human and machines. Thus, the current work is targeting benevolent applications. Subsequent
works around the benchmark that we propose are prompted to focus on emerging protocols in general
(not just posdis-compositional languages), while still aiming to provide a better understanding of
artificial agent’s symbolic behaviour biases and differences, especially when compared to human
beings, thus aiming to guard against possible misunderstandings and misaligned behaviours.

Table 5: Hyper-parameters values used in R2D2, with LSTM or DNC as the core memory module.
All missing parameters follow the ones in Ape-X (Horgan et al., 2018).

                                                 R2D2
 Number of actors                                                           32
 Actor parameter update interval                                   1 environment step
 Sequence unroll length                                                     20
 Sequence length overlap                                                    10
 Sequence burn-in length                                                    10
 N-steps return                                                              3
 Replay buffer size                                               5 × 104 observations
 Priority exponent                                                         0.9
 Importance sampling exponent                                              0.6
 Discount γ                                                               0.997
 Minibatch size                                                             32
 Optimizer                                                   Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014)
 Optimizer settings                                     learning rate = 6.25 × 10−5 , ϵ = 10−12
 Target network update interval                                       2500 updates
 Value function rescaling                                                 None
                                         Core Memory Module
 LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)                       DNC (Graves et al., 2016)
Number of layers      2                          LSTM-controller settings     2 hidden layers of size 128
Hidden layer size     256, 128                   Memory settings              128 slots of size 32
Activation function   ReLU                       Read/write heads             2 reading ; 1 writing


                                                 21
