Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T ENSOR P ROGRAMS VI: F EATURE L EARNING                                                                   IN
I NFINITE D EPTH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Greg Yang∗              Dingli Yu∗                         Chen Zhu               Soufiane Hayou†
 xAI                     Princeton Language                 Nvidia                 Simons Institute,
                         and Intelligence,                                         UC Berkeley
                         Princeton University



                                                A BSTRACT

          Empirical studies have consistently demonstrated that increasing the size of
          neural networks often yields superior performance in practical applications.
          However, there is a lack of consensus regarding the appropriate scaling strategy,
          particularly when it comes to increasing the depth of neural networks. In practice,
          excessively large depths can lead to model performance degradation. In this
          paper, we introduce Depth-µP, a principled approach for depth scaling, allowing
          for the training of arbitrarily deep networks while maximizing feature learning
          and feature diversity among nearby layers. Our method involves dividing the
          contribution of each residual block and the parameter update by the square root
          of the depth. Through the use of Tensor Programs, we rigorously establish
          the existence of a limit for infinitely deep neural networks under the proposed
          scaling scheme. This scaling strategy ensures more stable training for deep neural
          networks and guarantees the transferability of hyperparameters from shallow to
          deep models. To substantiate the efficacy of our scaling method, we conduct
          empirical validation on neural networks with depths up to 210 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have showcased remarkable performance across a broad range of tasks,
including image classification, game playing exemplified by AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016), and
natural language processing demonstrated by GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). A prevailing trend in
developing these networks is to increase their size and complexity, with empirical evidence
indicating that using the same computation resources, models with more parameters tend to exhibit
better performance. There are two ways to increase any network size: width and depth. The
properties of the width (given a fixed depth) have been extensively studied in the literature: recent
work by Yang et al. (2022) identified the Maximal Update Parametrization (µP) that guarantees
maximal feature learning in the infinite width limit.1 Another benefit of µP is hyperparameter
transfer which enables hyperparameter tuning on smaller models; the optimal hyperparameter
choice for the smaller model remains optimal for larger models (i.e., models with larger width).
However, despite the achievements of large-scale deep models and the theoretical understanding
of scaling width, increasing the depth of neural networks still has both practical limitations and
theoretical difficulties. In practice, increasing depth beyond some level often results in performance
degradation and/or significant shifts in the optimal hyperparameters. In theory, unlike increasing
width, increasing depth introduces new parameters that significantly change the training dynamics.
In this paper, we aim to solve this problem by extending µP to include depth scaling. We call the
depth scaling Depth-µP.
The issue of depth scaling has persisted over time. A decade ago, deep neural networks experienced
significant degradation problems — having more than a few dozen layers would increase the
training error instead of improving the model’s performance. This was partly due to the vanishing
    ∗
     Equal contribution.
    †
     Work partially done at the National University of Singapore.
   1
     Here maximal feature learning refers to Θ(1) change in features in the infinite width limit. This should be
contrasted with the lazy training regime where the change in features is of order Θ(n−1/2 ).


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


or exploding gradient problem that affects the efficient propagation of information through the
network. The introduction of residual networks (ResNet) (He et al., 2016a;b; Srivastava et al.,
2015) has partially resolved this issue, allowing for the training of deeper networks with improved
performance. ResNet is constructed by layering residual blocks, which are composed of a series of
convolutional layers and then an element-wise addition with the input. This element-wise addition
(commonly referred to as skip connection) is a significant innovation of ResNet and remains an
important ingredient in modern architectures including Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Specifically, in a residual architecture, the l-th residual block is formulated as
                                        xl = xl−1 + g l (xl−1 ; W l ),
where xl−1 is the input, xl is the output, W l are the parameters of the block, and g l (often called
the residual branch) is a mapping that defines the layer (e.g. a stack of convolutions in ResNet, or
SelfAttention and MLP in a Transformer). In this work, we focus on the case where g l is a biasless
perceptron with (or without) activation.
The stacking of many residual blocks causes an obvious issue even at the initialization — the norm
of xl grows with l, so the last layer features do not have a stable norm when increasing the depth.
Intuitively, one can stabilize these features by scaling the residual branches with a depth-dependent
constant. However, scaling the residual branches with arbitrarily small constants might result in no
feature learning in the large depth limit since the gradients will also be multiplied with the scaling
factor. In this paper, we propose Depth-µP, a principled approach to scaling up the depth of residual
networks, enabling the training of arbitrarily deep networks while achieving feature learning and
maximizing feature diversity among nearby layers. Our framework extends the previous results on
µP which deals with optimal width scaling (Yang et al., 2022). It completes the width scaling and
hence provides a full width and depth scaling recipe that guarantees maximal feature learning and
hyperparameter transfer across width and depth. Depth-µP contains the following modifications to
the standard practice:
1. There is a multiplier for each residual branch
   before adding to its input, which is inversely
   proportional to the square root of L (where
   L is the depth). Formally, with a constant a
   independent from L,
                          a
         xl = xl−1 + √ · g l (xl−1 ; W l ). (1)
                           L
2. We set the learning rate of W l so that the
                 l
   update√of W during training is proportional
   to 1/ L. We derive different learning rate
   schemes for different optimization algorithms
   based on this principle. For Adam, because it
   is scale-invariant to the gradient,
                                √      the learning
   rate of W l is set to be η/ L. On the other
   hand, the learning rate of W l for SGD is set Figure 1: Behaviors−αof scaling strategies with a
   as a constant η because                                            L and parameter update size
                             the gradient of W l is branch multiplier −γ
                      √                             proportional to L .
   already of size 1/ L due to the multiplier.

Figure 1 compares Depth-µP with general branch multiplier scaling L−α and update size scaling
L−γ (where Depth-µP has α = γ = 12 ; see Section 4 for more details), showing the uniqueness of
Depth-µP. Specifically, limiting our analysis to block depth 1 (i.e., g l is a biasless perceptron, W l is
a single matrix)2 , we show that Depth-µP leads to the
                                                     √ following properties: a) At the initialization,
each one of the L residual blocks contributes Θ(1/ L) to the main branch. These L contributions
are independent of each other, so the sum of them is of size Θ(1); b) During training, the contribution
of the update of each residual block is Θ(1/L) due to the combining effect of the learning rate and
multiplier. The contributions of the updates are highly correlated, so they sum up to Θ(1); c) More
   2
     In Appendix K, we include a thorough discussion on the scaling strategy for block depth 2 and above.
We find limitations in all possible infinite-depth limits of such parametrizations, which we illustrate on simple
networks as well as Megatron transformer trained on Common Crawl (see Appendix L.3).


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


importantly, we classify all depth limits and show Depth-µP yields the optimal limit. This implies
that the optimal hyperparameters of the networks in Depth-µP are approximately invariant wrt depth.
With Depth-µP, we successfully train networks comprising thousands of residual blocks, while also
showcasing the transferability of hyperparameters across depth.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
Recently, µP (Maximal Update Parametrization), introduced in Yang et al. (2022), has emerged
as a promising approach for maximizing feature learning while simultaneously preventing
feature explosion as the network width increases, given a fixed depth. Notably, µP facilitates
hyperparameter transfer across varying network widths. This means that instead of tuning
hyperparameters directly on large models, one can optimize them on smaller models and utilize
the same set of hyperparameters for larger models.
While increasing the width can lead to improved performance, increasing the depth of the network
also yields significant performance gains, and most state-of-the-art models use deep architectures.
To address the challenges associated with training deep networks, several studies have proposed
scaling the network blocks using a depth-dependent scaler to ensure stability of features and
gradients at initialization (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Hayou et al., 2021; Noci
et al., 2022; Hayou, 2023; Hayou & Yang, 2023; Noci et al., 2023). For Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs) (no skip connections), Jelassi et al. (2023) showed that a learning rate scaling of depth−3/2
guarantees stability after the initial gradient step. However, it remains unclear how the learning rate
should be adjusted beyond the first step, and this scaling is not suitable for architectures with residual
connections. We refer the reader to Appendix A for a more comprehensive literature review.

3     WARM -U P : D EEP L INEAR R ESIDUAL N ETWORKS
Let us begin with a simple example that provides the necessary intuition underpinning our depth
scaling strategy. Given a depth L, width n, consider a linear residual network of the form
                                        1
                          xl = xl−1 + √ W l xl−1 ,        for l = 1, . . . , L,
                                         L
where x0 = U ξ is the input layer, f (ξ) = V ⊤ xL is the output layer, W l ∈ Rn×n are the weight
matrices, and U, V are input and output weight matrices assumed to be fixed during training.

3.1   O PTIMAL SCALING OF THE LEARNING RATE
To simplify the analysis, we consider gradient updates based on a single datapoint. The first gradient
step is given by W1l = W0l − ηGl0 , where η is the learning rate, and Gl0 is a matrix with update
directions. For instance, we have the following expressions for Gl0 with SGD and Adam:

       • SGD: Gl0 = √1L dxl ⊗ xl−1 , where dxl =
                                               def ∂ℓ
                                                   ∂xl
                                                       for some loss function ℓ.

       • Adam: Gl0 = sign √1L dxl ⊗ xl−1 , where ⊗ is the Kronecker product.3

In both cases, dxl and xl−1 are computed for a single training        datapoint ξ0 . The last layer features
                                              QL             1
x (for some input ξ) are given by x = l=1 I + √L W x0 .4 We use the subscript t to refer to
  L                                     L                         l

training step. After the first gradient step, we have the following
                                L
                               Y            1                        η
                       xL1  =        I +  √    W  l      0    L
                                                  1 x = x0 − √ AL + O(η ),
                                                                                  2
                                                                                                         (2)
                               l=1
                                             L                        L
                 PL h Q                           i       hQ                   i
where AL =                         I +  √1 W k       G l
                                                                  I +  √1 W k    x0 . We argue that AL
                    l=1      k>l          L    0       0    k<l             0
                                                                       √L
behaves as Θ(L) (in second norm). This is the due to the 1/ L scaling factor. To see this, we
    3
      The first step of Adam can be viewed as the SignSGD update. Our analysis for Adam is valid for any
training algorithm that gives Θ(1) gradients.
    4
      To avoid any confusion, here we define the matrix product by L
                                                                  Q
                                                                   l=1 Al = AL × AL−1 · · · × A1 .



                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


further simplify the analysis by considering the case din = n = dout = 1 (single neuron per layer)
and the squared loss.

Scaling for SGD. With SGD, we have that Gl0 = √1L k̸=l 1 + √1L W0k x0 dxL , where dxL =
                                                         Q

(V xL − y(ξ0 )) and y(ξ0 ) is the target output. Therefore, it is easy to see that
                                                              2
                             L Y                    2
                     1      X                1                             1 2
           EA2l = E                  1 + √ W0k dxL x20  = Θ                L = Θ(L),
                    L                         L                            L
                            l=1 k̸=l
                                                   2p
where we have used the fact that E 1 + √1L W0k          = 1 + Θ(L−1 ), for any positive integer p.
                                                                                2
                                                                          η
Hence, the magnitude of the first order term in eq. (2) is given by E    √  A
                                                                           L l
                                                                                    = Θ(η 2 ), which
shows that the update is stable in depth as long as η = Θ(1) in depth. More precisely, this is the
maximal choice of learning rate that does not lead to exploding features as depth increases.
Scaling for Adam. With Adam, we have Gl0 = ±1, and therefore we obtain
                                                             2
                                    L Y
                                   X              1
                      EA2l = E              1 + √ W0k x0  = Θ L2 ,


                                   l=1 k̸=l
                                                   L

where we have
             used the
                      same arguments as before. In this case, the first order term in eq. (2) is
                  2
             η
given by E √L Al      = Θ(η 2 L−1 ), and therefore, the maximal learning rate that one can choose
without exploding the features is given by η = Θ(L−1/2 ).
                                                     √
Summary: By ensuring that parameter update is Θ(1/ L), the features remain stable while feature
update is Θ(1). This Θ(1) update is due to the accumulation of Θ(1/L) correlated terms across
depth. We refer the reader to Appendix B for a more in-depth analysis of this simple model.

3.2   SGD TRAINING DYNAMICS BEYOND ONE TRAINING STEP AND n = 1

The intuitive example above assumes there is only one single neuron per layer (n = 1). However,
rigorous extension to the general finite width setting (n > 1) is hard. This can be solved by
introducing Tensor Programs framework (Yang & Littwin, 2023), which allows us to study the
infinite-width network and be worry-free from noise caused by finite width. Tensor Programs
also enable analysis of training dynamics beyond the first training step. Particularly, we rigorously
derive the training dynamics of SGD for the linear residual network when the width and the depth
sequentially go to infinity. Our analysis of the linear case reveals our main technical tools with
minimal notations and prerequisite knowledge, so it is more friendly to readers who are interested
in the technical details. Below we provide our technical road map. The full version of the analysis
can be found in Appendix C.
1. We first take the width of the network to infinity by the Tensor Program framework. As a result,
   instead of tracking vectors and matrices along the training trajectory, we track random variables
   that correspond to the vectors, that is, for a vector x ∈ Rn that appears in the computation of the
   training, the coordinates of x can be viewed as iid copies of random variable 8x⟩ (called a ket)
   when n → ∞.
2. Since the network is linear, every random variable can be written as a linear combination of a
   set of zero-mean “base” random variables by the Master Theorem of Tensor Programs (Yang &
   Littwin, 2023). Then we can track the random variables by analyzing the coefficients of their
   corresponding linear combinations, and the covariance between the “base” random variables.
3. We aggregate the coefficients of all random variables and represent them by a six-dimensional
   tensor Γ, where two of the dimensions have shape L because the number of random variables
   and the number of “base” random variables scale linearly with L. The next step is to find if Γ
   converges when L grows. However, any convergence directly based on Γ is impossible because
   the shape of Γ is different when L grows. We thus convert Γ to a set of functions Γ whose input
   domain is [0, 1] × (0, 1], where the two inputs to Γ corresponds to the fractional index of the two


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    dimensions of Γ of shape L. Similarly, the covariance between the “base” random variables can
    represented by another set of functions C whose input domain is (0, 1]. Finally, we claim that
    the functions Γ and C converge when L → ∞, and identify their limits as the solution of a set of
    functional integrals in Proposition C.4.
In Appendix L.1, we conduct a thorough empirical verification of our theory in the linear case. The
experiments clearly show the convergence of deep linear residual networks under Depth-µP.

4     P RELIMINARIES FOR THE G ENERAL C ASE
Notation Let L be the depth of the network, i.e., the number of residual blocks, and n be the
width of the network, i.e. the dimension of all hidden representations x0 , . . . , xL . Let ξ ∈ Rdin be
the input of the network, U ∈ Rn×din be the input layer, and V ∈ Rn×e be the output layer, so that
x0 = U ξ and the model output w.r.t. ξ is f (ξ) ≜ V ⊤ xL . Let ℓ be the loss function absorbing the
label, and dxl be the gradient of xl w.r.t. the loss. We denote variables at t-th training step by adding
t as a subscript, e.g., the input at step t is ξt 5 , the hidden representation of l-th layer at step t is xlt ,
and the model output at step t is ft . Let T be the number of training steps. Let I be the identity
matrix, and 1 be the full one vector. For m ∈ N+ , let [m] = {1, . . . , m}.

4.1    U NIFIED S CALING FOR SGD AND A DAM
We extend the definition of entrywise update (Yang & Littwin (2023)) for depth scaling, allowing us
to study the unified depth scaling for SGD, Adam, and other optimization algorithms that perform
only entrywise operations.
Definition 4.1. A gradient-based update of parameter w with both width and depth scaling is defined
by a set of functions Q = {Qt : Rt+1 → R}t≥0 , and c, d, δ, γ, η. The update at time t of the
optimization is
                                w ← w − ηn−c L−γ Qt (nd Lδ g0 , . . . , nd Lδ gt ),
where gs , s = 0, . . . , t, are the gradients of w at time s.
For SGD, Qt (nd Lδ g0 , . . . , nd Lδ gt ) = nd Lδ gt , and the “true” learning rate is ηn−c+d L−γ+δ . For
                                                 1−β1 Pt       t−s d δ
                                                1−β1
                                                    t+1   s=0 β1   n L gs
               d   δ          d   δ
Adam, Qt (n L g0 , . . . , n L gt ) = r        1−β2   P t    t−s
                                                                                   , and the “true” learning rate is
                                                  t+1   s=0 β2   (nd Lδ gs )2 +ϵ
                                              1−β2

just ηn−c L−γ .
The purpose of multiplying the gradients nd Lδ before Qt is to make sure the inputs to Qt are Θ(1)
w.r.t. n and L6 ; otherwise, the update might be trivial when n and L become large. For example,
if gradients are o(1) entrywise, then, in Adam, directly feeding gradients to Qt will always give an
output of 0 because of the constant ϵ > 0. In this paper, we will only consider d, δ such that nd Lδ g
is Θ(1).7 As a result, the output of Qt is also Θ(1) in general. Therefore, n−c L−γ decides the scale
of the update and should be our focus. We call ηn−c L−γ the effective learning rate.

4.2    S ETUP
We consider an L-hidden-layer residual network with biasless perceptron blocks:
                  ∀l ∈ [L], hl = W l xl−1 , xl = xl−1 + L−α MS(ϕ(hl )),
where x0 = U ξ, the network output f = V ⊤ xL , ϕ is the nonlinearity/activation function and MS
refers to Mean Substraction and is given by MS(x) = x − ⟨x, 1⟩/n = Gx with G = I − 11⊤ /n.
We follow µP (Yang, 2020b) for the widthwise scaling, i.e., the initialization of U , V , W l are i.i.d.
zero-mean Gaussian with variance 1, n−2 , n−1 respectively, and the c in the effective learning rate
ηn−c L−γ for U , V and W l are 0, 1, 1 respectively, i.e., the learning rate of W l is ηn−1 L−γ .
In sum, the (α, γ) pair decides the depthwise scaling of our whole setup.
    5
      Here, the input is used to perform one gradient step at training step t. We will see later that our claims
should in principle hold for batched versions of the training algorithm.
    6
      It is called faithfulness in Yang & Littwin (2023).
    7
      Note c, d, δ, γ, η in Definition 4.1 can be different for parameters, so it is possible to make every parameter
to satisfy the condition. In this paper, we focus on matrices W l , which share the same set of c, d, δ, γ, η.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maximal update parametrization (µP) (Yang, 2020b) considers the change of initialization and
learning rate of each weight matrix in the network when width scales up.8 It provides a unique
initialization and learning rate of each weight matrix as a function of width n that makes the update
of each weight matrix maximal (up to a constant factor). The benefit of µP is not only the theoretical
guarantee but also the hyperparameter stability when scaling up the width (Yang & Hu, 2021).
Mean Substraction (MS). The use of mean substraction is key in our analysis. First of all, it acts
in a similar fashion to LayerNorm without the normalization part. We believe that mean substraction
in LayerNorm plays a more important role than the division by the norm. This is because with
the right depth scaling, it is generally the case that features will remain stable as depth grows
(no exploding/vanishing), however, the correlation will induce non-zero means, hence the need for
mean substraction to avoid exploding behaviour. Secondly, substracting the mean only decreases the
dimension of the layers by 1, which is insignificant in the large width limit. Lastly, one can think of
a generalized parametrization in which means of the activations are computed and added back after
scaling the centered block. This will result in similar scaling patterns to the ones we propose in our
setup. For the sake of simplification, we do not consider this general setup in this paper.

5       C LASSIFICATION OF D EPTHWISE PARAMETRIZATIONS
In this section, we provide a comprehensive description of the impact of depth parametrization on
stability and update size. For this purpose, we only have two scalings to keep track of: the branch
multiplier and the learning rate scaling because the initialization scale is fixed by the faithfulness
property (defined below). Requiring that the    √ features don’t blow up at initialization means that
the branch multipliers must be at most Θ(1/ L). Assuming the updates are faithful (i.e., input to
gradient processing functions are Θ(1) entrywise), the update size can be at most 1/L for the hidden
layers, by an (Jacobian) operator-norm argument, but potentially much less. Naively speaking, there
can be a trade-off between update size and initialization: if initialization is large, then the update
may need to be small so as not to blow up the other parts of the network; likewise if the initialization
is small, then the update size can be larger. But one may be surprised that a careful calculation shows
that there is no trade-off: we can maximize both initialization and update size at the same time.
Before delving into the details, let us first define the notions of training routine, stability, faithfulness,
and non-triviality. Hereafter, all the aymptotic notations such as O, Ω and o should be understood
in the limit “n → ∞, then L → ∞”. For random variables, such notations should be understood in
the sense of weak convergence (convergence in distribution). When we use the notation x = O(1)
for some vector x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rn , it should understood in the sense that for all i ∈ [n], xi =
O(1). Lastly, we will use bold characters (e.g. h instead of h) to denote ‘batched’ versions of the
quantities. This is just to emphasize that the following claims should hold for batched quantities as
well.
Remark: in this section, we state the results as “claims” instead of theorems. In Appendix G.4,
we provide “heuristic” proofs that can be made rigorous under non-trivial technical conditions.
We believe this additional layer of complexity is unneeded and do not serve the purpose of this
paper. To showcase the correctness, we provide rigorous proof for all the claims in the linear case in
Appendix H, which also serves as intuitions for the general case.
Definition 5.1 (Training routine). A training routine is the package of η, Q, and the input batches.
Definition 5.2 (Stability). We say a parametrization is

          1. stable at initialization if hl0 , xl0 = O(1), ∀l ∈ [L], and f0 = O(1).
          2. stable during training if for any training routine, any time t ≥ 0, l ∈ [L], we have
             ∆hlt , ∆xlt = O(1), ∀l ∈ [L], and ∆ft = O(1), where the symbol ‘∆’ refers to the change
             after one gradient step.

We say the parametrization is stable if it is stable both at initialization and during training.
Definition 5.3 (Faithful). We say a parametrization is faithful at step t if hlt = Θ(1) for all l ∈ [L].
We say the parametrization is faithful if it is faithful for all t. We also say it is faithful at initialization
(resp. faithful during training) if this is true at t = 0 (resp. for t ≥ 1).
    8
        Reparametrization is also included in the original µP, but it is not necessary for the purpose of this paper.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note faithfulness here refers to “faithfulness to ϕ”, meaning the input to ϕ is Θ(1). This is
different from the definition of faithfulness in Yang & Littwin (2023), where faithfulness refers
to “faithfulness to Q” meaning the input to Q is Θ(1). “faithfulness to Q” is already assumed in this
work as mentioned in Section 4.1.
Definition 5.4 (Nontriviality). We say a parametrization is trivial if for every training routine and
                            a.s.
any time t ≥ 1, ft − f0 −−→ 0 in the limit “n → ∞, then L → ∞” (i.e., the function does not
evolve in the infinite-width-then-depth limit). We say the parametrization is nontrivial otherwise.
Definition 5.5 (Feature Learning). We say a parametrization induces feature learning in the limit
“n → ∞, then L → ∞”, if there exist a training routine, and t ≥ 1, and any λ > 0, we have
    ⌊λL⌋
∆ht       = Θ(1).

5.1   M AIN CLAIMS
We are now ready to state the main results. The next claim provides a necessary and sufficient
condition under which a parametrization is stable at initialization.
Claim 5.1. A parametrization is stable at initialization iff α ≥ 1/2.

Claim 5.1 is not new and similar results were reported by Hayou et al. (2021). However, Hayou
et al. (2021) focuses on initialization and lacks a similar stability analysis during training. In the
next result, we identify two different behaviours depending on the scaling of the learning rate.
Claim 5.2. Consider a parametrization that is stable at initialization. Then the following hold
(separately from each other): a) It is stable during training as well iff α + γ ≥ 1; b) It is nontrivial
iff α + γ ≤ 1. Therefore, it is both stable and nontrivial iff α + γ = 1.

From Claim 5.1 and Claim 5.2, having α+γ = 1 and α ≥ 1/2 is a necessary and sufficient condition
for a parametrization to be stable and nontrivial throughout training. In the next result, we therefore
restrict our analysis to such parametrizations and study their faithfulness.
Claim 5.3. Consider a stable and nontrivial parametrization. The following hold (separately from
each other).

       • It is faithful at initialization iff α ≥ 1/2. As a result, α = 1/2 is the minimal choice of α
         that guarantees faithfulness.
       • It is faithful during training iff α ≤ 1.

Therefore, a stable and nontrivial parametrization is faithful iff α ∈ [1/2, 1].

The first claim follows from well-known calculations of randomly initialized residual networks
Hayou et al. (2021). For the second claim, the intuition here is just that if α + γ = 1 and α > 1 then
γ < 0, i.e., the update size blows up with depth. This would then cause the input to the nonlinearities
to blow up with size.
Now by focusing on stable, nontrivial, and faithful parametrizations, we have narrowed down the
space of (α, γ) to α + γ = 1 and α ∈ [1/2, 1]. However, in order to achieve optimal hyperparameter
transfer, we need to identify the optimal parametrization among them. (See Appendix I for detailed
explanation on what causes hyperparameter transfer.) To accomplish this, we first define the notion
of feature diversity exponent, which relates to the similarity in the features of adjacent layers.
Definition 5.6 (Feature Diversity Exponent). We say a parametrization has feature diversity
exponent κ ≥ 0 if κ is the maximal value such that for all λ ∈ [0, 1] and sufficiently small ϵ > 0,
and all time t,
                                 1
                                √ x⌊(λ+ϵ)L⌋
                                       t        − xt
                                                     ⌊λL⌋
                                                            = Ω(ϵ1−κ ),
                                  n
where Ω(1) should be interpreted in the limit “n → ∞, then L → ∞, then ϵ → 0”. We say a
parametrization is redundant if κ = 0.

In other words, the feature diversity exponent κ is a measure of how different the outputs are in
layers that are close to each other. With κ = 0, the output of each layer is essentially the same as the
output of the previous layer in the sense that the rate of change from one layer to the next is bounded
(at least locally), and hence the network is intuitively “wasting” parameters.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Claim 5.4. Consider a stable and nontrivial parametrization that is furthermore faithful during
training (but not necessarily at initialization). Then it is redundant if α ∈ (1/2, 1].

To understand the intuition behind Claim 5.4, let us see what happens when α > 1/2. In this
case, the randomness of the initialization weights will have no impact on training trajectory as depth
increases. To see this, consider some layer index ⌊λL⌋. The blocks are divided by Lα which is
larger than the magnitude of accumulated randomness (of order (λL)1/2 ). This basically destroys
all the randomness from initialization and therefore the randomness in the learned features will
consist only of that coming from U and V (input and output matrices). When depth goes to infinity,
the contribution of the randomness in two adjacent layers becomes less important, we end up with
adjacent layers becoming very similar because the gradients to these layers are highly correlated.
In contrast, we have the following result, which defines Depth-µP.
Claim 5.5 (Depth-µP). α = γ = 1/2 is the unique parametrization that is stable, nontrivial,
faithful, induces feature learning, and achieves maximal feature diversity with κ = 1/2.

Note feature learning is not the unique property of Depth-µP9 , but in terms of feature diversity, a
phase transition phenomenon occurs when α = 1/2. More precisely, for Depth-µP, we can show that
           ⌊(λ+ϵ)L⌋       ⌊λL⌋
n−1/2 xt           − xt       = O(ϵ1/2 ) while the same quantity is O(ϵ) for all α ∈ (1/2, 1], which
suggests that Depth-µP yields rough path for xt . This allows the features to change significantly
from one layer to the next, hence efficiently using the parameters. For readers who are familiar with
rough path theory, the 1/2 continuity exponent is a result of Brownian increments in the path.10
Moreover, with α = 1, there is a phenomenon of feature collapse in the sense that the features will
be contained in the σ-algebra generated by the input and output layers, but contains no randomness
from the hidden layers (see Appendix G.2). Intuitively, the case of α = 1 is analogous to width
situation, where deep mean field collapses to a single neuron (all neurons become essentially the
same). For depth, the features (layers) are still relatively different but the redundancy does not allow
significant variety in these features.
In Appendix J, we provide more insight into feature diversity and shed light on its importance. We
show that the choice of nonlinearity and placement of nonlinearity can affect feature diversity, and
indeed the best architecture that maximizes feature diversity also performs better in the experiments.
We also provide empirical verification of our claims about feature diversity in Appendix L.4.

6 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide empirical evidence to show the optimality of Depth-µP scaling and the
transferability of hyperparameters across depth. We train vanilla residual network with block depth
1 (1 MLP layer in each residual block) on CIFAR10 dataset using Adam optimizer, batch size 64,
for 50 epochs. The parametrization of the network and the weight update rule are as follows,
  xl = xl−1 + a × L−α MS(ϕ(W l xl−1 )),              W l ← W l − η × n−1 L−γ Qlt (nLδ g0 , . . . , nLδ gt ),
where the learning rate η and the block multiplier a are the hyperparameters.11 The nonlinearity
ϕ is ReLU. The values of α, γ depend on the parametrization of choice. For Depth-µP, we have
α = γ = 1/2, and for standard parametrization, we have α = 0, γ = 1.12

Learning rate transfer (η). In Figure 2, we show the training loss versus learning rate for depths
2k , for k ∈ {3, 4 . . . , 10}. For Depth-µP, a convergence pattern can be observed for the optimal
learning rate as depth grows. Optimal learning rates for small depths (e.g. L = 23 ) exhibit a mild
shift which should be expected, as our theory shows convergence in the large depth limit. However,
starting from depth L = 26 , the optimal learning rate is concentrated around 10−3 . With standard
   9
      Stable, nontrivial, and faithful parametrizations all induce feature learning
  10
      The reader might ask whether we can obtain an exponent smaller than 1/2. This is indeed possible, but it
will entail using correlated weights. We leave this question for future work.
   11
      Note that η here is constant across depths and widths, and the effective learning rate is given by ηn−1 L−γ .
   12
      In standard parametrization, there is generally no rule to scale the learning rate with depth, and the optimal
learning rate is typically found by grid search. Here, we assume that in standard parametrization, the learning
rate is scaled by L−1 to preserve faithfullness.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Depth μP


         SP (α = 0,γ = 1)


         SP (α = γ = 0)


Figure 2: Training loss versus learning rate at varying depths for Depth-µP (top row) and two Standard
Parametrizations (bottom two rows). The network consists of MLP blocks with width n = 256 and block
depth 1. We fix its input/output layers and train its hidden layers for 50 epochs with batch size 64 on CIFAR10
using Adam. Each curve represent the average training loss over a time slice of 1000 steps for depths 2k for
k ∈ {3, 4, . . . , 10}. Confidence intervals are based on 5 seeds. The results show that Depth-µP preserves
optimal learning rate while consistently improving the training loss as depth increases.

parametrization with learning rate scaling (α = 0, γ = 1), the optimal learning rate exhibits a
significant shift with depth and training loss degrades when the depth is too large. Here we have
already set a = 2−3 , making the curves look better compared to the standard practice with a = 1.
For standard parametrization without any depth scaling (α = γ = 0), the optimal learning rate
exhibits a significant shift as depth grows (even with smaller a = 2−4 ), suggesting that standard
parametrization is not suitable for depth scaling. Additional figures with multiple time slices are
provided in Appendix M.
Block multiplier transfer (a). In Figure 14, we investigate the stability of the hyperparameter a
in Depth-µP as depth increases. The results suggest that the optimal value of this constant converges
as depth grows, which suggest transferability. Additional experiments with multiple time slices are
provided in Appendix M.

7    D ISCUSSION
This research contributes a foundational understanding of the optimal depth scaling for neural
networks, showcasing the effectiveness of Depth-µP through rigorous theoretical justifications and
practical experiments. As the field of deep learning continues to evolve, our work serves as a
valuable guidepost for developing more efficient and powerful neural network architectures while
also paving the way for exciting future investigations into the scaling of advanced architectures.
While our current theory establishes the optimality of depth-µP in the case of MLP blocks, the
applicability of this scaling principle to more advanced architectures, such as Transformers, should
in-principle yield favorable outcomes. We leave this for future work.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Huishuai Zhang, Jeremy Bernstein, Edward Hu, Michael Santacroce, Liyuan Liu for their
helpful comments and discussion. D. Yu was supported by NSF and ONR. Part of this work was
done during D. Yu’s internship at Microsoft.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization, 2019.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport, 2018.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming,
  2020.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. How to start training: The effect of initialization and architecture,
  2018.
Soufiane Hayou. On the infinite-depth limit of finite-width neural networks, 2023.
Soufiane Hayou and Greg Yang. Width and depth limits commute in residual networks, 2023.
Soufiane Hayou, Eugenio Clerico, Bobby He, George Deligiannidis, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith
  Rousseau. Stable resnet. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.), Proceedings of The
  24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 130 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1324–1332. PMLR, 13–15 Apr 2021. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v130/hayou21a.html.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The
  Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pp. 630–645. Springer, 2016b.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks, 2020.
Samy Jelassi, Boris Hanin, Ziwei Ji, Sashank J. Reddi, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, and Sanjiv Kumar.
  Depth dependence of µp learning rates in relu mlps, 2023.
Liyuan Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, and Jiawei Han. Understanding the
  difficulty of training transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08249, 2020.
Lorenzo Noci, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Luca Biggio, Antonio Orvieto, Sidak Pal Singh, and Aurelien
  Lucchi. Signal propagation in transformers: Theoretical perspectives and the role of rank collapse,
  2022.
Lorenzo Noci, Chuning Li, Mufan Bill Li, Bobby He, Thomas Hofmann, Chris Maddison, and
  Daniel M. Roy. The shaped transformer: Attention models in the infinite depth-and-width limit,
  2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Highway networks, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.
Greg Yang. Scaling limits of wide neural networks with weight sharing: Gaussian process behavior,
  gradient independence, and neural tangent kernel derivation, 2020a.
Greg Yang. Tensor programs ii: Neural tangent kernel for any architecture, 2020b.
Greg Yang. Tensor programs i: Wide feedforward or recurrent neural networks of any architecture
  are gaussian processes, 2021.
Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Tensor programs iv: Feature learning in infinite-width neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11727–11737. PMLR, 2021.
Greg Yang and Etai Littwin. Tensor programs ivb: Adaptive optimization in the infinite-width limit,
  2023.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder,
  Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Hongyi Zhang, Yann N. Dauphin, and Tengyu Ma. Fixup initialization: Residual learning without
  normalization, 2019.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Stochastic gradient descent optimizes
  over-parameterized deep relu networks, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A         R ELATED W ORKS
A.1        W IDTH SCALING AND µP

The infinite-width limit of neural networks has been a topic of extensive research in the literature.
Numerous studies have predominantly focused on examining the behavior of various statistical
quantities at initialization. Some works have gone beyond the initialization stage to explore the
dynamics of feature learning in neural networks.

Lazy Training. With standard parametrization, a learning rate of order O(n−1 ),13 n being the
width, yields the so-called lazy training regime in the infinite-width limit, where the features remain
roughly constant throughout training (Chizat et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022). This regime is also
known as the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regime and its convergence properties have been
extensively studied in the literature (Jacot et al., 2020; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Chizat & Bach, 2018;
Zou et al., 2018).

Feature learning and µP. Recent empirical studies (e.g. Yang et al. (2022)) have provided
compelling evidence that feature learning plays a crucial role in the success of deep learning.
It is widely acknowledged that the remarkable performance achieved by deep neural networks
can be attributed to their ability to acquire meaningful representations through the process of
training. Consequently, scaling the network architecture emerges as a natural choice to enhance
the performance of such models.
In this context, µP (Maximal Update Parametrization), introduced in Yang et al. (2022), has
emerged as a promising approach for maximizing feature learning while simultaneously preventing
feature explosion as the network width increases, given a fixed depth. Notably, µP facilitates
hyperparameter transfer across varying network widths. This means that instead of tuning
hyperparameters directly on large models, one can optimize them on smaller models and utilize
the same set of hyperparameters for larger models.
The derivation of µP leverages the Tensor Programs framework (Yang, 2021; 2020a;b; Yang & Hu,
2021; Yang et al., 2022), which provides valuable tools for capturing the behavior of neural networks
in the infinite-width regime during the training process.

A.2        D EPTH SCALING

While increasing the width of neural networks can lead to improved performance, increasing the
depth of the network also yields significant performance gains, and most state-of-the-art models use
deep architectures. The introduction of skip connections (He et al., 2016a;b) played a pivotal role in
enabling the training of deep networks. However, it became apparent that even with skip connections
and normalization layers, training deep networks remains a challenging task (Liu et al., 2020).
Moreover, tuning hyperparameters for large depth networks is a time-and-resource-consuming task.
To address the challenges associated with training deep networks, several studies have proposed
scaling the network blocks using a depth-dependent scaler to ensure stability of features and
gradients at initialization (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Hayou et al., 2021; Noci
et al., 2022; Hayou, 2023; Hayou & Yang, 2023; Noci et al., 2023). However, these works primarily
focus on stability at initialization and lack insights into the dynamics during the training process. For
instance, one might argue that features can still experience explosive growth if the learning rate is
not properly chosen. Therefore, an effective depth scaling approach should not only ensure stability
at initialization but also provide guidelines for scaling the learning rate.
This motivation underlies the development of Depth-µP, which offers a comprehensive framework
for depth scaling. Depth-µP encompasses block multipliers and learning rate scaling, providing a
complete recipe for training deep networks. In the case of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) (no
skip connections), Jelassi et al. (2023) showed that a learning rate scaling of depth−3/2 guarantees
stability after the initial gradient step. However, it remains unclear how the learning rate should
be adjusted beyond the first step, and this scaling is not suitable for architectures with residual
connections.
    13
         We also obtain the lazy infinite-width limit with the NTK paramterization and a O(n−1/2 ) learning rate.


                                                          12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B         C ONTINUATION OF THE I NTUITIVE E XPLANATION WITH L INEAR
          N ETWORKS
Recall the network model
                                                        1
                                     ∀l ∈ [L],    xl = √ W l xl−1 + xl−1 ,
                                                         L
where x0 = U ξ, resp. f (ξ) = V ⊤ xL is the input, resp. output, layer, and W l ∈ Rn×n are the
weight matrices, and U, V are input and output weight matrices that we assume to be fixed during
training.

B.1        C ONVERGENCE WHEN DEPTH GOES TO ∞

Let us look at xL1 again in the simple case din = dout = n = 1 and analyze its behaviour when
L → ∞. This paragraph is only intended to give an intuition for the convergence. A rigorous proof
of such convergence will be later presented in the
                                                   paper. Let us consider the case with SGD training
with learning rate η = 1 and let ML,l = k̸=l 1 + √1L W0k and τ = (V xL                      0
                                         Q
                                                                                0 − y(ξ0 ))x . With this,
we have the following
                                     L
                                    Y            1         1
                              xL
                               1 =       1  +  √    W l
                                                      0 −    τ M L,l x .
                                                                         0
                                                                                                      (3)
                                                  L        L
                                    l=1
                                                                                                √
WLOG, let us assume that x00 > 0. Then, with high probability (the event that W0l ≪ L, for
                                                                         α
some notion of “≪”, occurs with a probability of at least 1 − e−L for some α > 0)14 , we have
      L                                        L
that x1 > 0. We can therefore look at log(x1 ) which simplifies the task. Taking the log and using
Taylor expansion under a high probability event, we obtain
                             L              L            PL
                         1 X l 1X                               (W l )2
             L    0
        log(x1 /x ) = √          W0 −          τ ML,l + l=1 0 + O(L−1+ϵ )
                          L l=1        L                       L
                                          l=1
                             L                   L                  PL        l 2
                         1 X l               1X          1              l=1 (W0 )
                     =√          W0 − τ x L
                                          0              1     l
                                                                 +                + O(L−1+ϵ ),
                          L                  L      1 + √ W0               L
                                   l=1                l=1        L
                                                                     PL
                                                  1
                                                    PL                      (W l )2
for some ϵ > 0. The first and third terms √L l=1 W0l and l=1L 0 converge (almost surely) to a
standard Gaussian and 1, respectively. The second term also converges naturally, since xL
                                                                                        0 converges
in L2 to a Log-Normal random variable (Hayou (2023)) and with a delicate treatment (involving high
                                                   PL
probability bounds), one can show that the term L1 l=1 1+ √11 W l converges (in L2 norm) at large
                                                                        L    0

depth. This implies that one should expect xL
                                            1 to have some notion of weak convergence as depth
grows. Note that the same analysis becomes much more complicated for general width n > 0. To
avoid dealing with high probability bounds, a convenient method consists of taking the width to
infinity first n → ∞, then analyzing what happens as depth increases. We discuss this in the next
section.

B.2        A D ISCUSSION ON THE G ENERAL C ASE

Difficulty of generalizing to the nonlinear case.        The extension to the general width scenario
(n > 1) necessitates a more intricate treatment of the term Al to find optimal scaling rules, yet the
proposed scaling remains optimal for general width. This preliminary analysis lays the groundwork
for proposing a specific learning rate scaling scheme that maximizes feature learning. Moreover,
demonstrating the optimality of this scaling strategy in the presence of non-linearities is a non-
trivial task. The primary challenge stems from the correlation among the post-activations induced
during the training process. Overcoming these challenges requires a rigorous framework capable of
addressing the large depth limit of crucial quantities in the network.
For this purpose, we employ the Tensor Program framework to investigate the behavior of essential
network quantities in the infinite-width-then-depth limit. By leveraging this framework, our
    14
         This follows from simple concentration inequalities for sub-exponential random variables.


                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


theoretical findings establish that the aforementioned scaling strategy remains optimal for general
networks with skip connections. Our framework considers the setup where the width is taken to
infinity first, followed by depth. This represents the case where 1 ≪ depth ≪ width, which
encompasses most practical settings (e.g. Large Language Models).

The critical role of Initialization. A naive approach to depth scaling can be as follows: since the
weights Wtk might become highly correlated during training, one has to scale the blocks with 1/L.
To understand this, let us assume a block multiplier of L−α and consider the scenario of perfect
correlation where all weights are equal, i.e., Wtk = W for every k ∈ 1, . . . , L. In this case, the
                                                             L
last layer features can be expressed as xL = (I + L−α W ) x0 . When α = 1/2, the features are
likely to exhibit an explosive growth with increasing depth, while opting for α = 1 is guaranteed to
stabilize the features.
However, in this paper, we demonstrate that this intuition does not align with practical observations.
Contrary to expectations, the features do not undergo an explosive growth as the depth increases
when α = 1/2. This phenomenon is attributed to two key factors: random initialization and learning
rate scaling with depth. These factors ensure that the weight matrices never become highly correlated
in this particular fashion during the training process.
In summary, while a naive depth scaling strategy based on scaling blocks might suggest the need for
α = 1 to stabilize the features, our findings reveal that in practice, this is not the case. The interplay
of random initialization and learning rate scaling effectively prevents the features from experiencing
explosive growth, even with the choice of α = 1/2.

C        C ONTINUATION OF SGD T RAINING DYNAMICS
In this section, we continue to study the linear neural network with residual connections under
Depth-µP. We derive the training dynamics of SGD for this linear network when the width and the
depth sequentially go to infinity. The road map of our analysis consists the following three steps.

         1. We first take the width of the network to infinity by the Tensor Program framework (Yang
            & Littwin, 2023). As a result, instead of tracking vectors and matrices along the training
            trajectory, we track random variables that correspond to the vectors, that is, for a vector
            x ∈ Rn that appears in the computation of the training, the coordinates of x can be viewed
            as iid copies of random variable 8x⟩ (called a ket) when n → ∞. 15
         2. Since the network is linear, every random variable can be written as a linear combination
            of a set of zero-mean “base” random variables by the Master Theorem of Tensor
            Programs (Yang & Littwin, 2023). Therefore, we can track the random variables by
            analyzing the coefficients of their corresponding linear combinations, along with the
            covariance between the “base” random variables.
         3. Since the number of random variables and the number of “base” random variables scale
            linearly with L, the coefficients of all random variables can be represented by a six
            dimensional tensor, where two of the dimensions have shape L. We then map the tensor
            to a set of functions whose input domain is [0, 1] × [0, 1]. Finally, we claim that the
            functions converge when L → ∞, and identify their limits as the solution of a set of
            integral functional.

Formally, under mild assumptions16 , we first prove that for any depth L, when n → ∞, the
training dynamics of SGD can be characterized by two sets of functions {Γt,s,a,b : [0, 1] × (0, 1] →
R}t∈{0,...,T −1},s∈{−1,...,t},a,b∈{0,1} and {Ct,s,a : (0, 1] → R}t,s∈{−1,...,T −1},a∈{0,1} , where T is
the total number of training steps. The network output at time t is Γt,−1,0,1 (1, 1) in the infinite width
limit, and the formal definition of Γ and C can be found in Appendix C.
    15
      The definition of 8x⟩ requires the coordinates of x is O(1) w.r.t. n, and 8x⟩ is trivial if the coordinates of x
is o(1) w.r.t. n. Therefore, for x whose coordinates are not Θ(1), we normalize x by multiplying polynomial
of n so the resulting vector has coordinates Θ(1).
   16
      Other than the assumptions of Tensor Programs (e.g. the loss function is well-conditioned), the rest
assumptions (e.g., the input and output dimension is 1; the batch size is 1) are only for the convenience of
the notations and can be easily generalized within the Tensor Program framework.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then we take the depth L to infinity, and find Γ and C is the solution of the following functional
integral in the limit as in Proposition C.4.

Assumptions and Notations Recall the linear network is given by
                                    x0 = U ξ,
                                            a
                         ∀l ∈ [L], xl = √ W l xl−1 + xl−1 ,
                                             L
                                             ⊤ L
                                      f =V x .
For convenience, we assume a = 1, the SGD learning rate of W l is 1. We add t as a subscript to
any notation to denote the same object but at t-th training step, e.g., the input at step t is a single
datapoint ξt , the hidden output of l-th layer at step t is xlt , and the model output at step t is ft . Let T
be the number of training steps. Let ℓt be the loss function absorbing the label at time t, and χt be
the derivative of the loss at time t, i.e., χt = ℓ′t (ft ). Let dxlt = ∂ℓt /∂xlt , and its normalized version
δxlt = n · dxlt .
The Tensor Program analysis heavily depends on the scaling of initialization and learning rate of
U, V, W w.r.t n. In this paper, we use µP as the scaling w.r.t. n since it maximizes feature learning
in the large width limit (Yang & Hu, 2021). Without loss of generality, we follow Yang & Hu (2021)
and assume the input and output dimension is 1, i.e., ξ ∈ R, f ∈ R. For a clean presentation,
we additionally assume U, V are frozen during training in this section and each coordinate of W is
initialized with i.i.d. Gaussian of variance 1/n.

C.1    W IDTH L IMIT UNDER µP

As the first step, we take the width of the network n to infinity using Tensor Programs (TP). As
briefly mentioned in the road map of the section, the TP framework characterizes each vector
involved in the training procedure by a random variable when n → ∞. For a vector x ∈ Rn
that has roughly iid coordinates, we write 8x⟩ ∈ R (called a ket) to denote a random variable such
that x’s entries look like iid copies of 8x⟩. Then for any two vector x, y ∈ Rn that have roughly iid
                                                                               ⊤
coordinates, their limiting inner product by n can be written as limn→∞ x n y = E8x⟩ · 8y⟩, which
we write succinctly as ⟨x8y⟩. Deep linear network with SGD is a simple example for this conversion
from vectors to random variables. As shown in Program 1, we define a series of scalars (f˚t and χ̊t )
and random variables (8U ⟩, 8nV ⟩, 8xlt ⟩, 8δxlt ⟩, 8Wtl xl−1    l⊤  l
                                                          t ⟩, 8Wt δxt ⟩) using the ket notations. For
better understanding, we provide a brief introduction to TP below.

Tensor Programs (TP) in a nutshell. When training a neural network, one can think of this
procedure as a process of successively creating new vectors and scalars from an initial set of random
vectors and matrices (initialization weights), and some deterministic quantities (dataset in this case).
In the first step, the forward propagation creates the features xl0 where the subscript 0 refers to
initialization, and the scalar f0 , which is the network output. In the first backward pass, the output
derivative χ0 is computed, then the gradients dxl0 are backpropagated. (Since the coordinates of
dxl0 vanish to 0 when n → ∞, TP instead tracks its normalized version δxl0 =         def
                                                                                         n · dxl0 .) New
vectors are created and appended to the TP as training progresses. When the width n goes to
infinity, vectors of size n in the TP (e.g., the features xlt , and normalized gradients δxlt ) see their
coordinates converge to roughly iid random variables (e.g., 8xlt ⟩ and 8δxlt ⟩ in Program 1), and other
scalar quantities (e.g., ft and χt ) converge to deterministic values (e.g., f˚t and χ̊t in Program 1)
under proper parametrization (µP). The Master Theorem (Yang et al., 2022) captures the behaviour
of these quantities by characterizing the infinite-width limit of the training process. For more in-
depth definitions and details about TP, we refer the reader to Yang et al. (2022).
Now when we look back to Program 1, the definitions of scalars and random variables should be
clear (except for 8W0l xl−1           l⊤   l
                         t ⟩ and 8W0 δxt ⟩). One can find straightforward correspondence between
those and their finite counterpart, for example:

       • f˚t corresponds to ft , and χ̊t corresponds to χt ;
       • 8xlt ⟩ corresponds to xlt and 8δxlt ⟩ corresponds to δxlt . (Recall δxlt = n·dxlt is the normalized
         version of dxlt .)


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Program 1: Random Variables induced from Tensor Program for the Linear Network with LR
η = 1 and frozen U, V .
Initial random variables: 8U ⟩, 8nV ⟩ are independent standard Gaussian.
for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
           def
    8x0t ⟩ = ξt 8U ⟩;
    for l = 1, . . . , L do
                       def           Pt−1
         8Wtl xl−1          l l−1 √1
                 t ⟩ = 8W0 xt ⟩ − L
                                               l    l−1 l−1
                                        s=0 8δxs ⟩⟨xs 8xt ⟩;
                     def
          8xlt ⟩ = 8xl−1  √1   l l−1
                     t ⟩ + L 8Wt xt ⟩;
    end
        def
    f˚t = ⟨xL 8nV ⟩;
                t
        def
    χ̊t = ℓ′t (f˚t );
               def
    8δxLt ⟩ = χ̊t 8nV ⟩;
    for l = L, . . . , 1 do
                      def                Pt−1
        8Wtl⊤ δxlt ⟩ = 8W0l⊤ δxlt ⟩ − √1L s=0 8xl−1   l    l
                                                s ⟩⟨δxs 8δxt ⟩;
                           def
       8δxl−1       l     √1   l⊤    l
           t ⟩ = 8δxt ⟩ + L 8Wt δxt ⟩;
   end
end
where 8W0l xl−1         l⊤   l
            t ⟩ and 8W0 δxt ⟩ are defined in Definition C.1.



                                    Pt−1                                 l l−1
        • By SGD, Wtl = W0l − √1L s=0 dxls ⊗ xl−1
                                              s , which corresponds to 8Wt xt ⟩ =
                        t−1
          8W0l xl−1 √1         l    l−1 l−1
                       P
                t ⟩− L  s=0 8δxs ⟩⟨xs 8xt ⟩.


Now we can dive into the definition of 8W0l xl−1               l⊤   l
                                                  t ⟩ and 8W0 δxt ⟩. Let W be the set of initial random
                                  1           L         ⊤ def     ⊤
matrices of size n × n, i.e., {W0 , . . . , W0 }, and W = {W : W ∈ W}. Let VW denote the set of
all vectors in training of the form W y for some y. Then for every W ∈ W ∪ W ⊤ , and W y ∈ VW ,
we can decompose 8W y⟩ into the sum of 8W yb⟩ and 8W y˙⟩, where 8W yb⟩ is a random variable that
act as if W were independent of y, and 8W y˙⟩ is the random variable capturing the correlation part
between W and y. Specifically, let us briefly track what happens to W0l xl−1   t    during training. In the
first step, we have W0l xl−1
                         0   which  has    roughly Gaussian  coordinates (in the large width limit). In this
case, we have 8W0l xl−1  ˙⟩ = 0. After the first backprop, we have dxl−1 = dxl + √1 W l⊤ dxl , which
                      0                                                0          0     L    0    0
means that the update in W l−1 will contain a term of the form W0l⊤ z for some vector z. This implies
that W0l xl−1
            1  will contain a term of the form W0l W0l⊤ z ′ for some vector z ′ . This term induces an
additional correlation term that appears when we take the width to infinity. The 8W0l xl−1     ˙
                                                                                            1 ⟩ is defined
                                                        l    l⊤ ′
by isolating this additional correlation term from W0 W0 z . The remaining term is Gaussian in the
infinite-width limit, which defines the term 8W0l xl−1
                                                     1 ⟩. Formally, we present the following definition.
                                                        b


Definition C.1. We define 8W y⟩ = 8W yb⟩ + 8W y˙⟩ for every W ∈ W ∪ W ⊤ and W y ∈ VW , where
                                def


        • 8W yb⟩ is a Gaussian variable with zero mean. ∀W ∈ W ∪ W ⊤ , W y, W z ∈ VW ,

                                                             def
                                         Cov 8W yb⟩, 8W zb⟩ = ⟨y8z⟩.

              ∀W, W ′ ∈ W ∪ W ⊤ , W y ∈ VW , W ′ z ∈ VW ′ , 8W yb⟩ and 8W ′ zb⟩ are independent if
              W ̸= W ′ . 8W yb⟩ is also independent from 8U ⟩ and 8nV ⟩.

        • 8W y˙⟩ is defined to be a linear combination of {8z⟩ : W ⊤ z ∈ VW ⊤ }. Then we can unwind
          any 8y⟩ inductively as a linear combination of 8 •b⟩, 8U ⟩ and 8nV ⟩, which allows us to fully


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          define
                                                                                       ∂8y⟩
                                              8W y˙⟩ =
                                                        def
                                                                 X
                                                                             8z⟩ ·               .
                                                              W ⊤ z∈V                ∂8W ⊤ zb⟩
                                                                        W⊤



C.2    D EPTHWISE S CALING OF R ANDOM VARIABLES

As mentioned in Definition C.1, both 8xlt ⟩ and 8δxl−1
                                                     t ⟩ can be written as linear combination of
“base” random variables: {8W0 xs ⟩}s∈{0,...,t},m∈[L] , {8W0m⊤ δxm
                                m m−1b
                                                                       s ⟩}s∈{0,...,t},m∈[L] , 8U ⟩ and
                                                                         b
8nV ⟩. Moreover, the coefficients of the linear combinations can be calculated in a recursive way:
by expanding 8W0l xl−1
                    t ⟩ using Definition C.1, we have
                                              t−1
                                                                                              !
        l       l−1     1     l l−1b       1 X       l     ∂8xl−1
                                                               t ⟩          1     l−1 l−1
      8xt ⟩ = 8xt ⟩ + √ 8W0 xt ⟩ + √              8δxs ⟩                − √ ⟨xs 8xt ⟩ .
                         L                  L s=1        ∂8W0l⊤ δxlsb⟩       L

The recursive formula for 8δxlt ⟩ is similar.
                                                                                                 √
Using this induction, we claim in the linear combinations, the coefficient of every 8 •b⟩ is O(1/ L),
and the coefficient of 8U ⟩ and 8nV ⟩ is O(1). We also claim the covariance between any pairs of
random variables in the form of 8xlt ⟩ and 8δxl−1
                                              t ⟩ is O(1).
Proposition C.2. ∀t, ∀s ≤ t, ∀l, m, ∀8y⟩ ∈ {8xlt ⟩, 8δxlt ⟩},

      ∂8y⟩               1           ∂8y⟩                  1      ∂8y⟩             ∂8y⟩
                 =O √         ,                =O √             ,       = O (1) ,         = O (1) .
       m  m−1b
  ∂8W0 xs ⟩               L          m⊤
                                 ∂8W0 δxs ⟩mb               L     ∂8U ⟩           ∂8nV  ⟩

∀t, s, l, m, ∀8y⟩ ∈ {8xlt ⟩, 8δxlt ⟩}, ∀8z⟩ ∈ {8xm       m
                                                 s ⟩, 8δxs ⟩},

                                                       ⟨y8z⟩ = O(1).

The reasoning of Proposition C.2 is provided in Appendix D. Note the computation of covariance
can also be written as a recursive formula. The reasoning relies essentially on an inductive argument.

C.3    I NFINITE D EPTH L IMIT

Now we formalize our argument above and obtain the formula describing the dynamics of the
network when L → ∞. We first write the coefficients of the linear combinations as a six dimensional
tensor Γt,s,a,b,l,m , where t, s ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, a, b ∈ {0, 1}, l, m ∈ [L]. Specifically, Γt,s,a,b,l,m
represents the derivative of 8xlt ⟩ and 8δxlt ⟩ w.r.t. 8W0m xm−1
                                                              s
                                                                   b⟩ and 8W m⊤ δxmb⟩. Here, we use 0 to
                                                                              0      s
                                                l          m m−1b
denote kets appears in the forward pass (8xt ⟩ and 8W0 xs ⟩), and 1 to denote kets in the backward
                                                                     ∂8xlt ⟩                     ∂8xlt ⟩
pass (8δxl ⟩ and 8W m⊤ δxmb⟩). Formally, Γt,s,0,0,l,m =
             t          0      s                                             , Γt,s,0,1,l,m =               ,
                                                                              ∂8W0m xm−1
                                                                                     s
                                                                                        b⟩                        ∂8W0m⊤ δxm
                                                                                                                           s ⟩
                                                                                                                             b
                  ∂8δxlt ⟩                       ∂8δxlt ⟩
Γt,s,1,0,l,m =               , Γt,s,1,1,l,m =               b.
               ∂8W0m xsm−1b⟩                  ∂8W0m⊤ δxm  s ⟩

However, it is hard to describe the limit of Γ because its size increases along with L. Therefore, we
define the following set of functions {Γt,s,a,b : [0, 1]×(0, 1] → R}t∈{0,...,T −1},s∈{−1,...,t},a,b∈{0,1} :
For s ≥ 0,                                        √
                                Γt,s,a,b (p, q) = L · Γt,s,a,b,⌈Lp⌉,⌈Lq⌉
                                                        ⌈Lp⌉                                         ⌈Lp⌉
                                                     ∂8xt   ⟩                                    ∂8xt   ⟩
For s = −1, Γt,−1,0,0 (p, q) =                         ∂8U ⟩ , Γt,−1,0,1 (p, q)          =        ∂8nV ⟩ , Γt,−1,1,0 (p, q)   =
    ⌈Lp⌉                                ⌈Lp⌉
∂8δxt    ⟩                          ∂8δxt    ⟩
  ∂8U ⟩      , Γt,−1,1,1 (p, q) =    ∂8nV ⟩      .
Here l, m are normalized
                 √        to [0, 1] so the input domain
                                                      √ of Γs are identical for different L; Γt,s,a,b,l,m
is multiplied by L because Γt,s,a,b,l,m = O(1/ L) by Proposition C.2; and the extra s = −1
case helps us also capture the derivative w.r.t. 8U ⟩ and 8nV ⟩.
Similarly, we can also define another set of function {Ct,s,a : (0, 1] → R}t,s∈{−1,...,T −1},a∈{0,1} to
describe the covariance between the “base” random variables: ∀p ∈ (0, 1], let l = ⌈Lp⌉,


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        def
       • Ct,s,0 (p) = Cov(8W0l xl−1    l l−1b      l−1 l−1
                                t ⟩, 8W0 xs ⟩) = ⟨xt 8xs ⟩,
                                   b
                    def
       • Ct,s,1 (p) = Cov(8W0l⊤ δxltb⟩, 8W0l⊤ δxlsb⟩) = ⟨δxlt 8δxls ⟩,
                                    def                                                     def
For t = −1, C−1,−1,0 (p) = Cov(8U ⟩, 8U ⟩) = 1, and C−1,−1,1 (p) = Cov(8nV ⟩, 8nV ⟩) = 1, By
Definition C.1, the “base” random variables of different “groups” are independent, so we only tracks
the covariance listed above.
Using this definition of Γ and C, it is convenient to write their recursive formula in the following
lemma.
Lemma C.3 (Finite depth recursive formula for Γ and C (Informal version of Lemma D.1)). Γ and
C can be computed recursively as follows:

                 l                  l−1
      Γt,r,0,b     , q = Γt,r,0,b        , q + I[(t=r)∧(b=0)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
                 L                   L
                               t−1
                            1X                l                 l−1 l              l
                         +         Γs,r,1,b     ,q   Γt,s,0,1      ,     − Ct,s,0      .
                            L s=0             L                  L L               L


                     l−1                      l
      Γt,r,1,b           ,q        = Γt,r,1,b   , q + I[(t=r)∧(b=1)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
                      L                      L
                                         t−1
                                       1X               l−1                  l l             l
                                     +       Γs,r,0,b       ,q    Γt,s,1,0    ,    − Ct,s,1      .
                                       L s=0             L                   L L             L

                               t
                               X s
                                 X              X Z 1
          Ct,s,a (p) =                                       Γt,t′ ,a,b (l/L, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,a,b (l/L, q)dq,
                              t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}      0

where l = ⌈Lp⌉ − 1 if a = 0, and l = ⌈Lp⌉ if a = 1.

The proof of Lemma C.3 is straightforward from Program 1. In Appendix D, we also give a formal
proof that Γ and C converge when L grows to infinity, in the case where L is powers of 2. The
restriction on L being powers of 2 is imposed for the convenience of the proof, and the convergence
of Γ and C is true in the general case. Moreover, we derive the infinite depth behavior based on the
recursion of Γ and C in Lemma C.3.
Proposition C.4 (Infinite depth limit of Γ and C (Informal version of Proposition D.2)). In the limit
L → ∞, we have
                                              t−1
                                           Z pX
  Γt,r,0,b (p, q) = I[(t=r)∧(b=0)∧(p≥q)] +        Γs,r,1,b (p′ , q) · (Γt,s,0,1 (p′ , p′ ) − Ct,s,0 (p′ ))dp′ ;
                                                         0   s=0
                                                          t−1
                                                       Z 1X
  Γt,r,1,b (p, q) = I[(t=r)∧(b=1)∧(p≤q)] +                         Γs,r,0,b (p′ , q) · (Γt,s,1,0 (p′ , p′ ) − Ct,s,1 (p′ ))dp′ ;
                                                         p s=0
                     t
                     X s
                       X              X Z 1
  Ct,s,a (p) =                                      Γt,t′ ,a,b (p, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,a,b (p, q)dq.
                 t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}          0


The proof of Proposition C.4 follows from Lemma C.3. A rigorous proof requires first showing
the existence of a solution of the integral functional satisfied by the couple (Γ, C). The solution is
typically a fixed point of the integral functional in Proposition C.4. After showing the existence,
one needs to show that (Γ, C) converges to this limit. This typically requires controlling the
difference between finite-depth and infinite-depth solutions and involves obtaining upper-bounds
on error propagation. The existence is guaranteed under mild conditions on the integral functional.
We omit here the full proof for existence and assume that the functional is sufficiently well-behaved
for this convergence result to hold. The formal proof of the convergence of Γ and C for L = 2k
(k ∈ N) in Appendix D is a showcase of the correctness of the proposition.


                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D      D ETAILS OF THE LINEAR CASE

D.1    P ROOF SKETCH OF P ROPOSITION C.2

Here we provide a proof sketch of Proposition C.2, the formal prove is implied by the existence of
Γ and C in the infinite depth limit.



Proof sketch. The claims can be reasoned by induction on t and l. Let us take 8xlt ⟩ as an example,
since 8δxl−1                      l                                    l
         t ⟩ is symmetric with 8xt ⟩. By expanding the definition of 8xt ⟩, we have

                                                                       t−1
                                                                                                                    !
                        1                           1                  X                  ∂8xl−1
                                                                                             t ⟩         1
       8xlt ⟩ = 8xl−1
                  t ⟩+ √                8W0l xl−1
                                              t ⟩+ √
                                                 b                           8δxls ⟩                        l−1 l−1
                                                                                                      − √ ⟨xs 8xt ⟩ .
                                   L                              L s=1                 ∂8W0l⊤ δxlsb⟩     L

                         l−1                                            ∂xl−1                √
Note by induction, ⟨xl−1
                     s 8xt ⟩ = O(1) and
                                                                          t
                                                                                       = O(1/ L), so
                                                                    ∂8W0l⊤ δxlsb⟩

                                                       X t−1
                                       1              1
                     8xlt ⟩ = 8xl−1       l l−1b
                                t ⟩ + √ 8W0 xt ⟩ + O         8δxls ⟩
                                        L            L s=1
                                       l                     X    l  t−1
                                      X    1  m m−1b       1         X        ′
                          = ξt 8U ⟩ +     √ 8W0 xt ⟩ + O                 8δxm
                                                                            s′ ⟩.
                                      m=1
                                            L              L     ′    ′                              m =1 s =1

                                                                                                                    ′
                                                                                                              ∂8δxm ⟩
                                    ′

Then by unwinding 8δxm                                                   s′                                                         √1
                        s′ ⟩ and noting that by induction, ∀s < t, ∂8W m xm−1b⟩ = O                                                   L
                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                      0   s
         ′                      ′                ′
  ∂8δxm                  ∂8δxm            ∂8δxm

      s′
           ⟩        1          ′ ⟩              ′ ⟩
    m⊤      mb
               = O √L , ∂8U ⟩ = O (1), ∂8nV ⟩ = O (1), we have
                             s                s
∂8W0    δxs ⟩


        ∂8xlt ⟩                                         ∂8xlt ⟩                                   ∂8xlt ⟩           ∂8xlt ⟩

                                    1                                                1
                       =O          √         ,                          =O          √         ,           = O (1) ,         = O (1) .
    ∂8W0m xm−1
           s
              b⟩                     L           ∂8W0m⊤ δxm
                                                          s ⟩
                                                            b                         L           ∂8U ⟩             ∂8nV ⟩


Also by unwinding, ∀8y⟩ ∈ {8xm       m
                             s ⟩, 8δxs ⟩},

                               XXX                           ∂8xlt ⟩   ∂8y⟩             ′         ′
                  ⟨y8xlt ⟩ =                         ′ m′ −1b
                                                                ·       ′ m′ −1b
                                                                                 · ⟨xtm′ −1 8xms′
                                                                                                    −1
                                                                                                       ⟩
                                               ∂8W m  x       ⟩   ∂8W m  x     ⟩
                               m ′   s ′   t′      0    t ′           0    s′

                                  XXX                 ∂8xlt ⟩             ∂8y⟩               ′
                                                                                                    m′
                               +                         ′⊤     ′b
                                                                   ·        ′⊤    ′b
                                                                                     · ⟨δxm
                                                                                          t′ 8δxs′ ⟩
                                                      m       m          m
                                                            δxt′ ⟩ ∂8W0 δxs′ ⟩  m
                                   m′ s′      t′ ∂8W0
                                         l
                                   ∂8xt ⟩ ∂8y⟩        ∂8xlt ⟩ ∂8y⟩
                               +                 ·           +
                            ∂8U ⟩                    ∂8U ⟩        ∂8nV ⟩ ∂8nV ⟩
                         =O(1).


D.2    F ORMAL RECURSIVE FORMULA OF Γ AND C

By the same way of expanding 8xlt ⟩ and ⟨y8xlt ⟩, we formally derive the recursive formula for Γ and
C below.
Lemma D.1 (Finite depth recursive formula for Γ and C). Γ can be computed recursively as follows:
For t = 0, . . . , T − 1,

        • ∀q ∈ (0, 1], Γt,−1,0,q (0, q) = ξt ,


                                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   l−1 l

       • For l = 1, . . . , L, ∀r ≤ t, ∀p ∈            , ∀q ∈ (0, 1], ∀b ∈ {0, 1},
                                                    L , L
                               t     s     X Z 1
                            X       X                              l−1                                l−1
             Ct,s,0 (p) =                             Γt,t′ ,0,b       , q Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,0,b       , q dq;
                                                                    L                                   L
                           t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1} 0

                                      l−1
         Γt,r,0,b (p, q) = Γt,r,0,b         , q + I[(t=r)∧(b=0)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
                                        L
                                 t−1
                               1X                l                    l−1 l                     l
                           +          Γs,r,1,b     ,q     Γt,s,0,1        ,      − Ct,s,0             .
                               L s=0             L                     L L                      L

       • f˚t = Γt,−1,0,1 (1, 1),

       • χ̊t = ℓ′t (f˚t ),
       • ∀q ∈ (0, 1], Γt,−1,1,1 (1, q) = χ̊t ,

       • For l = L, . . . , 1, ∀r ≤ t, ∀p ∈ l−2       l−1

                                                   L , L , ∀q ∈ (0, 1], ∀b ∈ {0, 1},
                                      t     s       X Z 1
                         1         X      X
          Ct,s,1 p +           =                            Γt,t′ ,1,b (l/L, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,1,b (l/L, q)dq;
                         L
                                  t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1} 0

                                              l
              Γt,r,1,b (p, q) = Γt,r,1,b        , q + I[(t=r)∧(b=1)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
                                             L
                                        t−1
                                      1X                l−1                     l l                       l
                                 +           Γs,r,0,b       ,q       Γt,s,1,0     ,         − Ct,s,1            .
                                      L s=0              L                      L L                       L


The proof is straightforward from Program 1. The recursive nature of Γ and C yields the following
infinite-depth behavior.
Proposition D.2 (Infinite depth limit of Γ and C). In the limit L → ∞, we have ∀p ∈ [0, 1], q ∈
(0, 1], b ∈ {0, 1}:
  Γt,−1,0,0 (0, q) = ξt ;
                                                    t−1
                                                 Z pX
  Γt,r,0,b (p, q) = I[(t=r)∧(b=0)∧(p≥q)] +                   Γs,r,1,b (p′ , q) · (Γt,s,0,1 (p′ , p′ ) − Ct,s,0 (p′ ))dp′ ;
                                                   0   s=0

  f˚t = Γt,−1,0,1 (1, 1);
  χ̊t = ℓ′ (f˚t );
         t
  Γt,−1,1,1 (1, q) = χ̊t ;
                                                    t−1
                                                 Z 1X
  Γt,r,1,b (p, q) = I[(t=r)∧(b=1)∧(p≤q)] +                   Γs,r,0,b (p′ , q) · (Γt,s,1,0 (p′ , p′ ) − Ct,s,1 (p′ ))dp′ ;
                                                   p s=0
                   t
                   X s
                     X           X Z 1
  Ct,s,a (p) =                                Γt,t′ ,a,b (p, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,a,b (p, q)dq.
                  t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}   0



D.3    C ONVERGENCE OF Γ AND C WHEN L = 2k

In this section, we prove Γ and C will converge when L → ∞. For convenience, we will only
consider the case when L = 2k for some integer k. To distinguish Γ and C corresponding to
different L, we add the depth as the superscript, i.e., ΓL and C L .
Theorem D.3. ∀t ≤ T, s < t, a ∈ {0, 1}, b ∈ {0, 1}, ∀p ∈ [0, 1], q ∈ (0, 1],
              k
       • {Γ2t,s,a,b (p, q)}k∈N is a Cauchy sequence,


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              k
            2
        • {Ct,s,a (p)}k∈N is a Cauchy sequence.

The proof is by induction on t. We will prove the following claims (A) (B) (C) (D) on t > 0 given
they are satisfied for any s < t. For t = 0, (A) (B) (C) (D) are trivial.

Assumption on s < t Assume ∃c > 1 such that ∀L > L′ and L = 2k for k ∈ N, ∀s < t, ∀r < s,

    (A) ∀p ∈ {0, L1 , . . . , 1}, q ∈ (0, 1],
                    L/2
                  |Γs,r,a,b (p, q) − ΓL
                                      s,r,a,b (p, q)| ≤ c/L,
                                                                 L/2
                                                               |Cs,r,a           L
                                                                       (p, q) − Cs,r,a (p, q)| ≤ c/L.

    (B) |ΓL                      L
          s,r,a,b (p, q)| ≤ c, |Cs,r,a (p)| ≤ c.
         L
    (C) Cs,r,a (p) is c-Lipschitz w.r.t. p, and ΓL
                                                 s,r,a,b (p, q) is c-Lipschitz w.r.t. p.
                      1      1                1                                               1
    (D) |ΓL                       L                            L               L
          s,r,0,1 (p− L , p+ L )−Γs,r,0,1 (p− L , p)| ≤ c/L, |Γs,r,1,0 (p, p)−Γs,r,1,0 (p, p− L )| ≤ c/L.

                                      k                k
Remark (A) indicates that {Γ2s,r,a,b }k and {Cs,r,a
                                                 2
                                                      }k converge. We only care about r < s because
Cs,s,a will never be used, and Γs,s,a,b is known: for p ∈ {0, L1 , . . . , 1},
 L                              L


     ΓL
      s,s,a,b (p, q) = I[(a = 0) ∧ (b = 0) ∧ (p ≥ q)] + I[(a = 1) ∧ (b = 1) ∧ (p + 1/L ≤ q)].


Proof for t-th step (the forward pass) In the following subsections, we will prove inductively on
increasing order of all L > L′ and L = 2k , and increasing order of p ∈ {0, 1/L, . . . , 1} that ∀s < t,
                          2                      1
   (D0) |ΓL                      L
          t,s,0,1 (p, p + L ) − Γt,s,0,1 (p, p + L )| ≤ c2 exp(c1 p)/L;
                                                    1                          1
   (C0) For s < t, |ΓL                 L
                     t,s,0,b (p, q) − Γt,s,0,b (p − L , q)| ≤ tcc2 exp(c1 (p − L ))/L;
                                            1
   (B0) |ΓL
          t,s,0,b (p, q)| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − 2L ));
            L/2                                                  1
   (A0) |Γt,s,0,b (p, q) − ΓL
                            t,s,0,b (p, q)| ≤ c3 c2 exp(c1 (p − 2L ))/L;
          L
   (C1) |Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) − Ct,s,0
                             L
                                   (p)| ≤ c4 c2 exp(c1 (p − L1 ))/L;
          L
   (B1) |Ct,s,0 (p + L1 )| ≤ c2 exp(c1 p);
            L/2
   (A1) |Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) − Ct,s,0
                             L
                                   (p + L1 )| ≤ c5 c2 exp(c1 p)/L,

where c2 = max{ξt2 , |ξt |} exp(c1 /2L′ ), c3 = 3ct, c4 = 4t(t + 1)c2 + 2tc, c5 = c4 + 1, c1 =
c3 t(4ct + 2c4 + 29) + tc(3c4 + 14) + c(2c4 + 2c).

Proof for t-th step (the backward pass) Similar bounds also apply to Γt,s,1,b and Ct,s,1 by
induction on decreasing order of p.

Conclusion Combining both backward pass and forward pass at time t shows (A)(B)(C)(D) also
hold for s = t with a larger (but constant) c. Thus, (A)(B)(C)(D) hold for any constant s by induction
on training steps.

D.3.1    ΓL
          t,s,0,b (p, q) IN FORWARD PASS (P ROOF FOR D0, C0, B0, A0)

We first consider

                                             1
            ΓL
             t,r,0,b (p, q) = ΓL
                               t,r,0,b   p −    , q   + I[(t = r) ∧ (b = 0) ∧ (Lp = ⌈Lq⌉)]
                                             L
                                    t−1
                                 1X L                                   1
                              +         Γs,r,1,b (p, q) ΓL t,s,0,1  p −   , p  − C L
                                                                                  t,s,0 (p)  .
                                 L s=0                                  L


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              2                        1
(D0) Difference between ΓL                             L
                              t,s,0,1 (p, p + L ) and Γt,s,0,1 (p, p + L )   Assume p ≥ 1/L (p = 0 is
trivial), let q = p + 1/L, q = p + 2/L, note that Γs,s,1,b (p, q) = Γs,s,1,b (p, q ′ ) since p + 1/L ≤
                            ′                            L                 L

q ≤ q ′ , so for r < t,
                                              ′
            |ΓL                  L
               t,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p, q ) |

                L              1           L         1 ′
           ≤ |Γt,r,0,b p − , q − Γt,r,0,b p − , q |
                               L                     L
                    t−1
                  1X L                                    ′                   1
              +         |Γs,r,1,b (p, q) − ΓL
                                            s,r,1,b (p, q   ) | ΓL
                                                                 t,s,0,1  p −   , p     L
                                                                                     − Ct,s,0 (p)
                  L s=0                                                       L
                          1         1                         1
           ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L + · t · c/L · 2c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                          L         L                         L
                                      1
          = (1 + 2ct/L)c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L ≤ c2 exp(c1 p)/L,
                                      L
as c1 ≥ 2ct.

(C0) Lipschitz w.r.t. p      For r < t,
                                                          1
                       |ΓL                  L
                         t,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p −      , q)|
                                                          L
                            t−1
                         1X L                                       1
                     =|          Γs,r,1,b (p, q) ΓL  t,s,0,1    p −   , p  − C L
                                                                              t,s,0 (p)  |
                         L s=0                                      L
                           t−1
                        1X                             1                      1
                     ≤          c c2 exp(c1 (p − )) + c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                        L s=0                         L                       L
                                           1
                     = ctc2 exp(c1 (p −      ))/L.
                                           L
(B0) Bounded Again assume p ≥ 1/L (p = 0 is trivial because c2 ≥ |ξt | exp(c1 /2L)), since
               1                        1
|ΓL                                                          L
  t,r,0,b (p − L , q)| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − L )), we can bound |Γt,r,0,b (p, q)|:

                                                     1                      1
                    |ΓL
                      t,r,0,b (p, q)| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − )) + ctc2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L
                                                     L                      L
                                                     1
                                    = c2 exp(c1 (p − ))(1 + ct/L)
                                                     L
                                                      1
                                    ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p −    )),
                                                     2L
as long as c1 ≥ 2ct.

(A0) Difference between L and L/2 bounded When p = 0, it is trivial. When p = 1/L, it is
also trivial by Lipschitz w.r.t. p, which results
                     L/2
                  |Γt,r,0,b (p, q) − ΓL
                                      t,r,0,b (p, q) | ≤ 3ctc2 /L ≤ c3 c2 exp(c1 /2L)/L.

When p ≥ 2/L, since
                                        t−1
  L/2               L/2        2      2 X L/2                L/2        2       L/2
 Γt,r,0,b (p, q) = Γt,r,0,b p − , q +       Γs,r,1,b (p, q) Γt,s,0,1 p − , p − Ct,s,0 (p) ,
                               L      L s=0                             L

we compare it with ΓL   t,r,0,b (p, q) expanded based on its previous two steps
                                                 t−1
                                     2         1X L                                    1
 ΓLt,r,0,b (p, q) = ΓL
                     t,r,0,b    p −    , q   +       Γ        (p, q)   Γ L
                                                                                   p −   , p  − C L
                                                                                                        (p)
                                     L         L s=0 s,r,1,b             t,s,0,1
                                                                                       L          t,s,0

                          t−1
                       1X L                    1        L              2         1         L          1
                    +           Γ          p − ,q      Γt,s,0,1 p − , p −             − Ct,s,0 p −           .
                       L s=0 s,r,1,b           L                       L         L                    L


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to bridge the two above, namely matching the inputs for Γ and C, we need a middle term
                                        t−1
   L                L          2      2X L                  L          2       L
 Γt,r,0,b (p, q) = Γt,r,0,b p − , q +
 e                                          Γ       (p, q) Γt,s,0,1 p − , p − Ct,s,0 (p) .
                               L      L s=0 s,r,1,b                    L

                                                                                        L/2
Now we can bound |ΓL                eL                      eL
                   t,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p, q) |, and |Γt,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p, q) | separately,
                                                          L/2
which add up to be the bound for |ΓL
                                   t,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p, q) |.

            |ΓL                  eL
               t,r,0,b (p, q) − Γt,r,0,b (p, q) |
                t−1
             1X L                         L             1           L             2
          ≤          |Γ        (p, q) | Γt,s,0,1 p − , p − Γt,s,0,1 p − , p
            L s=0 s,r,1,b                               L                         L
                   t−1
                1X L                      1                        2        1                   1
            +            Γs,r,1,b p − , q          ΓL
                                                    t,s,0,1  p −     , p −      −  C L
                                                                                     t,s,0  p −
                L s=0                     L                       L         L                   L

                                                             2
                         −ΓL                   L
                             s,r,1,b (p, q) Γt,s,0,1 p −
                                                                          L
                                                               , p − Ct,s,0   (p)
                                                             L
             1                             2          1                                2
          ≤ · ct · ctc2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L + · 2t · c/L · c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
            L                              L          L                                L
                1                           2          1                          2
            + · ct · c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L + · ct · c4 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L
                L                           L         L                           L
            c2 t2 + 3ct + c4 ct                       2
          =                         · c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                      L2                              L

and
        L/2           eL
   |Γt,r,0,b (p, q) − Γ t,r,0,b (p, q) |

     L/2            2                           2
 ≤ |Γt,r,0,b p − , q − ΓL        t,r,0,b   p −    , q   |
                    L                          L
         t−1
      1X          L/2             2           L           2    L/2  L
   +          c Γt,s,0,1 p − , p − Γt,s,0,1 p − , p − Ct,s,0 (p) + Ct,s,0 (p)
      L s=0                      L                        L
         t−1
      1X c           L                2              L
   +               |Γt,s,0,1 p − , p | + |Ct,s,0 (p) |
      L s=0 L                        L
   1                      1                               1           c                1
 ≤    · (c3 c2 exp(c1 (p − )) + ct(c3 + c5 )c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L + 2t · · c2 exp(c1 (p − )))
   L                      L                               L           L                L
   c3 + ct(c3 + c5 + 2)/L                    1
 ≤                          · c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                L                            L
In sum, as c1 ≥ 2(c3 +c5 +ct+c
                          3
                              4 +5)
                                    ,

         L/2                               c3 + ct(c3 + c5 + ct + c4 + 5)/L               1
      |Γt,r,0,b (p, q) − ΓL
                          t,r,0,b (p, q) | ≤                                c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                                                           L                              L
                                                           1
                                         ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p −    ))/L.
                                                          2L

D.3.2     Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) IN FORWARD PASS (P ROOF FOR C1, B1, A1)
              L
Now consider Ct,s,0 . By expanding
                               t   s           X Z 1
           L            1    X   X
          Ct,s,0 (p +     )=                            ΓL                L             L
                                                         t,t′ ,0,b (p, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,0,b (p, q)dq,
                        L    ′   ′                  0
                              t =−1 s =−1 b∈{0,1}



                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we will have
                                  t−1 X
                                      s                  X Z 1
            L         1           X
           Ct,s,0 (p + ) =                                              ΓL                L             L
                                                                         t,t′ ,0,b (p, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,0,b (p, q)dq
                          L                                       0
                                 t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}
                                     s Z p
                                     X
                                                       L           L
                                 +                    Ct,s′ ,0 (q)Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, q)dq.

                                     s′ =0       0


(C1) Lipschitz Since CtL′ ,s′ ,b and ΓL
                                      s,s′ ,0,b are bounded and Lipschitz,

              L      1      L
            |Ct,s,0    ) − Ct,s,0
                    (p +           (p)|
                     L
             t−1 X s         Z   1
            X           X                                                1
          ≤                         |ΓL                   L
                                      t,t′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γt,t′ ,0,b (p −   , q)| · c2 dq
            ′    ′             0                                         L
             t =−1 s =−1 b∈{0,1}
                 t−1 X
                     s            X Z 1
                 X                                                      1            c
            +                                        |ΓL
                                                       t,t′ ,0,b (p −     , q)| · c · dq
                                             0                          L            L
                t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}
                s
                X 1       L             L
            +        · |Ct,s′ ,0 (p)Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, p)|
                  L
                s′ =0
                s Z p− 1
              X         L
                               L              c
            +             |Ct,s   ′ ,0 (q)| ·   dq.
              ′    0                          L
                s =0
                                                1                                  1
          ≤ 1/L · (2t(s + 1) · ctc2 exp(c1 (p −   )) · c2 + 2t(s + 1)c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c2
                                                L                                  L
                                 1                            1
            + s · c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c + s · c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c)
                                 L                            L
                        2                             1
          = (4t(s + 1)c + 2sc)/L · c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                                                     L
                               1
          ≤ c4 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L.
                              L
                     L
(B1) Bounded Since |Ct,s,0 (p)| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − L1 )), we bound Ct,s,0
                                                                  L
                                                                        (p + L1 ) as:

                    L             1                    1
                  |Ct,s,0 (p +      )| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · (1 + c4 /L) ≤ c2 exp(c1 p),
                                  L                    L
as long as c1 ≥ c4 .

(A1) Difference between L and L/2 bounded It is easy to see that for p = 0,
                                       L                   1      L/2       1
                                      Ct,s,0 (p +            ) − Ct,s,0 (p + ) = 0,
                                                           L                L
we will prove that for p ∈ {2/L, 4/L, . . . , 1},
                                L                1      L/2       1
                              |Ct,s,0 (p +         ) − Ct,s,0 (p + )| ≤ c2 exp(c1 p)/L.
                                                 L                L
Then by (C1), for p ∈ {1/L, 3/L, . . . , 1 − 1/L},
          L             1      L/2       1                     1                      1
        |Ct,s,0 (p +      ) − Ct,s,0 (p + )| ≤ c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L + c4 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L
                        L                L                     L                      L
                                             ≤ (c4 + 1)c2 exp(c1 p)/L
                                             = c5 c2 exp(c1 p)/L.
                                                                                                                   L/2
                                               L
Suppose p ∈ {2/L, 4/L, . . . , 1}, we compare Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) − Ct,s,0
                                                                  L
                                                                        (p − L1 ) and Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) −
  L/2
Ct,s,0 (p − L1 ). Intuitively, both of them are O(1/L), and their difference is O(1/L2 ). In particular,


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


both of them can be written into four parts:
   L       1      L            1
  Ct,s,0 (p +) − Ct,s,0 (p − )
           L                  L
   t−1 X s    X Z 1
  X                                                           2
=                         ΓL   ′
                            t,t ,0,b (p, q) − Γ L
                                                   ′
                                                t,t ,0,b (p −   , q)  CtL′ ,s′ ,b (q)ΓL
                                                                                      s,s′ ,0,b (p, q)dq                        (E1L )
  ′    ′             0                                        L
   t =−1 s =−1 b∈{0,1}
       t−1 X
           s              X Z 1
       X                                                 2                                                        2
  +                                    ΓL
                                        t,t′ ,0,b (p −     , q)CtL′ ,s′ ,b (q) ΓL  ′
                                                                                s,s ,0,b (p, q) − Γ L
                                                                                                       ′
                                                                                                    s,s ,0,b (p −   , q)   dq   (E2L )
                                  0                      L                                                        L
      t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}
      s Z p
      X
                       L           L
  +                   Ct,s′ ,0 (q)Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, q)dq                                                                           (E3L )
                  2
      s′ =0    p− L
         s Z p− 2
      X             L
                         L            L                   L                    2
  +                     Ct,s′ ,0 (q)(Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, q) − Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p −         , q))dq                                        (E4L )
               0                                                               L
      s′ =0
       L/2                      L/2                      L/2       L/2         L/2      L/2          L/2
and Ct,s,0 (p + L1 ) − Ct,s,0 (p − L1 ) = E1                   + E2      + E3        + E4     where Ei     is defined in the
                                                                                      L/2
same way as EiL but with C L/2 and ΓL/2 instead of C L and ΓL . Next we bound |EiL − Ei | one
by one:
                                                                 L/2
       1. The only hard part to bound in |EiL − Ei                     | is
                                                               2          L/2                 L/2           2
                      |ΓL                   L
                        t,t′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γt,t′ ,0,b (p −       , q) − (Γt,t′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γt,t′ ,0,b (p − , q))|.
                                                               L                                            L
          By almost the same proof of (A0),
                                               2          L/2                 L/2           2
                        |ΓL                   L
                                                 , q) − (Γt,t′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γt,t′ ,0,b (p − , q))|
                          t,t′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γt,t′ ,0,b (p −
                                               L                                            L
                  ct(c3 + c5 + ct + c4 + 5)                  1
               ≤               2
                                            c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                             L                              L
          Then we have
                                                  L/2
                                       |E1L − E1 |/(2t(s + 1))
                                        ct(c3 + c5 + ct + c4 + 5)                 1
                                      ≤                           c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c · c
                                                    L2                            L
                                                             1
                                        + 4ctc2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L · c/L · c
                                                             L
                                                             1
                                        + 4ctc2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L · c · c/L
                                                             L
                                        c3 t(c3 + c5 + ct + c4 + 13)                1
                                      ≤                2
                                                                     c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                                                     L                              L
                                      L/2                                L/2
       2. Bounding |E2L − E2                | is similar to |E1L − E1          |, where we first bound
                                                     2          L/2                 L/2           2
              |ΓL                   L
                s,s′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γs,s′ ,0,b (p −     , q) − (Γs,s′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γs,s′ ,0,b (p − , q))| ≤ 9c2 t/L2 .
                                                     L                                            L
          Then we have
                                                           L/2
                                                |E2L − E2   |/(2t(s + 1))
                                                                  2
                                              ≤ c3 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L · c · 2c/L
                                                                  L
                                                                   2
                                                + c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c/L · 2c/L
                                                                  L
                                                                   2
                                                + c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c · 9c2 t/L2
                                                                  L
                                                c2 (2c3 + 2 + 9ct)                2
                                              ≤                     c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                                                         L2                       L

                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        L/2
     3. For |E3L − E3         |, we first simplify
                                                          s
                                           L/2        2 X L/2          L/2
                                          E3      =       Ct,s′ ,0 (p)Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, p),
                                                      L ′
                                                        s =0

          and
                                s
                          1 X L                                             1 L                  1
                  E3L =       Ct,s′ ,0 (p)ΓL                   L
                                           s,s′ ,0,0 (p, p) + Ct,s′ ,0 (p −   )Γs,s′ ,0,0 (p, p − ).
                          L ′                                               L                    L
                               s =0

          Again, we introduce an intermediate term
                                                      s
                                                  2 X L
                                           Ee3L =       Ct,s′ ,0 (p)ΓL
                                                                     s,s′ ,0,0 (p, p).
                                                  L ′
                                                       s =0

          Then we can bound
                                      L/2
                            |E3L − E3       |
                                                     L/2
                          ≤ |E3L − Ee3L | + |Ee3L − E3 |
                             t                      2                   2
                          ≤ (c4 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L · c + c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c/L)
                            L                       L                   L
                               2t                      1                 1
                            + (c5 c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/Lc + c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · c/L)
                                L                      L                 L
                            tc(c4 + 1 + 2c5 + 2)                   1
                          ≤                          c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                                       L2                          L
                        L/2
     4. For |E4L − E4         |, we use
                                                  2          L/2                 L/2           2
          |ΓL                   L
            s,s′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γs,s′ ,0,b (p −      , q) − (Γs,s′ ,0,b (p, q) − Γs,s′ ,0,b (p − , q))| ≤ 9c2 t/L2 ,
                                                  L                                            L
                                          L/2
          which is used in |E2L − E2            |. Finally,
                                                          L/2
                                                |E4L − E4       |/t
                                                               2
                                            ≤ c4 c2 exp(c1 (p −   ))/L · 2c/L
                                                               L
                                                                2
                                              + c2 exp(c1 (p − )) · 9c2 t/L2
                                                               L
                                              c(2c4 + 9ct)                 2
                                            ≤              c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                                                   L2                      L
In sum,
       L          1      L          1     L/2       1       L/2       1
     |Ct,s,0 (p +   ) − Ct,s,0 (p − ) − Ct,s,0 (p + ) + Ct,s,0 (p − )|
                  L                 L              L                 L
      c3 t(4ct + 2c4 + 14) + c2 (2 + 15ct) + tc(3c4 + 5) + c(2c4 + 9ct)                  1
    ≤                                                                    · c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                                      L2                                                 L
      c3 t(4ct + 2c4 + 29) + tc(3c4 + 14) + c(2c4 + 2c)                    1
    =                             2
                                                         · c2 exp(c1 (p − )).
                                L                                         L
Therefore, since c1 = c3 t(4ct + 2c4 + 29) + tc(3c4 + 14) + c(2c4 + 2c),
                       L        1      L/2        1
                     |Ct,s,0 (p + ) − Ct,s,0 (p + )|
                                L                 L
                       L         1      L/2       1                          1
                  ≤ |Ct,s,0 (p − ) − Ct,s,0 (p − )| + c1 /L2 · c2 exp(c1 (p − ))
                                L                 L                          L
                                                1
                  ≤ (1 + c1 /L)c2 exp(c1 (p − ))/L
                                                L
                  ≤ c2 exp(c1 p)/L.


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E         N OTATIONS FOR THE GENERAL CASE
This section provides an introduction to the new TP notations from Yang & Littwin (2023). We only
require the definition of the inner and outer products in this paper.

Averaging over n When x ∈ Rn , we always use greek subscript α, β, . . . ∈ [n] to index its entries.
Then ⟨xα ⟩α denotes its average entry. This notation will only be used to average over n-dimensions,
but not over constant dimensions.

E.1        T HE T ENSOR P ROGRAM A NSATZ : R EPRESENTING V ECTORS VIA R ANDOM VARIABLES

From the Tensor Programs framework (Yang et al., 2022), we know that as width becomes large,
the entries of the (pre-)activation vectors and their gradients will become roughly iid, both at
initialization and training. Hence any such vector’s behavior can be tracked via a random variable
that reflects the distribution of its entries. While we call this the “Tensor Program Ansatz”, it is a
completely rigorous calculus.

E.1.1        K ET N OTATION
Concretely, if x ∈ Rn is one such vector, then we write 8x⟩ ∈ R (called a ket) for such a random
variable, such that x’s entries look like iid samples from 8x⟩.For any two such vectors x, y ∈ Rn ,
(xα , yα ) ∈ R2 for each α will look like iid samples from the random vector (8x⟩, 8y⟩), such that, for
                      ⊤
example, limn→∞ x n y = E 8x⟩ · 8y⟩, which we write succinctly as just ⟨x8y⟩. Here ⟨x8 is called a
bra, interpreted as a sort of “transpose” to 8x⟩. In our convention, 8x⟩ is always a random variable
independent of n and x always has Θ(1) typical entry size.17 .
This notation can be generalized to the case where x ∈ Rn×k , y ∈ Rn×j . In this case, we can think
of ⟨x8y⟩ as the k × j matrix given by (⟨xa 8yb ⟩)1≤a≤k .
                                                      1≤b≤j

Because we will often need to multiply a ket with a diagonal matrix, we introduce a shorthand:
                                              8x⟩χ = 8x⟩Diag(χ),                                   (4)
if x is n × k and χ is a k-dimensional vector.

E.1.2        O UTER P RODUCT
Likewise, if both x and y have shape n × k, the expression
                               8x⟩⟨y8 represents the limit of xy ⊤ ∈ Rn×n .
More formally, 8x⟩⟨y8 is defined as an operator that takes a ket 8z⟩ ∈ Rj and return the ket
                                         (8x⟩⟨y8)8z⟩ = 8x⟩(⟨y8z⟩) ∈ Rj
i.e., it returns the random vector 8x⟩ ∈ Rk multiplied by the deterministic matrix ⟨y8z⟩ ∈ Rk×j on
the right. This corresponds to the limit of xy ⊤ z/n. Likewise, 8x⟩⟨y8 acts on a bra ⟨w8 ∈ Rj by
                                     ⟨w8(8x⟩⟨y8) = (⟨w8x⟩)⟨y8 ∈ Rj .
which corresponds to the limit of n1 w⊤ xy ⊤ . This definition of 8x⟩⟨y8 makes the expressions
                                  8x⟩⟨y8z⟩,      ⟨w8x⟩⟨y8,    ⟨w8x⟩⟨y8z⟩
unambiguous (since any way of ordering the operations give the same answer).
Remark E.1 (Potential Confusion). One should not interpret 8x⟩ ⟨y8 as the scalar random variable
              Pk        i    i
8x⟩ · 8y⟩ =      i=1 8x ⟩8y ⟩, which would act on a ket 8z⟩ to produce (⟨x8 · ⟨y8)8z⟩ = E(8x⟩ ·
8y⟩)8z⟩, which is deterministic. On the other hand, 8x⟩ ⟨y8z⟩ is always a linear combination of 8x⟩, a
nondeterministic random variable in general. In particular, any correlation between 8x⟩ and 8y⟩ does
not directly play a role in their outer product 8x⟩ ⟨y8: we always have 8x⟩ ⟨y8z⟩ = 8x⟩ ⟨y8 1 8z⟩ 1 ,
where (8y⟩ 1 , 8z⟩ 1 ) is an iid copy of (8y⟩, 8z⟩) independent from 8x⟩.
    17
         i.e., ∥x∥2 /n = Θ(1) as n → ∞


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Outer Product with Diagonal Inserted Finally, if χ ∈ Rk is deterministic, then (consistent with
eq. (4)) we define 8x⟩ χ ⟨y8 as the operator that acts on kets 8z⟩ ∈ Rj by
                      (8x⟩ χ ⟨y8)8z⟩ = 8x⟩ χ ⟨y8z⟩ = 8x⟩Diag(χ)(⟨y8z⟩) ∈ Rj .
Morally, 8x⟩ χ ⟨y8 is just a shorter way of writing 8x⟩Diag(χ)⟨y8 and represents the limit of
xDiag(χ)y ⊤ . In particular, 8x⟩ 1 ⟨y8 = 8x⟩⟨y8.

E.1.3       N ONLINEAR O UTER P RODUCT
If xy ⊤ ∈ Rn×n is the (linear) outer product of two vectors x ∈ Rn and y ∈ Rn , then ϕ(xy ⊤ ), the
entrywise application of nonlinear ϕ : R → R to xy ⊤ , is a kind of nonlinear outer product.Passing
to the ket notation, in general we define ϕ (8x⟩⟨y8) as the operator that acts on kets as
                                                     k
                                                                      !
                                                    X
                            ϕ (8x⟩⟨y8) 8z⟩ =def
                                                Eϕ       8xi ⟩8y i ⟩ 1 8z⟩ 1
                                                   1
                                                             i=1

             1 1       k 1       1
where 8y ⟩ , . . . , 8y ⟩ , 8z⟩     is an iid copy of 8y 1 ⟩, . . . , 8y k ⟩, 8z⟩ independent from 8x⟩ and
the expectation is taken only over the former. This is just like, in the finite n case,
                                                      k
                                                                    !
                                                     X
                                      ⊤                     i i⊤

                               ϕ xy z/n = ϕ              xy            z/n.
                                                             i=1

Moreover, if 8w⟩ ∈ Rj , 8z⟩ ∈ Rk , then

                     ⟨w8ϕ (8x⟩⟨y8) 8z⟩ = ⟨w8ϕ 8x⟩⟨y8 1 8z⟩ 1 ∈ Rj×k
                                              k
                                                          !
                                             X
                                                  i   i 1
                                       = Eϕ     8x ⟩8y ⟩      8w⟩ ⊗ 8z⟩ 1
                                                       i=1
where ⊗ denotes outer product of vectors and expectation is taken over everything.

More generally, if ϕ : Rt → R, then ϕ 8x1 ⟩⟨y1 8, . . . , 8xt ⟩⟨yt 8 is an operator taking kets to kets,
defined by
                                                   k                       k
                                                                                        !
                                                   X                       X
                                                          i    i 1             i    i 1
                                             def
        ϕ 8x1 ⟩⟨y1 8, . . . , 8xt ⟩⟨yt 8 8z⟩ = E ϕ    8x1 ⟩8y1 ⟩ , . . . ,   8xt ⟩8yt ⟩   8z⟩ 1
                                              1
                                                        i=1                  i=1
Remark E.2 (Potential Confusion). Note ϕ(8x⟩⟨y8) is not the image of the operator 8x⟩⟨y8 under ϕ
in the continuous function calculus of operators, but rather a “coordinatewise application” of ϕ. For
example, if ϕ(t) = t2 , then ϕ(8x⟩⟨y8) is not 8x⟩⟨y8x⟩⟨y8, the latter being what typically “squaring
an operator” means, but rather 8x⟩2 ⟨y82 = 8x ⊙ x⟩⟨y ⊙ y8.

E.1.4       C OMPARISON WITH P REVIOUS Z • N OTATION
For readers familiar with the Tensor Programs papers, this new “bra-ket” notation (aka Dirac
notation) relates to the old Z • notation by
                                     8x⟩ = Z x ,       ⟨x8y⟩ = E Z x Z y .
The new notation’s succinctness of expectation inner product should already be apparent.
Furthermore, the old notation is not very compatible with multi-vectors whereas 8x⟩ makes it clear
that ⟩ represents the constant dimension side. Consequently, (nonlinear) outer product is awkward to
express in it, especially when its contraction with random variables requires an explicit expectation
symbol E.

F    I NFINITE -W IDTH L IMIT WITH THE B RA - KET NOTATION
As before, when the width n of the program goes to infinity, one can infer how the program behaves
via a calculus of random variables. We define them below via the new ket notation instead of the
earlier Z notation.


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ket Construction. We recursively define the random variable 8x⟩ (called a ket) for each vector
x and deterministic number θ̊ for each scalar θ in the program. For a vector W x in the program,
we also define random variables 8W xb⟩ and 8W x˙⟩ (called hat-ket and dot-ket respectively) such that
8W x⟩ = 8W xb⟩ + 8W x˙⟩. These are the same as Z b and Ż in the old TP notation (Yang et al., 2022)
and they satisfy

   Hat All hat-kets are jointly Gaussian with zero-mean and covariance18

                                       Cov(8W xb⟩, 8U yb⟩) = I(W = U )⟨x8y⟩                                  (5)

   Dot Every dot-ket is a linear combination of previous kets, expressed by the following equation
                                                                          ∂8x⟩
                                             8W x˙⟩ =
                                                          X
                                                    def
                                                                8y⟩ E                                        (6)
                                                          y∈x           ∂8W ⊤ yb⟩

eq. (6) is the same equation as in(Yang et al., 2022, Zdot) but formulated much more succinctly in
the bra-ket notation:
                                                           X           ∂Z x
                      (Yang et al., 2022, Zdot), Ż W x =       Zy E          .
                                                                     ∂ZbW ⊤ y
                                                           y∈x


There is an alternative notion for 8W x˙⟩ in Yang & Littwin (2023) that write

                                          8W x˙⟩ = 8x⟩ˇ⟨W ⊤ x8x⟩.
This is more convenient to write as we introduce the operator view.
We can see the ket 8W x⟩ as the result of the action of an operator on the ket 8x⟩.
Definition F.1. Let W be an initial matrix in a Tensor Program. We define 8W 8, b8W b8, 8̇W 8̇ to be the
linear operators on kets 19 that act by
                                                  def
                                        b8W b8x⟩ =    8W xb⟩
                                                  def
                                         8̇W 8̇x⟩ =   8W x˙⟩
                                               def b b
                                        8W 8x⟩ =   8W 8x⟩ + 8̇W 8̇x⟩.
Any linear operator that is equal to 8W 8 for some initial matrix W is called an initial operator.

We also define the adjoint relations between the operators:

                                               b8W b8† = 8̇W ⊤ 8̇,
                                                     †
                                               8̇W 8̇ = b8W ⊤b8,
                                               8W 8† = 8W ⊤ 8.

Parameter Update In the SGD case, the parameter update of W l is simple. With the operator
notation and outer product notation, we can write
                                      l
                                    8Wt+1 8 = 8Wtl 8 − η8δhlt ⟩ χt ⟨xl−1
                                                                     t 8.

  18
      In eq. (5), I(W = U ) is the deterministic number that is 1 iff W and U are the same matrix (as symbols in
the program) and 0 otherwise. This should not be interpreted as a random variable that is 1 precisely when W
and U take the same values.
   19
       To be rigorous, we need to specify the “Hilbert space” of kets. This is somewhat pedantic and not crucial
to the key points of this paper, but the Hilbert space can be constructed as follows: Let σ(π) be the σ-algebra
generated by the kets of the program π. Let Σ(π) def
                                                           S
                                                        = π′ ⊇π σ(π) be the union (more precisely, the direct
limit) of σ(π ′ ) over all programs π ′ extending π. Then the Hilbert space in question is the L2 space of random
variables over the Σ of our program.


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this work, ∆ denotes change for one step, i.e.,
                                        l
                                     8∆Wt+1 8 = −η8δhlt ⟩ χt ⟨xl−1
                                                               t 8;

¯ denotes total change, i.e.,
∆
                                                  t−1
                                                  X
                                    ¯ l8 = −
                                   8∆W                   η8δhlτ ⟩ χτ ⟨xl−1
                                       t                               τ 8,
                                                  τ =0

which we write succinctly 8∆W¯ l 8 = −η8δhl ⟩ χ ⟨xl−1
                                                  <t 8. (Compared to Yang & Littwin (2023), ∆
                                 t        <t
    ¯ are changed from δ and ∆ because we want to use δ for gradients instead of d, which is now
and ∆
used for depth differentiation).
Note in the general case,
                                       l
                                    8∆Wt+1 8 = −η8δhl≤t ⟩ χ≤t ⟨xl−1
                                                                ≤t 8

where
                                         def
                     8δhl≤t ⟩ χ≤t ⟨xl−1     l     l        l−1             l        l−1
                                    ≤t 8 = Qt (8δh0 ⟩ χ0 ⟨x0 8, . . . , 8δht ⟩ χt ⟨xt 8).

So
                                                  t−1
                                                  X
                                   ¯ tl 8 = −η
                                  8∆W                    8δhl≤τ ⟩ χ≤τ ⟨xl−1                       (7)
                                                                        ≤τ 8.
                                                  τ =0


                                     ¯ tl 8 = −η8δhl<t ⟩ χ ⟨xl−1
For the rest of the paper, we write 8∆W                      <t 8 for convenience. The generalization
to eq. (7) follows Yang & Littwin (2023).


G     H EURISTICS FOR THE PROOFS IN THE GENERAL CASE

The notation in this section is mostly defined in appendix E. The complete notation is defined in
Yang & Littwin (2023).

G.1     D EPTH -µP

Let MS(x) = x − ⟨x, 1⟩/n = Gx where G = I − 11⊤ /n, where x ∈ Rn . Recall the definition of
the network and the normalized gradients


                                          x1 = U ξ
                                          hl = W l xl−1
                                                        1
                                           xl = xl−1 + √ Gϕ(hl )
                                                         L
                                                  ⊤ L
                                        f (ξ) = V x
                                        δxL = nV
                                        δhl = ϕ′ (hl ) ⊙ (Gδxl )
                                                        1
                                      δxl−1 = δxl + √ W l⊤ δhl
                                                         L

where V = Θ(1/n) coordinatewise, δxl = Θ(1) coordinatewise and W l = Θ( √1n ) coordinate-
wise.
                                                                                def
We also abuse the notation of G and use it as an operator on kets: G8x⟩ = 8x⟩ − E8x⟩.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Forward. Similar to the linear case, one can show that under technical conditions (mostly on the
activation function) that the infinite-depth limit of the TP follows the dynamics
                   √                        √

             λ                     λ λ
          d8xt ⟩ = dλGϕ 8W0 8xt ⟩ + dλ8∆Wt 8xt ⟩   ¯
                                                   ^    λ  λ


                     √
                    dλGϕ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ + dλGϕ′ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ 8∆W ¯ t 8xt ⟩
                                                            ^λ λ
                 =
                  √
                                                                          ¯ t 8xt ⟩
                 = dλGϕ b8W0λb8xλt ⟩ + 8̇W0λ 8̇xλt ⟩ + dλGϕ′ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ 8∆W
                                                                          ^λ λ

                  √
                                                               ^           ¯ tλ 8xλ ⟩
                 = dλGϕ b8W0λb8xλt ⟩ + dλGϕ′ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ 8̇W0λ 8̇xλt ⟩ + 8∆W
                                                                           ^
                                                                                   t

where λ ∈ [0, 1] refers to the fractional layer index (λ represents layer index ⌊λL⌋ as L → ∞), t
refers to the training step, 8W0λ 8 the matrix operator (defined in Appendix F), and the tilde symbol
refers to the “normalized” version of the object, i.e., multiply the ket with (dλ)c for some c such
that the multiplication (normalized ket) is Θ(1) w.r.t. L, and same for the normalized operators.
The first term represents a Gaussian noise.

In the linear case, we have
                                    √
                                                            ^            ¯
                     d8xλt ⟩ =               λb λ            λ    λ      ^ λ   λ
                                        dλ 8W0 8xt ⟩ + dλ 8̇W0 8̇xt ⟩ + 8∆Wt 8xt ⟩
                                           b

Note
                               √        t−1                           √
                                                                               λ ⟩ˇ
                                        X
             8̇W0λ 8̇xλt ⟩ =       dλ          ]
                                              8δhλ ⟩⟨∇ λ⊤ λ 8xλ ⟩ =
                                                 s    W0 δhs  t
                                                                             ^
                                                                          dλ8δh     λ⊤  λ    λ
                                                                               <t ⟨W0 δh<t 8xt ⟩
                                        s=0
Using multi-vector notation, we write
                                                                          X
                     ¯ tλ 8xλ ⟩ = −η 8δh
                     ^
                    8∆W               ^ λ ⟩ ⟨xλ 8xλ ⟩ = −η
                                        <t χ
                                                                                 ] λ ⟩ ⟨xλ 8xλ ⟩
                            t                 <t t                              8δhs χs  s   t
                                                                          s<t
                                                                          X
                     ¯ λ 8xλ ⟩ = −η8δhλ ⟩χ ⟨xλ 8xλ ⟩ = −η
                    8∆W                                                         8δhλs ⟩χs ⟨xλs 8xλt ⟩
                        t  t          <t     <t t
                                                                          s<t

Backward. Similar to the forward prop, we obtain the following dynamics for the infinite-depth
TP
           √
−d8δxλτ ⟩ = dλ8Wτλ⊤ 8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩
           √   λ⊤                       √                             √                √

                              λ⊤
          = dλ 8W0 8 + 8̇W0 8̇ + dλ8∆Wτ 8
                 b      b                    ¯  g λ  †    ′    λ λb          ^ λ   λ ˙      ¯
                                                                                            ^   λ   λ
                                                         ϕ 8W0 xτ ⟩ + dλ8W0 xτ ⟩ + dλ8∆Wτ 8xτ ⟩ 8Gδxτ ⟩       λ

           √            h                     i   √          h                      i             h                     i
                                                                                          ¯W
          = dλb8W0λ⊤b8 ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)8Gδxλτ ⟩ + dλ8̇W0λ⊤ 8̇ ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)8Gδxλτ ⟩ + dλ8∆ gλ 8† ϕ′ (8W λ xλb⟩)8Gδxλ ⟩
                                                                                              τ         0 τ         τ

           + dλ8̇W0λ⊤ 8̇ ϕ′′ 8W0λ xλτb⟩     ^ λ λ˙      ^¯ λ λ          λ
                                          8W  0 xτ ⟩ + 8∆Wτ 8xτ ⟩ 8Gδxτ ⟩

Here the (dλ)3/2 term got dropped. The individual terms can be simplified as follows

        h                     i                  h                   i
 ¯W
8∆ gλ 8† ϕ′ (8W λ xλb⟩)8Gδxλ ⟩ = −η8xλ ⟩ χ ⟨δh
    τ          0 τ         τ         <τ
                                            ] λ 8 ϕ′ (8W λ xλb
                                              <τ
                                                                  λ         λ       ] λ   gλ
                                                        0 τ ⟩)8Gδxτ ⟩ ≈ −η8x<τ ⟩ χ ⟨δh<τ 8δhτ ⟩
         h                       i h                                       ih                       i
8̇W0λ⊤ 8̇ ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)8Gδxλτ ⟩ = 8xλ<τ ⟩ˇ⟨W0λ xλ<τ 8 + 8xλτ ⟩ˇ⟨W0λ xλτ 8 ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)8Gδxλτ ⟩
                                             "                              #
                                                                       λ
                                                      λ λb ∂8Gδxτ ⟩
                                                                                        h                        i
                                                 ′
                                       λ
                                  = 8x<τ ⟩ E ϕ (8W0 xτ ⟩)                     + 8xλτ ⟩ E ϕ′′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)8Gδxλτ ⟩
                                                            ∂8W0λ xλ<τb⟩
                                       √
                                  = Θ( dλ)
where the other terms from the product rule drops out because
                                   ∂ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩)    ∂8Gδxλτ ⟩
                                                    =              =0
                                     ∂8W0λ xλ<τb⟩      ∂8W0λ xλτb⟩

                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2     1/L BRANCHES

G.2.1    F ORWARD :

                                                        ¯ λ 8xλ ⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩
                      d8xλt ⟩ = dλG E ϕ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ + 8∆W

                                                          t    t
                                     h                                          i
                                                        ¯ tλ 8xλt ⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩
                              = dλG E ϕ b8W0λb8xλt ⟩ + 8∆W

where the equality follows because 8xλt ⟩ is contained the σ-algebra of 8U0 , V0 ⟩,so 8̇W0λ 8̇xλt ⟩ = 0.
        ¯ tλ 8 ∈ σ(8U0 , V0 ⟩)⊗σ(8U0 , V0 ⟩), 8∆W
Since 8∆W                                      ¯ tλ 8xλt ⟩ ∈ σ(8U0 , V0 ⟩), and the expectation is really
just over b8W0λb8xλt ⟩.

G.2.2    BACKWARD

                   −d8δxλτ ⟩ = dλ E 8Wτλ⊤ 8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩


                                     ¯ τλ⊤ 8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩

                             = dλ E 8∆W

Here the b8W0λ⊤b8 and 8̇W0λ⊤ 8̇ drop out because the former is zero-mean and indepenent from 8U0 , V0 ⟩
and the latter drops out because 8xλt ⟩ is contained the σ-algebra of 8U0 , V0 ⟩.

G.3     1/Lα BRANCHES , α ∈ (1/2, 1]

G.3.1    F ORWARD

                                                            ¯ tλ 8xλt ⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩
              d8xλt ⟩ = (dλ)α G E ϕ 8W0λ 8xλt ⟩ + (dλ)1−α 8∆W
                                                            ^
                            h                i
                                                ¯ tλ 8xλt ⟩
                      = dλ E ϕ′ b8W0λb8xλt ⟩ G8∆W

because the same reason as above.

G.3.2    BACKWARD

                   −d8δxλτ ⟩ = dλ E 8Wτλ⊤ 8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩


                                     ¯ τλ⊤ 8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩ | 8U0 , V0 ⟩

                             = dλ E 8∆W
                                   h               i
                                                     ¯ τλ⊤ 8Gδxλτ ⟩
                             = dλ E ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩) 8∆W

Here,
                              h               i                    h                i
                                                                                       ¯ λ⊤ 8δxλ ⟩
8ϕ′ (Wτλ xλτ ) ⊙ (Gδxλτ )⟩ ≡ E ϕ′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩) G8δxλτ ⟩ + (dλ)1−α E ϕ′′ (8W0λ xλτb⟩) G8∆W τ    τ


G.4     J USTIFICATIONS OF THE CLAIMS

Claim 5.2. Stability during training when α + γ ≥ 1 is straightforward (some technical conditions
on the activation function are required). This is because the weight updates are of order L−α−γ and
feature updates involve no more than L terms of size L−α−γ (plus higher order terms that do not
contribute to the update in the large depth limit). When α + γ > 1, the contribution of a sum of at
most L terms of order L−α−γ will decrease to zero, and the network output ft will converge to f0
in this case, yielding a trivial limit. However, when α + γ = 1, the updates remain important in the
infinite depth limit, yielding a non-trivial limit.

Claim 5.3. Consider a stable and nontrivial parametrization (i.e. α + γ = 1). Faithfullness at
initialization is achieved only when α ≥ 1/2. This was proven in Hayou et al. (2021) in a more
general setup. Faithfullness during training is ensured as long as α ≤ 1 because feature updates are
always Θ(1) in depth. With α > 1, γ < 0 and the weight updates explode with depth in this case,


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which yield exploding behaviour for h.

Claim 5.4 When α ∈ (1/2, 1], we obtain smooth limiting dynamics when L → ∞ as demonstrated
in Appendix G.3. This limiting process is a smooth process (no Brownian jumps) that satisfies the
required definition of redundancy.
Claim 5.5. It remains to prove that Depth-µP is non-redundant. This is a result of the limiting
dynamics in this case (Appendix G.1) . With Depth-µP, the randomness of the initialization in
the hidden layer remains present throughout training, inducing a Brownian-like term that breaks
redundancy.

G.5   S UBLETY: L AYERWISE ( LOCAL ) LINEARIZATION BUT NOT GLOBAL LINEARIZATION

Definition G.1. We say a parametrization induces layerwise linearization iff each layer can be
linearized without changing the network output when L → ∞, that is, ∀l ∈ [L],
        L−α G ϕ(Wtl xl−1           l l−1     ′   l l−1       l       l   l−1        −1

                       t ) − ϕ(W0 xt ) − ϕ (W0 xt ) ⊙ ((Wt − W0 )xt ) = o(L            )
Claim G.1. A stable and nontrivial parametrization induces layerwise linearization iff α ∈ [1/2, 1).
                                  √                                                       l l−1
In Depth-µP, Wtl − W0l is Θ(1/ L) which is much smaller               l
                                                         √ than W0 . Therefore, ϕ(Wt xt ) −
     l l−1      ′    l l−1         l     l  l−1
ϕ(W0 xt ) − ϕ (W0 xt ) ⊙ ((Wt − W0 )xt ) = o(1/ L), thus satisfies Definition G.1. Similar
to the depth-µP case, for α ∈ [1/2, 1), the activation in the forward pass can be linearized which
indicates layerwise linearization when α + γ = 1.
However, note that this does not imply the entire network is linearized (w.r.t. all the parameters in
the sense of Neural Tangent Kernel). In our setup, where the widthwise scaling follows µP and the
input/output layers are initialized at a constant scale (w.r.t. L), it is actually not possible to have a
kernel limit. Even in our linear case in Section 3.2, one can see the learned model is not linear w.r.t.
the parameters.
If the initialization of the output layer is L times larger than our setup (assuming L ≪ n so the
widthwise scaling still follows µP), it may induce a parametrization that can linearize the entire
network. In that situation, the learning rate has to be L times smaller than Depth-µP to obtain
stability during training, so the change of parameters is also L times smaller, which can lead to
the linearization of the entire network. Since we focus on maximal feature learning, the rigorous
argument is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     C LASSIFICATION OF D EPTHWISE PARAMETRIZATIONS IN L INEAR C ASE
We discuss the classification results on the linear residual networks with SGD training and give
rigorous proofs for the claims in this simplified setting. Recall the linear residual networks:
                                    ∀l ∈ [L], xl = xl−1 + aL−α hl ,
where hl = W l xl , and the effective learning rate of W l is ηn−1 L−γ . Without loss of generality, we
assume η = a = 1.
H.1     I NITIALIZATION

At initialization, we have
                                                              −α l
                                              8xl0 ⟩ = 8xl−1
                                                         0 ⟩+L  8h0 ⟩,
where
                                 8hl0 ⟩ = 8W0l xl−1     l l−1b
                                                0 ⟩ = 8W0 x0 ⟩.
Since 8xl−1 ⟩ is independent from 8W l xl−1b⟩, we have
          0                     0 0
                       −2α l                     −2α l−1 l−1
  l   l       l−1 l−1
⟨x0 8x0 ⟩ = ⟨x0 8x0 ⟩+L   ⟨h0 8h0 ⟩ = ⟨xl−1
                                l           l−1
                                        0 8x0 ⟩+L   ⟨x0 8x0 ⟩ = (1+L−2α )⟨xl−1 l−1
                                                                           0 8x0 ⟩.
Using this recursion, we can write
                                          ⟨xl0 8xl0 ⟩ = (1 + L−2α )l ⟨x00 8x00 ⟩.
                                                                                      −2α+1
                                                         −2α L
Therefore, ⟨xL   L
             0 8x0 ⟩ = Θ(1) iff α ≥ 1/2, otherwise (1 + L   ) ≈ eL                            explodes with large L.
A similar argument stands for hl0 and f0 . Therefore, we have proved Claim 5.1.
                                                                      e l = Θ(1) for α ≥ 1/2. Given
Similarly, we can get the stability of the first backward pass, i.e., δx0
α ≥ 1/2, we can also settle the size of δh0 that
                                         e
                                            e l = Θ(L−α ),
                                            δh         0
which implies
                                           ∆W1l = L−γ+α · δh
                                                          e l ⊗ xl−1 .
                                                            0    0


H.2     A FTER THE FIRST STEP OF GRADIENT UPDATE

Now we look at the second forward pass, and assume the input is the same, i.e., 8x01 ⟩ = 8x00 ⟩, we
have
                                        −α                    l l−1 ˙
                   8xl1 ⟩ = 8xl−1
                              1 ⟩+L        (8W0l xl−1
                                                  1 ⟩ + 8W0 x1 ⟩ + 8∆W1 8x1 ⟩)
                                                      b                         l l−1

                           ]
                           e l ⟩⟨xl−1 8 = −L−γ 8δx e l ⟩⟨xl−1 8, and 8]     def
where 8∆W1l 8 = −L−γ 8δh      0   0                   0   0
                                                                      e l⟩=
                                                                      δh 0      Lα 8δh
                                                                                    e l ⟩ is the normalized
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                    l l−1 ˙
version of 8δh0 ⟩, which happens to equal to 8δx0 ⟩. By the definition of 8W0l xl−1
             e l                                  e l
                                                                                      1 ⟩ and 8W0 x1 ⟩,
                                                                                          b
we get a similar formula to the Depth-µP case:
                                                                                                 !
          l        l−1       −α     l l−1b     −α e l          ∂8xl−1
                                                                   1 ⟩          −γ   l−1 l−1
        8x1 ⟩ = 8x1 ⟩ + L 8W0 x1 ⟩ + L 8δx0 ⟩                              − L ⟨x0 8x1 ⟩ .
                                                            ∂8W0l⊤ δx
                                                                    e lb⟩
                                                                       0
                               ∂8xl−1 ⟩
Now we write bl = Lγ              1
                                           and cl = −⟨xl−1 l−1
                                                       0 8x1 ⟩, then
                           ∂8W0l⊤ δx
                                  e lb⟩
                                     0

                                         −α                −α−γ l
                     8xl1 ⟩ = 8xl−1
                                 1 ⟩+L      8W0l xl−1
                                                   1 ⟩+L
                                                     b         (b + cl )8δx
                                                                         e l ⟩.
                                                                           0
                  l−1          l    −α     l⊤    l       L      L     −α
                                                                          8W0m⊤ δx
                                                                                e mb⟩, we have
                                                              P
                  0 ⟩ = 8δx0 ⟩ + L
By expanding 8δx                        8W0 δxe ⟩ = 8δxe ⟩+
                                                                m=l L
               e            e                      b
                                                 0       0                        0
                                                                     L
                                                                                           !
                                                                    X
     8xl ⟩ = 8xl−1 ⟩ + L−α 8W l xl−1b⟩ + L−α−γ (bl + cl ) 8δx
        1         1                  0 1
                                                            e L⟩ +         L−α 8W m⊤ δx
                                                                            0
                                                                                     e mb⟩
                                                                                                   0     0
                                                                                    m=l+1
                         l
                         X                                 l
                                                           X
            = 8x01 ⟩ +         L−α 8W0m x1m−1b⟩ +                L−α−γ (bm + cm )8δx
                                                                                  e L⟩
                                                                                    0
                         m=1                               m=1
                  L               min{m−1,l}
                  X                       X        ′        ′
              +          L−α−γ                  (bl + cl )L−α 8W0m⊤ δx
                                                                    e mb⟩.
                                                                      0                                          (8)
                  m=2                 l′ =1



                                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note the four terms in eq. (8) are independent of each other.
Now it is easy to compute cl because only the first two terms in eq. (8) have correlation with xl0 :

                                          cl = cl−1 (1 + L−2α ) = Θ(1)
with α ≥ 1/2. For bl , we have the following recursive formula:
                                                     l
                                                     X
                                  bl+1 = L−2α            (bl + cl ) = Θ(l · L−2α ).
                                                   m=1


Stable during training and nontrivial. Finally, we can reason about the f˚1 (note f˚0 = 0, so
∆f˚1 = f˚1 ), which indicates whether the parametrization is stable during the first step20 , and whether
the parametrization is nontrivial for the first step:
                                               L
                                               X
                        f˚1 = ⟨nV 8xL
                                    1⟩ =             L−α−γ (bm + cm )χ0 = Θ(L1−α−γ ).
                                               m=1

Therefore, we have proved Claim 5.2 that the parametrization is stable during training iff α + γ ≥ 1,
and is nontrivial iff α + γ ≤ 1.

Faithfulness. Although there is no activation in the linear case, we still prove Claim 5.3 to
enlighten the proof of the general case.
At the initialization, hl0 and xl−1
                                0   have the same size, therefore, faithfulness is equivalent to stability,
which means it happens iff α ≥ 1/2.
During training, we can expand 8hl1 ⟩ in a similar way to eq. (8) as
                                                                 L
                                                                                         !
                                                                 X
                             −γ l                                        −α
        8hl1 ⟩ = 8W0l xl−1
                       1 ⟩+L
                          b    (b + cl )            e L⟩ +
                                                   8δx0                 L      8W0m⊤ δx
                                                                                     e mb⟩
                                                                                       0     = Θ(1 + L−γ ).
                                                                m=l+1

Therefore, it is faithful iff γ ≥ 0. It is equivalent to α ≤ 1 because we have α + γ = 1.

Feature diversity exponent. To simplify the analysis, we assume that ϵL is always an integer. We
first expand xl+ϵL
              1    − xl1
                                     l+ϵL
                                      X                                 l+ϵL
                                                                         X
              8xl+ϵL
                1    ⟩ − 8xl1 ⟩ =             L−α 8W0m xm−1
                                                        1
                                                           b⟩ +                L−α−γ (bm + cm )8δx
                                                                                                e L⟩
                                                                                                  0
                                    m=l+1                            m=l+1
                                        L              min{m−1,l+ϵL}
                                        X                    X                 ′    ′
                                    +         L−α−γ                         (bl + cl )L−α 8W0m⊤ δx
                                                                                                e mb⟩.
                                                                                                  0
                                        m=2           l′ =min{m−1,l}+1
                                                        √
With α + γ = 1, it is clear that the first term√is Θ(L−α ϵL) = Θ(ϵ1/2 L−α+1/2 ), the second term
has size Θ(ϵ), and the third term has size Θ( L · ϵL−α ) = Θ(ϵL−α+1/2 ). Therefore, there are only
two cases here: if α = 1/2, the overall size is Θ(ϵ1/2 + ϵ) = Θ(ϵ1/2 ); if α > 1/2, the first and the
third term vanish as L → ∞, so the overall size is Θ(ϵ). In sum, we have proved Claims 5.4 and 5.5.

Layerwise linearization. Claim G.1 is trivial in this simplified setting because layerwise
linearization is always true for linear nets. To enlighten the proof of the general case, we recap
that 8∆W1l 8xl−1
              1 ⟩ = L     c 8δx0 ⟩ = Θ(L−γ ), which is much smaller than 8W0l xl−1
                       −γ l e l
                                                                                 1 ⟩ = Θ(1) when
γ > 0. If there were an activation function, the linearization would bring an error of o(L−γ ) in hl1 ,
which means an error of o(L−γ−α ) = o(L−1 ) to xl1 .

  20
       We need ∆x and ∆h for stability, but they are similar to ∆f˚1 .


                                                           35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3    B EYOND ONE STEP

The argument above is in general tracking the derivatives and covariance, in other words, Γ and C
in the Depth-µP case.
Now we generalize Lemma C.3, and obtain the following recursion for Γ and C

            l                  l−1
 Γt,r,0,b     , q = Γt,r,0,b        , q + L1/2−α I[(t=r)∧(b=0)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
            L                    L
                                t−1
                         −α−γ
                                X              l       γ−1/2            l−1 l              l
                    +L              Γs,r,1,b     ,q   L      Γt,s,0,1      ,     − Ct,s,0      .
                                s=0
                                               L                         L   L             L


               l−1                      l
Γt,r,1,b           ,q       = Γt,r,1,b    , q + L1/2−α I[(t=r)∧(b=1)∧(l=⌈Lq⌉)]
                L                      L
                                         t−1
                                        X               l−1                        l l               l
                                + L−α−γ      Γs,r,0,b       ,q   Lγ−1/2 Γt,s,1,0     ,     − Ct,s,1      .
                                        s=0
                                                         L                         L   L             L

                                 t
                                 X s
                                   X           X Z 1
               Ct,s,a (p) =                                  Γt,t′ ,a,b (l/L, q)Ct′ ,s′ ,b (q)Γs,s′ ,a,b (l/L, q)dq,
                                t′ =−1 s′ =−1 b∈{0,1}    0

where l = ⌈Lp⌉ − 1 if a = 0, and l = ⌈Lp⌉ if a = 1.
Then all the claims can be reasoned by tracking the order of Γ and C.

Distinguish parametrizations with α + γ = 1 and 1/2 ≤ α ≤ 1. The parametrizations with
α + γ = 1 and 1/2 ≤ α ≤ 1 are all nontrivial, stable, and faithful. However, there is a large gap
between α = 1/2 (Depth-µP) and α > 1/2 in terms of the difficulty of tracking Γ and C. For
α > 1/2, we can see that Ct,s,a = Θ(1), Γt,−1,a,b = Θ(1) and Γt,s,a,b = o(1) for s ≥ 0. In this
case, we can simplify the recursion by ignoring Γt,s,a,b with s ≥ 0:
                                                       t−1
                            l                l−1     1X               l          l
                 Γt,−1,0,b     ≈ Γt,−1,0,b         −       Γs,−1,1,b     Ct,s,0     .
                            L                 L      L s=0            L          L

                                                                t−1
                                l−1                      l    1X                l−1           l
                Γt,−1,1,b                 ≈ Γt,−1,1,b       −       Γs,−1,0,b         Ct,s,1     .
                                 L                       L    L s=0              L            L
                                                   X
                                   Ct,s,a (p) ≈              Γt,−1,a,b (l/L)Γs,−1,a,b (l/L),
                                                  b∈{0,1}

where l = ⌈Lp⌉ − 1 if a = 0, and l = ⌈Lp⌉ if a = 1. Note Γt,−1,a,b (p, q) is simplified to a function
that only depends on p because Γt,−1,a,b (p, q) is constant when fixing p.
This simplification means the randomness in any W0l does not have an effect on the dynamics in
the infinite depth limit — the complicated functional integrals for α = 1/2 in Proposition C.4 are
simplified to be ODEs when α > 1/2. This ODE dynamic also directly implies that the feature
diversity exponent is 0 for α > 1/2.

I     W HAT C AUSES H YPERPARAMETER T RANSFER ?

In a popular misconception, hyperparameter transfer is implied by the existence of a limit. For
example, the fact that µP transfers hyperparameters, in this misconception, is because of the
existence of the feature learning limit (aka the µ limit), the limit of µP as width goes to infinity.
However, this is not the case. Indeed, there are a plethora of infinite-width limits, such as the NTK
limit, but there can only be one way how the optimal hyperparameters scale, so existence cannot
imply transfer. In a stronger version of this misconception, transfer is implied by the existence of a


                                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“feature learning” limit. But again, this is False, because there are infinite number of feature learning
limits (where the µ limit is the unique maximal one).
Instead, what is true is that the optimal limit implies the transfer of optimal hyperparameters. For
example, in the width limit case, µP is the unique parametrization that yields a maximal feature
learning limit. Compared to all other limits, this is obviously the optimal one. Hence µP can
transfer hyperparameters across width.
So far, there is no a priori definition for the “optimality” of a limit: One can only tell by classifying
all possible limits; it turns out only a small number of different behavior can occur in the limit, and
thus one can manually inspect for which limit is the optimal one.
Similarly, in this work, to derive a depthwise scaling that allows transfer, we need to classify all
possible infinite depth limits — and Depth-µP will turn out to be optimal in a sense that we define
later in the paper.21 More interestingly than the width case, here we have multiple modes of feature
learning when taking the depth limit and it is important to discern which mode of feature learning
is optimal. Thus, again, it is insufficient to derive any one limit, even with feature learning, and be
able to infer it yields HP transfer.
In appendix L, we provide experiments with 1/L block scaling (α, γ) = (1, 0), aka ODE scaling,
which provably induces feature learning in the infinite-depth limit, but is sub-optimal. Our results
show a significant shift in the optimal learning rate with this parametrization.
J     F EATURE D IVERSITY
In this section, we show that the choice of nonlinearity and placement of nonlinearities can affect
feature diversity greatly.
J.1   G RADIENT D IVERSITY

Gradient diversity is an important factor toward feature diversity. Observe that the gradient δxl at xl
is continuous in l in the limit L → ∞. In a linear model (or the pre-nonlin model, where nonlinearity
is put before the weights), this causes δhl = L−α δxl to be very similar between neighboring blocks.
As a result (because the weights W l receives an update proportional to δhl ⊗ xl−1 ), in the next
forward pass, neighboring blocks contribute very similarly to the main branch xl . This leads to a
waste of model capacity.

J.2   P RE -N ONLIN L EADS TO P OOR P ERFORMANCE

For example, in Figure 3, for a relu pre-nonlin resnet (i.e. blocks are given by W l ϕ(xl−1 ) instead
of ϕ(W l xl−1 )), we see that although Depth-µP indeed transfers hyperparameters (as predicted by
our theory), the performance is dramatically worse than the post-nonlin resnet in Figure 11, and
depth gives no performance gains beyond 8 layers. Specifically, it is because δhl = L−α δxl like the
linear case, and ϕ(xl−1 ) is also similar between neighboring blocks. As a result, the gradient of the
weights W l , proportional to δhl ⊗ ϕ(xl−1 ), has little diversity compared to nearby blocks.

J.3   M AXIMIZING F EATURE D IVERSITY WITH A BSOLUTE VALUE N ONLINEARITY

In a nonlinear model, we have δhl = δxl ⊙ ϕ′ (hl ). Because hl is almost independent from all
other hm , m ̸= l in the Depth-µP limit, ϕ′ (hl ) can serve to decorrelate the δhl , depending on
what ϕ is. For example, if ϕ is relu, then ϕ′ is the step function. hl is approximately a zero-mean
Gaussian in the Depth µP limit, so that ϕ′ (hl ) is approximately 0 or 1 with half probability each.
This decorrelates δhl much better than the linear case. But of course, this line of reasoning naturally
leads to the conclusion that ϕ′ = sign would be the best decorrelator of δhl and the maximizer of
feature diversity (with ϕ among the class of positively 1-homogeneous functions) — then δhl and
δhm are completely decorrelated for l ̸= m.
   21
      There are important nuances here that will be spelled out in an upcoming paper. For example, if the space
of hyperparameters is not chosen correctly, then it could appear that no limit is optimal in any manner. For
example, if one in (widthwise) SP, one only thinks about the 1D space of the global learning rate, then all
infinite-width limits are defective — and indeed there is no hyperparameter transfer where the bigger always
does better.


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=37000:38000 , log2(a)=0.0                                  step=37000:38000
                    0.5                                                                                 0.0
                                                 L = 2k , k =                                                              postnonlin         prenonlin
                                                    1           6                                       0.5
                    0.0                             2           7
                                                    3           8                                       1.0
                                                    4           9


                                                                                          Min LogLoss
                    0.5                             5           10                                      1.5


          LogLoss
                                                                                                        2.0
                    1.0
                                                                                                        2.5

                    1.5                                                                                 3.0
                                                                                                        3.5
                          6         5       4           3       2        1       0                            2   4         6             8         10
                                                Log2( /1e-3)                                                          Log2(L)

Figure 3: Pre-Nonlin Leads to Poor Performance Although Depth-µP for prenonlin resnet
indeed transfers hyperparameters (Left), depth gives no performance gains beyond 8 layers and
the performance is dramatically worse than the post-nonlin resnet (Right). In right plot, the ”Min
LogLoss” is minimal log loss over all block multiplier and learning rate. Networks are trained on
CIFAR-10 with Adam. See Figure 11 for more details about the setup.


                          ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=37000:38000 , log2 (a)=-1.5                                    step=37000:38000
                    1                         L = 2k , k =                                                                              abs        relu
                                                 3.0            7.0                                     1.0
                    0                            4.0            8.0
                                                 5.0            9.0                                     1.5
                                                 6.0            10.0
                    1
                                                                                          Min LogLoss


                                                                                                        2.0
          LogLoss


                                                                                                        2.5
                    2
                                                                                                        3.0
                    3
                                                                                                        3.5
                    4                                                                                   4.0
                              3         2       1           0        1       2       3                        2   4         6             8         10
                                                Log2( /1e-3)                                                          Log2(L)

Figure 4: Improving performance with absolute value non-linearity, which maximizes feature
diversity. (Networks are trained on CIFAR-10 with Adam.). See Figure 11 for more details about
the setup.



Indeed, as shown in Figure 4, swapping in absolute value for ϕ dramatically improves the training
performance of deep (block depth 1) resnets.
In general, in lieu of absolute value, any even nonlinearity would suffice.


J.4   F EATURE D IVERSITY IS IN T ENSION WITH L AYERWISE L INEARIZATION

The reason that ϕ′ (hl ) can decorrelate δhl is very much related to layerwise linearization. Recall that
in Depth-µP, hl can be decomposed to a zero-mean Gaussian part b       hl of size Θ(1) and a correction
term ḣl of size Θ(L−1/2 ) (corresponding to the decomposition 8hl ⟩ = 8hlb⟩+8hl˙⟩). b hl is independent
from h for m ̸= l but ḣ can be very strongly correlated to all other ḣ . Thus, ϕ′ (hl ) can
      b m                      l                                                  m

decorrelate δhl precisely because b  hl dominates ḣl , and this is also precisely the reason we have
layerwise linearization.
                                    hl is on the same order as ḣl and layerwise linearization does not
In the 1/L scaling (α, γ) = (1, 0), b
                 ′ l
occur, but also ϕ (h ) can no longer effectively decorrelated δhl .
Once again, we remind the reader that layerwise linearization in this case is not detrimental (in this
block depth 1 case) because b hl in fact accumulate contributions from the learned features of all
previous blocks and thus strongly depends on the learning trajectory (in contrast to the (widthwise)
NTK case where b hl is already determined at initialization).


                                                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            step=10000:11000, relu, no LN                                                step=37000:38000, relu, no LN
                                                                                                           1.0
                            0.00                                            block depth                                                                   block depth
                            0.25                                                   1                                                                             1
                                                                                   2                       1.5                                                   2
                            0.50
                                                                                                           2.0


                                                                                             Min LogLoss
                            0.75



              Min LogLoss
                            1.00
                                                                                                           2.5
                            1.25
                            1.50                                                                           3.0
                            1.75
                            2.00                                                                           3.5
                                   2   3    4      5     6      7      8      9        10                        2   3    4     5      6      7     8       9        10
                                                 Log2(TotalLayers)                                                            Log2(TotalLayers)

Figure 5: Block Depth 2 performs worse than Block Depth 1, Relu. In relu resnet with no
LN, block depth 2 does worse than block depth 1 when matching total number of layers (and thus
parameter count). However, training longer (38000 steps, Right) helps it catch up (compared to
11000 steps, Left). The y-axis is minimal log loss over all block multiplier and learning rate

                                           step=10000:11000, abs, with LN                                                step=37000:38000, abs, with LN
                                                                            block depth                    1.5                                            block depth
                            0.5                                                    1                                                                             1
                                                                                   2                       2.0                                                   2
                            1.0
                                                                                                           2.5
              Min LogLoss


                            1.5                                                              Min LogLoss
                                                                                                           3.0
                            2.0
                                                                                                           3.5
                            2.5                                                                            4.0
                            3.0                                                                            4.5
                                   2   3    4     5      6      7      8      9        10                        2   3    4     5      6      7     8       9        10
                                                Log2(TotalLayers)                                                             Log2(TotalLayers)

Figure 6: Block Depth 2 performs worse than Block Depth 1, Abs. In abs resnet with LN,
block depth 2 does significantly worse than block depth 1 when matching total number of layers
(and thus parameter count). Training longer (38000 steps, Right) does not close the performance
gap (compared to 11000 steps, Left). The y-axis is minimal log loss over all block multiplier and
learning rate


K         B LOCK D EPTH 2 AND A BOVE
Remark on notation: Here and in the next section, all big-O notation is in L only; the scaling in
width is assumed to be in µP.
In most of this work, we have considered depth-1 MLP for g l in eq. (1), it’s straightforward to derive
and classify the infinite-width-then-infinite-depth
                  √                                 limits for larger depths in each block. In particular,
the following 1/ L scaling still makes sense in this more general setting with block depth k and
leads to a well defined limit:

             a                                                                                                             √
xl = xl−1 + √ · g l (xl−1 ; W l1 , . . . , W lk ),                                          Θ(1) initialization scale, Θ(1/ L) learning rate
              L
                                                                                                                                                                          (9)
This is what we call Depth-µP in the block depth 1 case, but we shall not use this name in the general
block depth case because this parametrization is no longer optimal.22
K.1        B LOCK D EPTH ≥ 2 IS D EFECTIVE

A very clear symptom of this is that the performance of block-depth-2 resnets is worse than that of
block-depth-1 networks, when matching parameter count, although they can (but not always) catch
up after training for a long time (figs. 5 and 6). Simultaneously, we are seeing nontrivial or even
significant hyperparameter shifts as the total number of blocks increases (fig. 7).
    22
         What we exactly mean by optimal will be explained below.


                                                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=37000:38000 , log2 (a)=-2.0, relu, no LN             ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=37000:38000, log2 (a)=-1.0, abs, with LN
                                                                                                        0
                    0.0                            L = 2k , k =
                                                        3         7
                    0.5                                 4         8                                     1
                    1.0                                 5         9
                                                        6         10
                                                                                                        2


                                                                                              LogLoss
                    1.5


          LogLoss
                    2.0
                                                                                                        3                                           L = 2k , k =
                    2.5                                                                                                                                 3              7
                    3.0                                                                                 4                                               4              8
                                                                                                                                                        5              9
                    3.5                                                                                                                                 6              10
                                  3        2        1       0          1     2        3                     7        6       5        4       3        2           1
                                                   Log2( /1e-3)                                                                  Log2( /1e-3)

Figure 7: Block Depth 2 Hyperparameter Shift in relu resnet with no LN (Left) and abs resnet
with LN (Right).

                        √
K.2    D EFECT OF 1/ L S CALING IN B LOCK D EPTH 2
                         √
The reason that the 1/ L scaling is no longer fine in the block depth ≥ 2 case is the linearization
of the multiplicative
             √         interaction between the layers in the block. Indeed, just like the block
                                                                                           √ depth 1
case, the 1/ L scaling forces the weight updates ∆W of each weight matrix to be Θ( L) smaller
than the initialization W0 . Thus, within the block, the training dynamics when depth L is large is in
the kernel regime, where the contribution to the block output g(x; W • ) is only a summation, instead
of product, of individual contributions from each layer’s weights updates.
When aggregated over all L blocks, the result is that there is only multiplicative interaction of
∆W across blocks but not within layers. In other words, the network output is dominated, for
example in the linear case, by the contributions of the form M L · · · M 1 where each M l can be one
of I, W0l2 W0l1 , W0l2 ∆W l1 , or ∆W l2 W0l1 , but NOT ∆W l2 ∆W l1 . All other contributions (which all
involve within-block interactions like ∆W l2 ∆W l1 ) are subleading. In the general nonlinear case,
replacing the block
                                          ϕ(W l2 ϕ(W l1 xl−1 ))
with the linearized version
              ϕ(hl∧ ) + ϕ′ (hl∧ ) ⊙ [∆W l2 ϕ(hl∨ )] + ϕ′ (hl∧ ) ⊙ [W0l2 (ϕ′ (hl∨ ) ⊙ [∆W l1 xl−1 ])]
will achieve the same performance as depth L → ∞, where hl∧ = W0l2 ϕ(hl∨ ) and hl∨ = W0l1 xl−1 .
When block depth k = 1 (our main subject of study in this work), all interactions are included but
this is no longer true when k > 1.
In fig. 8, the heatmap of loss as a function of block multiplier and learning rate demonstrates this
vividly for block depth 2.

Small depth The optimal sublevel set of (learning rate, block multiplier) has slope ≈ −2 when the
number of blocks is 21 . In other words, around the optimum, double the learning rate while dividing
the block multiplier by 4 has similar performance. This is because ∆W l1 and ∆W l2 interact
multiplicatively, so that doubling their sizes leads to quadrupling their contribution to the block
output. The simultaneous decrease of block multiplier by 4 then roughly keep their contribution
invariant in size.

Large depth On the other hand, the optimal sublevel set has slope ≈ −1 when the depth is 210 :
Doubling the learning rate while halving the block multiplier has similar performance. This reflects
the fact that ∆W l1 and ∆W l2 now interact additively.
Intermediate depths interpolate this phenomenon, as seen in the plot for depth 25 .
                                                                                               √
In the same heatmaps, one can see the optimal (learning rate, block multiplier) (in the 1/ L
parametrization) shifts from the middle of the grid to the upper left as depth goes from 25 to 210 ,
demonstrating the lack of hyperparameter transfer.
This change in slope is seen in relu networks as well, with or without layernorm.


                                                                                          40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            log depth 1                    log depth 4                    log depth 10
                 13.5
                 12.5
                 11.5                         0                              0                                 0
                 10.5
                  9.5                             1                              1                                 1
                  8.5
       Log2(a)
                  7.5
                  6.5                             2                              2                                 2
                  5.5
                  4.5                             3                              3                                 3
                  3.5
                  2.5
                                                  4                              4                                 4
                  1.5
                  0.5
                        -7.0
                        -6.5
                        -6.0
                        -5.5
                        -5.0
                        -4.5
                        -4.0
                        -3.5
                        -3.0
                        -2.5
                        -2.0
                        -1.5
                        -1.0
                        -0.5


                                                      -7.0
                                                      -6.5
                                                      -6.0
                                                      -5.5
                                                      -5.0
                                                      -4.5
                                                      -4.0
                                                      -3.5
                                                      -3.0
                                                      -2.5
                                                      -2.0
                                                      -1.5
                                                      -1.0
                                                      -0.5


                                                                                     -7.0
                                                                                     -6.5
                                                                                     -6.0
                                                                                     -5.5
                                                                                     -5.0
                                                                                     -4.5
                                                                                     -4.0
                                                                                     -3.5
                                                                                     -3.0
                                                                                     -2.5
                                                                                     -2.0
                                                                                     -1.5
                                                                                     -1.0
                                                                                     -0.5
                            Log2( /1e-3)                   Log2( /1e-3)                   Log2( /1e-3)


Figure 8: The ”slope” of the optimal sublevel set in the (learning rate, block multiplier) space
changes from −2 to −1 as depth goes from 21 to 210 . Here we use absolute value nonlinearity with
layer normalization, block depth 2, and networks are trained for 50 epochs with Adam on CIFAR-
10.

                            √
Finally, we note that the 1/ L scaling still yields a L → ∞ limit where the network still learns
features as a whole, even though within each block this is no longer true. Thus, this is another
reminder that mere ”feature learning” does not imply ”hyperparameter transfer”!

K.3          C LASSIFICATION OF PARAMETRIZATIONS

These heatmaps already demonstrate that no parametrization of (global learning rate23 , block
multiplier) can transfer hyperparameters robustly, because any such parametrization can only shift
the heatmaps but not stretch them, so one cannot ”transfer” a sublevel set of one slope into a sublevel
set of another slope.
But even if we allow learning rate to vary between layers in a block, no stable, faithful, nontrivial
parametrization can avoid the linearization problem described above.
For simplicity, fix a positive-homogeneous nonlinearity and block depth 2.24 We consider the space
of hyperparameters consisting of the learning rate for each of the layers in a block, as well as the
block multiplier (one for each block); WLOG all weights are initialized Θ(1).25 This yields a space
of dimension blockdepth + 1 = 3.
Indeed, for this to happen, the weight update ∆W li must be at least of order Ω(1) (size of
initialization) for some i. But this would contribute a drift term to the block output g l =
g l (xl−1 ; W • ) that is as large as the noise term. This then implies that either the parametrization
is unstable (if the block multiplier L−α is Ω(1/L)) or lacks feature diversity (if the block multiplier
L−α is O(1/L)).
For example, in a linear model,
                 Lα 8g l ⟩ = 8W l2 W l1 xl−1 ⟩ = 8W0l2 W l1 xl−1b⟩ + 8W0l2 W l1 xl−1˙⟩ + 8∆W l2 W l1 xl−1 ⟩.
8W0l2 W l1 xl−1b⟩ is independent and zero-mean across l (the noise term), while 8W0l2 W l1 xl−1˙⟩ +
8∆W l2 W l1 xl−1 ⟩ is correlated across l (the drift term). 8W0l2 W l1 xl−1b⟩ is always Θ(1) because the
W0l2 , W0l1 are. If ∆W l2 is Ω(1), then 8∆W l2 W l1 xl−1 ⟩ = Ω(1) as well, making the drift term as
large as the noise term. If ∆W l1 is Ω(1), then 8W0l2 ∆W l1 xl−1˙⟩ = Ω(1), causing 8W0l2 W l1 xl−1˙⟩ =
8W0l2 W0l1 xl−1˙⟩ + 8W0l2 ∆W l1 xl−1˙⟩ to be Ω(1).26
The same argument can be straightforwardly adapted to nonlinear MLPs (with mean subtraction)
and arbitrary block depth ≥ 2, and as well to general nonlinearities that are not necessarily positive-
homogeneous, with hyperparameter space enlarged to include initialization.
  23
      meaning, the learning tied across all layers in a block
  24
      but our arguments generalize trivially to arbitrary block depth ≥ 2
   25
      This is WLOG because the nonlinearities are homogeneous
   26
      One can also observe that if ∆W l1 = Ω(1), then by symmetry the backward pass suffers the same
problem. But for general block depth, this argument does not say anything about the middle layers, while the
argument presented above implies that ∆W li cannot be Ω(1) for any i.


                                                              41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Trained linear network converges to its infinite width limit which is computed recursively
based on Γ and C. Depth is fixed at 64,width varies between 27 , 28 , . . . , 213 . Networks are trained
with SGD for 10 steps. The root mean square statistics (y-axis) at 1st, 5th and 10th steps are plotted
using solid lines where the x-axis is the width. The root mean square values are computed on the
outputs of some of the layers (including the input layer, output layer, and hidden layers at each
quarter). The corresponding value for the infinite width is indicated with dashed lines.


Figure 10: Under Depth-µP, infinite wide linear network training converges when increasing the
depth. Infinite wide linear networks of depth 24 , 25 , . . . , 29 are computed recursively based on Γ
and C. The root mean square statistics (y-axis) at 1st, 5th and 10th steps are plotted across the depth
(x-axis).


K.4       S O W HAT IS THE O PTIMAL PARAMETRIZATION ?

All of the above considerations suggest that we are missing crucial hyperparameters in our
consideration when increasing the complexity of each block. Our study right now is akin to the
naive study of the 1-dimensional hyperparameter space of the global learning rate in SP. Discovering
these missing hyperparameters will be an important question for future work.

L        F ULL E XPERIMENTS

L.1      V ERIFYING THE T HEORY IN THE L INEAR C ASE

In Section 3.2, we showed that a complete description of the training dynamics of linear networks
can be formulated in terms of Γ and C. In this section, we provide empirical results supporting our
theoretical findings. We first verify the finite-depth recursive formula for Γ in Lemma C.3 is the
correct limit when the width goes to infinity, then proceed to show that the infinite-depth limit is the
correct one.

Infinite-width limit. In Figure 9, we train a series of 64-layer linear networks of width
27 , 28 , . . . , 213 with 1, 5, 10 steps on MNIST, and plot the root mean square27 of the layer outputs
using solid lines. We also compute the infinite width limit of the corresponding statistics using the
recursive formula for Γ and plot them as dashed horizontal lines. For clarity of the figure, we only
                                                                 qP
                                                                      n    2
    27                                                                i=1 xi
    The root mean square of a vector x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) is         n
                                                                               , which is denoted as “l2” in Figures 9
and 10.


                                                       42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


plot the statistics of the input layer, output layer, and hidden layers of index 16, 32, 48, and 64. It
is clear that as the width grows, the solid lines converge to the dashed lines consistently across the
training steps. It indicates that our computation of the infinite width limit is correct.

Infinite-depth limit. We verify that the infinite width limit above converges when the depth grows.
We consider linear networks of the same architecture but vary the depth from 24 to 29 . We again
compute the root mean square values of the layer outputs using the recursive formula for Γ, and plot
them in Figure 10 with depth being x-axis. For clarity of the figure, we only plot the statistics of
the input layer, output layer, and hidden layers of index L/4, L/2, 3L/4, and L. One can observe
that the statistics of the layer outputs converge quickly when the depth grows from 24 to 29 , which
verifies our convergence result.

L.2    H YPERPARAMETER T RANSFER

In this section, we provide empirical evidence to show the optimality of Depth-µP scaling and the
transferability of some quantities across depth. We train vanilla residual network with block depth
1 (1 MLP layer in each residual block) on CIFAR-10 dataset using Adam optimizer, batch size 64,
for 50 epochs (input and output layers are fixed). The network is parameterized as follows
                                  xl = xl−1 + a × L−α MS(ϕ(W l xl−1 )),
and the weights are trained with the rule
                           W l ← W l − η × n−1 L−γ Qlt (nLδ g0 , . . . , nLδ gt ),
where the learning rate η and the block multiplier a are the hyperparameters.28 The values of α, γ
depend on the parametrization of choice. For Depth-µP, we have α = γ = 1/2, and for standard
parametrization, we have α = 0, γ = 1.29 In our experiments, we assume base depth 8, meaning
that we replace L by L/8 in the parametrization above.

Learning rate transfer (η).         In Figure 11, we show the training loss versus learning rate for
depths 2k , for k ∈ {3, 4 . . . , 10}. For Depth-µP, a convergence pattern can be observed for the
optimal learning rate as depth grows. Optimal learning rates for small depths (e.g. L = 23 ) exhibit
a mild shift which should be expected, as our theory shows convergence in the large depth limit.
However, starting from depth L = 26 , the optimal learning rate is concentrated around 10−3 . For
parametrization that only scales the multiplier but not LR (α = 1/2, γ = 0), we observe the
optimal learning rate shifts significantly. For standard parametrization without any depth scaling
(α = γ = 0), the optimal learning rate exhibits a more significant shift as depth grows. Moreover,
even if one picks the optimal learning rate for each depth, the performance still degrades when
the depth is very large, suggesting that standard parametrization is not suitable for depth scaling.
Additional figures with multiple time slices are provided in Appendix M.

Is feature learning sufficient for HP transfer? In Appendix I, we explained when and why
hyperparameter transfer occurs. Precisely, to obtain HP transfer, one needs to classify all feature
learning limits and choose the optimal one. We introduced the notion of feature diversity and showed
that Depth-µP is optimal in the sense that it maximizes feature diversity. To show that optimality
is needed for HP transfer, we train a resnet with (α, γ) = (1, 0) which is also a feature learning
limit. Figure 12 shows that in this case the learning rate exhibits a significant shift with depth.
Interestingly, the constant η in this case seems to increase with depth, suggesting that the network
is trying to break from the ODE limit, which is sub-optimal. Note that in Figure 11, with Depth-µP
we obtain better training loss compared to the ODE parametrization in Figure 12.

Do we still have transfer with LayerNorm (LN)? Our theory considers only Mean Substraction
(MS), and Figure 11 shows the results with MS. To see wether LN affects HP transfer, we train
resnets with the same setup as Figure 11 with absolute value non-linearity and LN applied to xl−1
  28
     Note that η here is the constant, and the effective learning rate is given by ηn−1 L−γ .
  29
     In standard parametrization, there is generally no rule to scale the learning rate with depth, and the optimal
learning rate is typically found by grid search. Here, we assume that in standard parametrization, the learning
rate is scaled by L−1 to preserve faithfulness.


                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=0:1000 , log2 (a)=1.0                                           ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), step=37000:38000 , log2 (a)=1.0
                                                    L = 2k , k =                                               0.0                              L = 2k , k =
              0.60
                                                         3             7                                       0.5                                   3             7
              0.58                                       4             8                                                                             4             8
                                                         5             9                                       1.0                                   5             9
              0.56                                       6             10                                                                            6             10
                                                                                                               1.5
    LogLoss


                                                                                                     LogLoss
              0.54
                                                                                                               2.0
              0.52
                                                                                                               2.5
              0.50
                                                                                                               3.0
              0.48
                                                                                                               3.5
                         2             1       0          1        2          3        4                                 2          1      0          1        2          3        4
                                                       Log2( /1e-3)                                                                                Log2( /1e-3)
                                    ( , ) = (1/2, 0), step=0:1000 , Log2(a)=1.0                                                ( , ) = (1/2, 0), step=37000:38000 , Log2(a)=1.0
                                                                                                               0.0           L = 2k , k =
              0.60
                                                                                                               0.5              3         7
              0.58                                                                                                              4         8
                                                                                                               1.0              5         9
              0.56                                                                                                              6         10
                                                                                                               1.5
    LogLoss


                                                                                                     LogLoss
              0.54
                                                                                                               2.0
              0.52                                                          L = 2k , k =
                                                                                  3            7               2.5
              0.50                                                                4            8
                                                                                  5            9               3.0
              0.48                                                                6            10              3.5
                     6                 4           2           0             2             4                         6              4          2           0             2             4
                                                       Log2( /1e-3)                                                                                Log2( /1e-3)
                                     ( , ) = (0, 0), step=0:1000 , log2 (a)=1.0                                                ( , ) = (0, 0), step=37000:38000 , log2 (a)=1.0
              1.0                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                               0.5
              0.9
                                                                                                               0.0
                             L = 2k , k =
              0.8               3            7
    LogLoss


                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                     LogLoss


                                4            8
              0.7               5            9                                                                 1.0
                                6            10
                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                        L = 2k , k =
                                                                                                                                                                              3            7
              0.6                                                                                                                                                             4            8
                                                                                                               2.0
                                                                                                                                                                              5            9
                                                                                                               2.5                                                            6            10
              0.5
                         2            1       0           1        2         3         4                                 2          1      0          1        2          3        4
                                                   Log2( /1e-3)                                                                                    Log2( /1e-3)

Figure 11: Train logloss versus learning rate for width n = 256 and varying depths. The network
consists of MLP blocks (with block depth 1), trained for 50 epochs on CIFAR10 dataset using
Adam. The batch size is fixed to 64. We tune the depth 23 network to obtain the optimal
(log2 (a), log2 (η/1e − 3)) = (1, 0), and scale all deeper networks using 23 as base depth. The
reader can check that the L = 23 curves in each columns are the same. We show the logloss versus
the learning rate of the hidden layers (input/output layers fixed) for three parametrizations: Depth-µP
(Top), Scaling only the blocks (no LR scaling), i.e. γ = 0 (Middle), and Standard Parametrization
without any scaling (α = γ = 0) (Bottom). Each curve represents the average training loss over
a time slice of 1000 steps for depths 2k for k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 10}. Confidence intervals are based
on 5 seeds. The results show that Depth-µP preserves the optimal learning rate while consistently
improving the training loss as depth increases. If we only scale the blocks without scaling the
LR (α = 1/2, γ = 0) when training with Adam, the optimal learning rate shifts significantly with
depth. With standard parametrization without any depth scaling (common practice), the results show
a significant shift in the optimal learning rate as well. For SP, we cap the log loss at 1, which is why
for depth 29 , 210 , we have a black horizontal line at LogLoss = 1.

before matrix multiplication with W l (preLN). We keep MS after non-linearity although it can be
removed since LN is applied in the next layer. Our results, reported in Figure 13 suggest that Depth-
µP guarantees learning rate transfer with LN as well.

Block multiplier transfer (a). In Figure 14, we investigate the stability of the hyperparameter a
in Depth-µP as depth increases. The results suggest that the optimal value of this constant converges


                                                                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      ( , ) = (1, 0), step=0:1000 , Log2(a)=-0.5                                          ( , ) = (1, 0), step=37000:38000 , Log2(a)=-0.5
                                                                                                             0.5
              0.650                                 L = 2k , k =                                                                            L = 2k , k =
                                                             1            6                                  0.0                                        1           6
              0.625                                          2            7                                  0.5                                        2           7
                                                             3            8                                                                             3           8
              0.600                                          4            9                                  1.0                                        4           9
                                                                                                                                                        5


                                                                                                   LogLoss
                                                             5
    LogLoss
              0.575                                                                                          1.5
              0.550                                                                                          2.0

              0.525                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                             3.0
              0.500
                                                                                                             3.5
                                  3           2         1         0           1       2       3                            3           2            1           0       1       2           3
                                                        Log2( /1e-3)                                                                                Log2( /1e-3)

      Figure 12: Same setup as fig. 11 for the parametrization (α, γ) = (1, 0) (the ODE limit).


                      ( , ) = (1/2, 1/2), LN, step=37000:38000 , log2(a)=-3.0                                       ( , ) = (1/2, 0), LN, step=37000:38000 , log2(a)=-3.0
               0                                                                                             0

               1                                                                                             1      L = 2k , k =
                                                                                                                          1                6
    LogLoss


               2                                                                                   LogLoss   2            2                7
                          L = 2k , k =                                                                                    3                8
                             1                6                                                                           4                9
               3             2                7                                                              3            5                10
                             3                8
               4             4                9                                                              4
                             5                10
                      7               6            5         4        3           2       1                        12             10            8               6           4       2
                                                       Log2( /1e-3)                                                                             Log2( /1e-3)

Figure 13: Same setup as Figure 11 with Abs non-linearity instead of ReLU and LayerNorm applied
to xl−1 before matrix multiplication with W l . We show the logloss versus the learning rate of the
hidden layers (input/output layers fixed) for two parametrizations: Depth-µP (Left) and scaling
only the blocks without LR scaling ((α, γ) = (1/2, 0)) (Right). The results show that Depth-µP
preserves the optimal learning rate while consistently improving the training loss as depth increases.
If we only scale the blocks without scaling the LR (α = 1/2, γ = 0) when training with Adam, the
optimal learning rate shifts significantly with depth.



as depth grows, which suggest transferability. Additional experiments with multiple time slices are
provided in Appendix M.


                                          step=0:1000 , Log2( /1e-3)=0.0                                                          step=37000:38000 , Log2( /1e-3)=0.0
              1.0                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                             0.0
              0.9
                                                                                                             0.5
              0.8                                                                                            1.0
    LogLoss


                                                                                                   LogLoss


                                                                                                             1.5
              0.7
                          L = 2k , k =                                                                       2.0        L = 2k , k =
                              3                   7                                                          2.5              3            7
              0.6             4                   8                                                                           4            8
                              5                   9                                                          3.0              5            9
              0.5             6                   10                                                         3.5              6            10
                      6                   4                   2               0           2                         6                  4                    2           0               2
                                                            Log2(a)                                                                                     Log2(a)

Figure 14: Train logloss versus block multiplier a for varying depths. Same training setup as in
fig. 11. The results suggest that Depth-µP stabilizes the hyperparameter a as depth increases.


                                                                                                  45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              batch=524288:557056
                                                              2.16

                                                              2.14

                                                              2.12                                                                  L = 2k , k =


                                                    LogLoss
                                                                                                                                      3.0               6.0
                                                                                                                                      4.0               7.0
                                                              2.10                                                                    5.0
                                                              2.08

                                                              2.06

                                                                        4           3                2                        1            0                 1
                                                                                                         Log2(a)

                                 Figure 15: Modern transformers are insensitive to block multiplier a.

                                                    batch=32768:65536
                                                                                                                                                     batch=950272:983040
                                                                                                                       2.12
                        2.3075
                        2.3050                                                                                         2.10
                        2.3025                                                                                         2.08



                                                                                                         Min LogLoss
          Min LogLoss


                        2.3000
                                                                                                                       2.06
                        2.2975
                        2.2950                                                                                         2.04
                        2.2925                                                                                         2.02
                        2.2900
                                                                                                                       2.00
                        2.2875
                                  3.0   3.5   4.0    4.5        5.0     5.5   6.0       6.5    7.0                            3.0    3.5       4.0     4.5         5.0     5.5   6.0   6.5   7.0
                                                              Log2(L)                                                                                            Log2(L)

Figure 16: In (Megatron) Transformer trained on Common Crawl, deeper does worse initially (Left)
but eventually does better (Right).


L.3    W HAT H APPENS IN A T RANSFORMER ?

Because transformers have block depth 2, as discussed in appendix J.4, we have plenty of reasons to
suspect that no parametrization of (learning rate, block multiplier) will be able to robustly transfer
hyperparameters across depth for transformers.
Here we do a large scale experiment using Megatron trained on Common Crawl and catalogue
our observations.30 In summary, in our particular  √ setup (which should be close to most large
language model pretraining), we see that the 1/ L scaling seems to transfer hyperparameters at
the end of training (Figure 17(Right)). However, we also see that 1) deeper does worse in initial
training (Figure 16(Left)), and 2) optimal hyperparameters scale like Θ(1) in the middle of training
(Figure 17(Left)).√Combined with the theoretical insights of Appendix J.4, this leads us to conclude
that while the 1/ L scaling can potentially be practically useful in transformer training, it is likely
to be brittle to architectural and algorithmic changes, or even simple things like training time.
In fact, we observe that transformers are insensitive to the block multiplier a (Figure 15), so that the
only relevant hyperparameter is really just learning rate. Thus, empirically measuring the scaling
trend of the optimal learning rate, as done in modern large scale pretraining, can be a practically
more robust way to transfer hyperparameters.
Here L is the number of transformer layers, each of which consists of an attention layer and an MLP
layer (each of which has depth 2).
L.4    F EATURE D IVERSITY

In this section, we empirically verify our claims about feature diversity exponent (Claims 5.4
and 5.5). We use the same setup as in Appendix L.2, i.e., we train deep residual networks of
width n = 256 on CIFAR-10 dataset with Adam and batch size 64. In Figure 18, we compare
   30
      We train the models for 3900 steps, using cosine decay schedule with 500 warmup steps. We use a sequence
length of 4096, batch size 256, resulting in approximately 4B tokens per training run.


                                                                                                     46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         batch=327680:360448
                                                                                                               batch=950272:983040
                   2.50                                                                         L = 2k , k =
                          L = 2k , k =                                                2.4         3.0          6.0
                   2.45       3.0        6.0
                              4.0        7.0                                                      4.0          7.0
                   2.40                                                                           5.0
                              5.0                                                     2.3
                   2.35


                                                                            LogLoss
         LogLoss
                   2.30                                                               2.2
                   2.25
                   2.20                                                               2.1
                   2.15
                                                                                      2.0
                   2.10
                          3         4    5       6     7      8   9   10                    4            6           8       10      12
                                               Log2( /1e-4)                                                      Log2( L /1e-4)

Figure 17: In the middle of (Megatron) transformer training, optimal learning  √ rate is approximately
                                                                                                  √
invariant (Left), while at the end of training, it approximately scales like 1/ L. However, the 1/ L
scaling transfers the maximum viable learning rate better in either case.


two parametrizations, Depth-µP (α = γ = 1/2) and the ODE parametrization (α, γ) = (1, 0). We
                   ⌊(λ+ϵ)L⌋              ⌊λL⌋        def
measure xt           − xt       = d(ϵ) at t = 1000 for the two parametrizations and varying depth.
For each parametrization and depth L, we rescale function d by multiplying a constant c such that
c · d(1/256) = 1, and then plot the rescaled function c · d for a clean presentation. One can observe
clearly that Depth-µP has feature diversity exponent (almost) 1/2 for any L, while the curves for
ODE parametrization move from ϵ1/2 to ϵ when L grows. This exactly fits our theory that Depth-
µP maximizes the feature diversity, while other parametrizations (even with feature learning) have
smaller feature diversity exponents that should go to 0 in the infinite depth limit.
Growth along with L and t. In Figure 19, we measure d(ϵ) at t = 100, 500, 1000, and rescale
it by dividing additional ϵ0.5 and a constant c such that d(1/256)
                                                            c·ϵ0.5   = 1, and then plot the rescaled
function d/(c · ϵ0.5 ) for a clean comparison between d and ϵ0.5 . We observe that for both Depth-µP
and ODE parametrization, the slopes of the curves grow along with L and t. The growth along
t can be explained by the cumulative correlation between layers. The growth along L for ODE
parametrization is because the independent components between nearby layers decrease when L
grows. We do not have a clear understanding for the growth along L for Depth-µP and we leave it
as a future work.

Absolute value activation increases feature diversity. In Figure 20, we plot the same curves
as in Figure 19 but comparing ReLU activation and absolute value activation under Depth-µP. We
observe that the slope of the curves for absolute value activation is smaller than ReLU activation. It
matches our theory in Appendix J that absolute value activation increases feature diversity.

M     A DDITIONAL FIGURES FOR H YPERPARAMETER T RANSFER E XPERIMENTS


                                                                           47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        = 1/2                                                          =1
Scaled ||xt( + )L xt L ||
                            15.0                                      15.0()                          ()      L = 2k , k =
                                                                                                                        8
                            12.5                                      12.5                                              9
                            10.0                                      10.0                                              10
                                                                                                                        11
                             7.5                                       7.5                                              12
                             5.0                                       5.0                                              13
                             2.5                                ( ) 2.5
                                                                  1/2                                    ( )
                                                                                                          1/2

                             0.0                                       0.0
                                   0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06      0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06


Figure 18: Difference between feature at layer ⌊λL⌋ and feature at layer ⌊(λ + ϵ)L⌋ as a curve of ϵ
for width n = 256 and varying depths. For a clean presentation, each curve is scaled by a constant
so it always passes (1/256, 1). The feature diversity exponent κ depends on the growth of the curve
when L → ∞. For Depth-µP (left), the curve is always close to ϵ1/2 , meaning κ = 1/2. For ODE
parametrization (right), the curve shifts from ϵ1/2 to ϵ when L grows, indicating its κ goes to 0 in
the infinite depth limit.


                                            t = 100                                    t = 500                                    t = 1000
                        3.0                                                                                                                                log(L)
                                                                   3.0                                         3.0                                         8
    Scaled Norm / 0.5


                        2.5                                        2.5                                         2.5                                         9
                                                                                                                                                           10
                        2.0                                        2.0                                         2.0                                         11
                                                                                                                                                           12
                        1.5                                        1.5                                         1.5                                         13
                        1.0                                        1.0                                         1.0                                         0.5
                                                                   0.5                                         0.5                                         1.0
                              0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06         0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06          0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06



Figure 19: Same setup as Figure 18 but at step t = 100, 500, 1000, and each curve is scaled by
dividing a constant and additional ϵ1/2 so it always passes (1/256, 1). The curve indicating feature
diversity exponent κ exactly 1/2 should be a horizontal line at 1. For Depth-µP (α = 0.5), the
curves are almost horizontal. For ODE parametrization (α = 1), slopes of the curves are larger with
larger L and larger t.


                                            t = 100                                     t = 500                                    t = 1000
                    1.125                                                                                      1.25                                        log(L)
                    1.100                                          1.15                                                                                    8
                                                                                                               1.20
Scaled Norm / 0.5


                                                                                                                                                           9
                    1.075                                          1.10                                        1.15                                        10
                    1.050                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                               1.10                                        12
                    1.025                                          1.05                                                                                    13
                                                                                                               1.05
                    1.000                                          1.00                                                                                    Abs
                                                                                                               1.00                                        ReLU
                              0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06          0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06          0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06



Figure 20: Same setup as Figure 19, but comparing Depth-µP with ReLU activation and absolute
value activation. Each curve is scaled by dividing a constant and ϵ1/2 so it always passes (1/256, 1).
The curve indicating feature diversity exponent κ exactly 1/2 should be a horizontal line at 1. For
both activations, slopes of curves are small, but growing along with L and t. The slopes with absolute
value activation (ϕ = Abs) are slower than the slopes with ReLU activation (ϕ = ReLU), indicating
feature diversity is higher with absolute value activation.



                                                                                           48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   step=0             step=1000          step=2000         step=3000           step=4000
          0.60
LogLoss


          0.55
          0.50
                 step=5000            step=6000          step=7000         step=8000           step=9000
             0
   LogLoss


             1   step=10000           step=11000        step=12000        step=13000           step=14000
             0
   LogLoss


             1
             2   step=15000           step=16000        step=17000        step=18000           step=19000
             0
   LogLoss


             1
             2
                 step=20000           step=21000        step=22000        step=23000           step=24000
             0
   LogLoss


             2
                 step=25000           step=26000        step=27000        step=28000           step=29000
             0
   LogLoss


             2
                 step=30000           step=31000        step=32000        step=33000           step=34000
             0
   LogLoss


             2

                  0.0     2.5          0.0   2.5         0.0   2.5          0.0   2.5           0.0   2.5
                 Log( /1e-3)          Log( /1e-3)       Log( /1e-3)       Log( /1e-3)          Log( /1e-3)

                        Figure 21: Same as fig. 11 (Up, Depth-µP) with multiple time slices.


                                                        49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       step=0          step=1000           step=2000           step=3000           step=4000
           1.0
LogLoss


           0.8
           0.6
                   step=5000           step=6000           step=7000           step=8000           step=9000
 LogLoss


            0

            1      step=10000          step=11000          step=12000          step=13000          step=14000
            0
 LogLoss


            1
            2      step=15000          step=16000          step=17000          step=18000          step=19000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                   step=20000          step=21000          step=22000          step=23000          step=24000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                   step=25000          step=26000          step=27000          step=28000          step=29000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                   step=30000          step=31000          step=32000          step=33000          step=34000
            0
 LogLoss


            2

                   0            10     0            10     0            10     0            10     0            10
                 Log( × L /1e-3)     Log( × L /1e-3)     Log( × L /1e-3)     Log( × L /1e-3)     Log( × L /1e-3)

Figure 22: Same as fig. 11 (Middle, Standard Parametrization with γ = 1) with multiple time slices.


                                                            50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   step=0      step=1000       step=2000        step=3000         step=4000
           0.8
LogLoss


           0.6
                 step=5000     step=6000       step=7000        step=8000         step=9000
 LogLoss


            0

            1    step=10000    step=11000      step=12000       step=13000        step=14000
            0
 LogLoss


            1
            2    step=15000    step=16000      step=17000       step=18000        step=19000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                 step=20000    step=21000      step=22000       step=23000        step=24000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                 step=25000    step=26000      step=27000       step=28000        step=29000
            0
 LogLoss


            2
                 step=30000    step=31000      step=32000       step=33000        step=34000
            0
 LogLoss


            2

                   5     0       5     0         5     0          5     0           5     0
                 Log( /1e-3)   Log( /1e-3)     Log( /1e-3)     Log( /1e-3)        Log( /1e-3)

Figure 23: Same as fig. 11 (Bottom, Standard Prameterization with no scaling, α = 0, γ = 0) with
multiple time slices.


                                               51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       step=0         step=1000          step=2000          step=3000   step=4000
             1.0
  LogLoss


             0.8
             0.6
                   step=5000          step=6000          step=7000          step=8000   step=9000
             0.5
LogLoss


             0.0
             0.5
                   step=10000         step=11000         step=12000        step=13000   step=14000
              0
   LogLoss


              1
              2    step=15000         step=16000         step=17000        step=18000   step=19000
              0
   LogLoss


              2
                   step=20000         step=21000         step=22000        step=23000   step=24000
              0
   LogLoss


              2
                   step=25000         step=26000         step=27000        step=28000   step=29000
              0
   LogLoss


              2
                   step=30000         step=31000         step=32000        step=33000   step=34000
              0
   LogLoss


              2

                   5        0         5        0        5        0         5        0   5        0
                       Log(a)             Log(a)            Log(a)             Log(a)       Log(a)

                                Figure 24: Same as fig. 14 with multiple time slices.


                                                         52
