Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S IGNED B INARIZATION : U NLOCKING E FFICIENCY
T HROUGH R EPETITION -S PARSITY T RADE -O FF
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Efficient inference of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on resource-constrained
         edge devices is essential. Quantization and sparsity are key algorithmic techniques
         that translate to repetition and sparsity within tensors at the hardware-software
         interface. This paper introduces the concept of repetition-sparsity trade-off that
         helps explain computational efficiency during inference. We propose Signed Bi-
         narization, a unified co-design framework that synergistically integrates hardware-
         software systems, quantization functions, and representation learning techniques
         to address this trade-off. Our results demonstrate that Signed Binarization is more
         accurate than binarization with the same number of non-zero weights. Detailed
         analysis indicates that signed binarization generates a smaller distribution of effec-
         tual (non-zero) parameters nested within a larger distribution of total parameters,
         both of the same type, for a DNN block. Finally, our approach achieves a 26%
         speedup on real hardware, doubles energy efficiency, and reduces density by 2.8x
         compared to binary methods for ResNet 18, presenting an alternative solution for
         deploying efficient models in resource-limited environments.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Despite significant strides in accuracy, the burgeoning complexity and resource demands of deep
learning models pose challenges for their widespread adoption across a wide range of domains (He
et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020; Graves et al., 2013; Jain et al., 2022; Mandlekar et al., 2021). This
requires the development of innovative techniques to enhance DNN efficiency during inference on
edge devices. Two such techniques have been studied extensively: binarization and sparsity. Bina-
rization, a form of quantization, results in weight repetition as only two values appear repeatedly in
the weight tensor (Courbariaux et al., 2015). This approach significantly trims the memory footprint
of the weight tensor, thereby decreasing memory I/O during inference (Hegde et al., 2018). In con-
trast, sparsity leads to zero weight values. Since anything multiplied by zero is zero, weight sparsity
leads to ineffectual multiplications (Wu et al., 2021). This approach reduces memory I/O during
inference by not reading activations that would be multiplied by zero weights (Gong et al., 2020).
Thus, both these techniques are geared towards reducing memory I/O during inference.
DNN inference efficiency is usually achieved by leveraging either binarization or sparsity. Ternary
introduces sparsity to binary by introducing an additional zero weight in conjunction to binary
weights. Ternary was conceived with the reasonable assumption that transitioning from binary to
ternary models would only minimally impact inference latency due to the effect of zero weights (Li
et al., 2016). However, advances in the contemporary hardware-software systems have revealed a
substantial increase in latency during such transitions (Prabhakar et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022).
This paper introduces the concept of the repetition-sparsity trade-off, a phenomenon that explains
the inference efficiency of binary and ternary weight quantization. A traditional binary network
chooses maximization of weight repetition while being ignorant of weight sparsity, whereas a ternary
network introduces weight sparsity at the expense of weight repetition. For instance, transitioning
from binary to ternary networks increases the number of possible unique 3x3 2D filters from 512
(29 ) to 19683 (39 ). This makes it exponentially harder to extract efficiency using filter repetition.
The conventional approach to deploying efficient DNNs has largely been a two-stage process: train-
ing the DNN with binarization or ternarization (Bai et al., 2018), followed by formulating a system
design that reduces memory I/O by leveraging both weight repetition and/or sparsity (Hegde et al.,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: On the left: The conventional, isolated approach where hardware-software systems and
quantization methods are designed separately leading to inefficient inference. On the right: The
Signed Binarization approach, a unified design framework, performs quantization-system co-design
to address the repetition-sparsity trade-off, thereby enhancing computational efficiency. Extended
diagram in Supplementary A.

2018). This partitioned design approach has revealed a pitfall: increased memory I/O during in-
ference due to the repetition-sparsity trade-off. However, recent advancements in DNN inference
systems can now exploit repetition and sparsity to improve efficiency as shown in (Prabhakar et al.,
2021; Fu et al., 2022). To this end, this paper proposes an elegant, full-stack, quantization-system
co-design framework called Signed Binarization . The foundational concept of this framework cen-
ters on local binarization, which ultimately results in global ternarization. It is designed with a deep
understanding of the repetition-sparsity trade-off. Signed Binarization re-imagines different levels
of stack working together in synergy to enhance computational efficiency during inference while
retaining the model’s accuracy: a) co-design with SOTA systems, called signed binary kernels, that
exploit both repetition and sparsity during DNN inference; b) it introduces signed binary quantiza-
tion functions that cause sparsity without decreasing repetition; c) it offers insights for representa-
tion learning with signed binary EDE that influences latent full-precision weights during training to
improve accuracy. This allows us to reap significant benefits of exploiting sparsity during DNN in-
ference, as shown in (Wang, 2020; Chen et al., 2019), while retaining benefits caused by repetition.
In this paper, we present the Signed Bina-
rization framework to improve the efficiency
of DNN inference by identifying and address-
ing the trade-off between repetition and spar-
sity. Thereby, encouraging a collaborative de-
sign between different layers of the computa-
tional stack to enhance efficiency. Compared
to binary, signed-binary co-design improves en-
ergy efficiency, reduces latency, and enhance
the performance of DNN inference, pushing
the Pareto front by providing higher accuracy
when both have comparable number of effec-
tual (non-zero valued) parameters as seen in
Figure 2. Based on our analysis and empiri-
cal evidence, we envision that the Signed Bina-
rization framework has potential to positively     Figure 2: Binary vs. Signed-Binary ResNet on
shape the evolution of more efficient and high-    ImageNet: The pronounced spread indicates that
performing deep learning models.                   signed binarization comprehensively outperforms
                                                   traditional binary methods in various aspects. It
2   BACKGROUND                                     ensures competitive accuracy and pushes Pareto
                                                   front, exhibiting a +2.5% improvement when both
Quantization Quantization in deep learning         methods employ the comparable number of ef-
involves mapping of real-valued numbers to a       fectual (non-zero) parameters. Moreover, our
select set of discrete values to streamline and    method enhances inference efficiency, achieving
optimize computations. The Binary Quantiza-        a 26% speedup, doubling energy efficiency, and
tion technique assigns any real-valued number      reducing density by 2.8x for the same backbone.
to either +1 or -1 (Courbariaux et al., 2015).
The primary objective behind this is to simplify operations in DL hardware, turning multiply-and-
accumulates (MACs) into mere accumulate operations (Rastegari et al., 2016). Conversely, Ternary


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Concept Diagram on the left: The diagram shows the comparison of Binary, Ternary, and
Signed Binary Quantization in terms of visual representation of their quantized weights. Qualitative
Evaluation on the right: The table qualitatively evaluates them in terms of weight sparsity, weight
repetition, and inference efficiency.

Quantization designates values to +1, -1, or 0 (Li et al., 2016). This determination is based on a
threshold, ∆. Values exceeding ∆ are assigned +1, those below receive -1, while others become
zero. For both quantization methods, the output values can undergo scaling using a factor, α (Bulat
& Tzimiropoulos, 2019; Bulat et al., 2019).

Weight Sparsity Weight Sparsity in DNN implies that there is repetition of weight with a value
equal to zero. The basic idea is that since 0 × x = 0 for any real-valued scalar x, if the weight
is zero, the multiplication is ineffectual and should be skipped (Gong et al., 2020). Sparsity in
weights is static during inference (Dai et al., 2020). Therefore, if the value of weight is zero, we
can choose not to load activations corresponding to that weight (Qin et al., 2020). This can lead
to a reduction in data movement, memory accesses, and MACs thereby reducing computations and
hence resulting in efficient DNN inference. This approach has been effective on ASICs and general-
purpose devices (Hegde et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2020; Gong et al., 2020).

Weight Repetition Extended background in supplementary C. Quantization of weights leads to
the same value being repeated again and again in the weight tensor. This phenomenon is known as
weight repetition (Hegde et al., 2018; Sze et al., 2020). Since the weights are fixed during DNN
inference (Dai et al., 2020), this leads to opportunities for improving efficiency during inference
with respect to time and energy by exploiting the repetition of weights and reducing memory ac-
cesses (Sze et al., 2020). This concept was first introduced in BNN (Courbariaux et al., 2016)
that talked about filter-repetition and demonstrated in UCNN (Hegde et al., 2018) that improved
efficiency on ASICs by reordering the weights and thus reorders activations to reduce arithmetic
operations. Recent work (Prabhakar et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022) extends this idea even further by
using both repetition and sparsity for efficient inference.

3   R EPETITION -S PARSITY T RADE - OFF
Consider a convolutional layer with typical 3×3 filters. Binary models, which have 29 unique fil-
ters, aim for efficiency by maximizing weight repetition and ignoring sparsity. In contrast, ternary
models employ 39 unique filters, introducing sparsity for increased expressivity (Li et al., 2016)
but inadvertently causing an exponential decrease in repetition. Recent works (Hegde et al., 2018;
Prabhakar et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022) show a significant slowdown in inference when using ternary
when compared with binary due to decreased repetition. This extends to bit-utilization; binary sys-
tems can potentially be represented by a single bit, whereas ternary systems require two bits due to
the inclusion of zero-valued weights. Moreover, recent findings indicate that runtime doubles when
transitioning from one to two bits during the deployment of ResNet18 on ARM CPUs, showcasing
the influence of bit-width distinction on inference time (Cowan et al., 2020). These differences can
be encapsulated by what we call the repetition-sparsity trade-off, that is crucial during inference of
these models. Sign-Binarization aims to address this trade-off to achieve efficient inference while
retaining model accuracy. It aims to maintain the number of unique 3x3 filters using two’s comple-
ment and utilize only one bit during inference, aspiring to combine the merits of both repetition and
sparsity for efficient inference while retaining competitive accuracy.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     S IGNED B INARIZATION
The objective is to create a quantization-system co-design method that acknowledges the trade-
off between repetition & sparsity by performing local binarization, ultimately resulting in global
ternarization.
4.1     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Conventional k-bit quantization schemes offer 2k unique weight choices per element, creating a
dense setup. Conversely, the (k+1)-bit scheme provides a sparse setup with 2k + 1 choices, intro-
ducing zero weight and generating ineffectual multiplications. This disparity places the two schemes
at opposite ends of the repetition-sparsity spectrum. The proposed signed-binary framework seeks
to bridge this divide by maintaining the k bit-width while adding sparsity and preserving weight
repetition. It does this by replacing one of the 2k weights with zero, which forms 2k unique quanti-
zation functions, fostering k-bit quantization. This trade-off, most prominent at k=1, translates the
dense scheme to binary and the sparse to ternary quantization, yielding signed-binary options with
quantization function value sets {1,0} and {0,-1}. Acting as a gradient, this strategy mimics binary
quantization locally while aligning with ternary quantization globally, paving the way for signed-
binary’s quantization-software system co-design, wherein the region of signed binary quantization
is designed collaboratively with the signed binary kernel to minimize memory I/O, thereby boosting
the efficiency over traditional binary networks.
Let the convolutional layer have a R × S kernel size and C input channels and has K such filters.
Let Ct the tile size in C dimension, i.e., a sub-dimension of C, effectively partitioning the filter into
smaller blocks. The quantization function takes latent full-precision weights W as input and outputs
the quantized weight Wquant . We define the region to be sign-binarized as R × S × Ct where
Ct ≤ C.The quantized weight Wquant would be the product of the sign-factor β and the bitmap U.
                                 Q : W → Wquant ;       Wquant = β U                                 (1)
                              R×S×Ct                                       R×S×Ct
                     ∀W ∈ R            ;   β ∈ {+1, −1};       U ∈ {0, 1}                            (2)

4.2     M ETHOD

Developing an efficient signed-binarization framework requires a redesign due to its distinct nature
from existing methods, as a latent FP weight can be assigned at any of 2k unique signed-quantization
functions. The challenges arise from the need to design signed-binary quantization functions, that
enable the model to learn meaningful representations. Signed-binary quantization must be com-
patible with signed-binary kernels to observe real improvement in efficiency. Local binarization
techniques must accommodate a global ternarization strategy, which presents additional challenges
such as determining suitable regions for local binarization and assigning these regions to their des-
ignated signed binary quantization functions. Finally, we need to explore techniques to fine-tune
latent full-precision weights during the training phase to bolster model accuracy.
In response, our approach is outlined through systematic ablation studies on ResNets trained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset, summarized in Tables 1-5 along with inference in Section 6.1. The elements in
grey represent our default configurations for the method. (For in-depth insights into our experimental
setup and implementation details, please refer to the supplementary section F). The ensuing sections
delve deeper into each of the aforementioned components and challenges, offering a comprehensive
view of our method’s evolution and its adaptations to various configurations.

4.2.1    E FFICIENT INFERENCE WITH CO - DESIGN
Co-designing Efficient Signed Binary Kernel: To observe efficiency improvement, the signed
binary kernel needs to be attuned to the repetition-sparsity trade-off. Our approach is to co-design
a signed binary kernel with signed binary quantization to fully exploit both repetition and sparsity
during inference. The key insight is that recent work (Fu et al., 2022; Prabhakar et al., 2021; Hegde
et al., 2018) splits the dot products of input and weights into smaller blocks via tiling to improve data
locality during inference. We use SumMerge (Prabhakar et al., 2021) as the signed binary kernel
such that the signed binary quantization’s size Ct is a multiple of signed binary kernel’s tile size,
i.e., Ct = max(C, kC ′ )∀ k ∈ Z+ and C ′ = signed binary kernel’s tile size. This allows a single
processing step of the kernel to see one signed binary quantization function leading to efficiency.

                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Arch        FP        T       B        SB           %{0, 1} filters    %{0, −1} filters      Acc
 ResNet20      92.10     90.86   90.20    90.05                0                    1           88.84
 ResNet32      92.90     92.03   91.51    91.55              0.25                 0.75          89.32
 ResNet44      93.30     92.40   91.93    91.98               0.5                  0.5          90.05
 ResNet56      93.63     92.90   92.42    92.52              0.75                 0.25          89.30
 ResNet110     93.83     93.33   92.64    92.68                1                    0           89.07

Table 1: Binary and Signed-Binary achieve comp-     Table 2: Equal percentage of positive and negative
-arable accuracy on CIFAR-10 ablations.             signed-binary regions leads to best model accuracy.

  Signed Binary EDE      Acc          Signed Binary Region     Acc         Signed Binary ∆        Acc
  Disabled               88.4         Ct = C                   88.6        0.01 × max |W|        90.01
  Enabled                88.7         Ct = C/2                 87.9        0.05 × max |W|        90.05

Table 3: Signed Binary EDE         Table 4: Variation of Ct leads         Table 5: Signed-Binary is not sen-
improves accuracy.                 to competitive accuracy.               sitive to the choice of ∆.

Ablations for Signed-Binary: We conduct experiments by training ResNets on CIFAR-10 dataset
for the method. Tables 2-5 use ResNet20 trained on CIFAR10. The default configuration for our
method is marked in grey .

4.2.2   D ESIGNING S IGNED B INARY Q UANTIZATION F UNCTIONS
Signed Binary Quant Functions: Our method involves the strategic use of two distinct quantization
functions. In this section, we intend to meticulously design these functions, characterized by the
value sets {0,1} where the sign-factor β1 is equal to 1, and {0,-1} where the sign-factor β−1 is
-1. The scaling factor αi mirrors βi where i = ±1. Following (Zhu et al., 2016), we define the
threshold value as ∆ = 0.05 × max(|W|). To assess the efficacy and sensitivity of the chosen
thresholds, we experiment with different ∆s using signed-binary quantization (see Section 4.2.2) to
find stable performance across various configurations, as depicted in Table 5. Functions are defined
as:
                                        α1    if W ≥ ∆ and β = 1
                                    (                                    )
                            quant
                         W        =    α−1 if W ≤ −∆ and β = −1                                   (3)
                                         0    Otherwise

                             α1 × ∂W∂L
                                                                            
                                      quant             if W > ∆ and β = 1
                       ∂L                                                    
                          =   −α−1 × ∂W∂L
                                        quant           if W < −∆ and β = −1                              (4)
                       ∂W 
                               1 × ∂W∂L                 Otherwise
                                                                             
                                     quant


Intra-Filter Signed-Binary Quant In this section, we delve deeper into signed binary quantiza-
tion by introducing variations in Ct with respect to the constant value C, aiming to identify the
optimal setting for Ct . We design this approach to emphasize the changes in performance across
different thresholds. Table 4 assesses the impact on representation quality by adjusting the Ct values
during the training. The result shows that intra-filter signed binary co-design preserve a competitive
level of representation quality even with a reduced Ct and setting of Ct = C works best.

Inter-Filter Signed-Binary Quant Building on intra-filter, where Ct = C, this is the simplest
signed binary quantization, and we term it as Inter-Filter Signed binary quantization. In essence,
this method involves assigning each filter to one of two distinct signed binary quantization func-
tions, enabling an efficient representation as Ct = C. We contrast it with binary and ternary quan-
tization schemes in an apples-to-apples comparison. Table 1 illustrates ResNets of varying depths
trained using different quantization schemes. The signed-binary quantization maintains comparable
accuracy against traditional quantization approaches across different architectures.

Value Assignment of Signed-Binary Quant Functions To fine-tune our network’s performance,
it’s crucial to examine how different value assignments within filters affect accuracy. This exper-
iment focuses on studying the effects of varying the proportions of filters with {0,1} and {0,-1}


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


value assignments. As illustrated in Table 2, we explore the delicate balance between positive and
negative binary values to find the best way to optimize network performance. The data indicates
that having an equal mix of these values is more beneficial, clearly outperforming the methods that
use only a single type of sparse quantized function. This observation underscores the importance of
using both positive and negative binary regions to achieve effective learning of representations.

4.2.3    L EARNING BETTER REPRESENTATIONS
Signed Binary EDE during Backward Propagation: Binary networks typically exhibit a promi-
nent peak of latent full-precision weights at zero, a consequence of employing a sign function. This
leads to fluctuations in latent weight assignments and ensuing instability, leading to degrading the
model’s accuracy. To counteract this, EDE gradually approximates the sign function’s derivative
during the backward propagation phase, enhancing both the update capability and gradient accu-
racy (Qin et al., 2021). In contrast, signed-binary co-design abstains from using zero-value thresh-
olding for local binarization, manifesting instead two distinct peaks at non-zero values of ±∆ (see
Figure 5b). This necessitates the development of a new method to prevent gradient information
loss during backward propagation for such networks. Responding to these challenges, we introduce
Signed binary EDE, a method specifically tailored to stabilize the fluctuations of latent full-precision
weights in sign-binary around ∆ = ±0.05 max(W), thereby fostering improved representations as
delineated in Table 3.
                                                                                           i
                                                                                               ×log Tmax
                operates by first determining t and k using the equations t = Tmin 10
Signed binary EDE                                                                                  ,
                                                                                        N    Tmin
           1                                                                                −1
k = max t , 1 where i is the current epoch and N is the total number of epochs, Tmin = 10 and
Tmax = 101 . Subsequently, we adapt g ′ (·) for sign-binary: g ′ (x) = kt 1 − tanh2 (t(x ± ∆)) , to

                                            ∂L
compute the gradients with respect to w as ∂w   = ∂Q∂Lw (w)
                                                            g ′ (w)

5     S IGNED B INARY C O - DESIGN P USHES THE PARETO -F RONTIER
In this section, we evaluate the efficacy of signed binary in preserving the quality of learned rep-
resentations when transitioning from the conventional binarization technique. Initially, we train
ResNets on the CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets using signed binary, and benchmark the results
against existing state-of-the-art methods in subsection 5.1. Additionally, subsection 5.2 examines
the latent full-precision and quantized weights in detail to provide a holistic understanding of the
retained representational capacity of the trained model.

5.1     C OMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS
To ascertain the true poten-
tial of signed binary code-
sign, we compare it with ex-
isting SOTA methods.         We
benchmark on CIFAR10 and
ImageNet datasets by training
ResNet-{20,32} and ResNet-
{18,34} models. Weight Spar-
sity leads to effectual and in-
effectual multiplications caused
by non-zero and zero-valued pa-
rameters respectively (Wu et al.,
2021). Conversely, model pa-
rameters are of two types, ef-
fectual (or non-zero valued)
parameters and ineffectual (or
zero valued) parameters. Since
only effectual parameters lead to   Figure 4: Comparison of Signed binary and conventional bi-
computation during inference,       nary methods on CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets. Signed bi-
we compare different binary         nary pushes the Pareto frontier, providing superior accuracy with
methods on two axes: model ac-      respect to effectual parameters and exhibiting a significant reduc-
curacy on the Y-axis and effec-     tion in effectual parameters of equivalent models.
tual binary model parameters on


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Quantized Weights                    (b) Latent Full Precision Weights

Figure 5: On the left: Quantized Weights, are depicted, illustrating a distribution reminiscent of
ternary networks but with weights distinctively segregated across filters, enhancing weight-repetition
and inference efficiency. On the right: Latent Full Precision Weights in a signed-binary conv
block maintain a blue distribution akin to binary’s Laplacian. In sign-binary, total parameters can
be divided between positive and negative signed-binary filters. These parameters can be subdivided
into non-zero valued effectual and zero-valued ineffectual ones. Notably, while the total parame-
ter’s looks like binary’s zero-mean Laplace distribution, individual filters do not. The effectual and
ineffectual parameters’ green-red and red-green distributions resemble Laplace and Gaussian distri-
butions, respectively. Sign Binary reduces computations during inference when compared to binary,
as it reduces effectual parameters from blue to green-red distribution.

the X-axis (refer to supplementary F for details and baselines). As shown in Figure 4, signed-binary
exhibits Pareto optimality against state-of-the-art methods. It achieves a +0.7% and +2.5% increase
in accuracy on the CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets, respectively, coupled with 1.4× and 1.5× re-
duction in effectual parameters respectively. Concurrently, it realizes approximately a ∼ 2.5× and
∼ 2.8× decrease in effectual parameters for equivalent models on the respective datasets. These
results emphasize the potential of signed binary co-design in creating efficient and accurate models.


5.2   V ISUALIZING L ATENT FP AND Q UANTIZED W EIGHTS

Latent FP weights. Binarization quantization leads to a zero-mean Laplacian distribution of latent
full-precision weights (Xu et al., 2021). ResNet18 trained on Imagenet in Figure 5, we observe
that despite the pronounced sparsity introduced by signed binary quantization, the distribution of
latent FP weights across an entire convolutional block resembles a zero-mean Laplacian distribution.
Signed-binary filters are neither zero mean, nor exhibit a Laplacian distribution (supplementary I).
This shows that even if individual filters don’t align with a zero-mean or Laplacian distribution,
collectively, the convolution block resembles these characteristics. Moreover, the presence of four
distinctive peaks overlaying Laplacian resembling distribution for full-precision latent weights are
due to: (a) Two peaks at the extremes appear because of clamped weights at +1 and -1, and (b) two
intermediate peaks arising from the employment of threshold functions defined at ±∆, analogous to
zero-valued peak observed in binary network due to the use of sign quant function.
Quantized weights. We investigate the distribution in quantized weights of a trained signed-binary
model by plotting the percentage distribution of quantized signed-binary convolutional blocks in
ResNet18 trained on Imagenet. Figure 5 reveals a roughly consistent, equal proportion of both pos-
itive and negative weights. This observation of a roughly equal proportion of positive and negative
weights is also observed in ternary quantization (Zhu et al., 2016). However, a crucial distinction
arises in the distribution of positive and negative weights within a convolutional layer. Like ternary,
both positive and negative valued weights are present within a layer. However, signed binary co-
design bifurcates them across different filters. This design decision improves inference efficiency.

6     S IGNED -B INARY C O - DESIGN IMPROVES I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY
In this section, we aim to demonstrate that switching from binary to signed binary leads to an in-
crease in inference efficiency. First, we demonstrate that signed-binary is more efficient than binary
and ternary because it acknowledges the repetition-sparsity trade-off. Next, we understand how the
presence of weight sparsity in a DNN leads to benefits during DNN inference. For these experi-
ments, we focus on signed-binary ResNet18 trained on ImageNet.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Signed Binary leads to efficient inference as it acknowledges repetition-sparsity
trade-off through quantization-system co-design: Visualizing inference in Section 6.1 when us-
ing recent systems Prabhakar et al. (2021); Fu et al. (2022). Weight repetition enables binary models
to skip work by re-using partial sums within and across filters. Signed-Binary, takes this even fur-
ther by reducing the number of effectual operations by leveraging sparsity while retaining repetition.
(Step by step explanation in Supp B)

6.1   E XPLOITING R EPETITION & S PARSITY WITH S IGNED B INARY

We posit that the performance of binary and ternary weight quantization methods in inference may
be hindered due to their neglect of the crucial repetition-sparsity trade-off. Weight sparsity allows
us to utilize upcoming sparse tensor operation technology to accelerate inference by skipping zeros
during inference (Wu et al., 2021). Concurrently, exploiting weight repetition leads to diminishing
arithmetic operations and data movement (Hegde et al., 2018). However, traditional binary networks
prioritize the maximization of weight repetition, overlooking the potential benefits of weight spar-
sity, while ternary networks induce weight sparsity but compromise on weight repetition. In contrast,
we hypothesize that signed binary co-design, being attuned to this trade-off, promises enhanced ef-
ficiency in actual device inference. To validate our hypothesis, we deploy quantized ResNet-18
models on Intel CPUs, rigorously measuring inference times under varying conditions.

Experimental Setup and Methodology We use SumMerge (Prabhakar et al., 2021) for perform-
ing inference of quantized and sparse DNNs on Intel CPUs (details in the supplementary D). All
experiments are conducted under identical test environments and methodologies. Within our ex-
periments utilizing SumMerge, we explore two distinct configurations: (1) with sparsity support
deactivated, the software does not distinguish between zero and non-zero weights, relying solely on
weight repetition; (2) with sparsity support activated, the software additionally omits computations
involving zero weights. We provide detailed analysis into both per-layer speedups and the aggregate
speedup across different quantization strategies relative to binary quantization.

Result and Analysis Please see Figures 6 and 7. We observe in Figure 7 that signed-binary is
consistently more efficient than binary and ternary for every quantized layer and the model overall
by 1.26x and 1.75x faster respectively, when exploiting both repetition and sparsity.
This result can be explained as follows: (A) When sparsity support is turned off : The software is
only relying on repeating values within the weight tensor for speedup. Because binary and signed-
binary have two unique values per convolutional filter, they take similar time for DNN inference.
Ternary is much slower as it has three unique values per convolution filter which makes extracting
efficiency by using weight repetition exponentially harder. (B) When sparsity support is turned
on: The software not only cares about the repeating values in the weight tensor but also skips
computations on zero weights to improve the runtime. Here we observe that ternary is slower than
binary, because the reduction in work due to sparsity is not able to compensate for the exponential
decrease in weight repetition. Our method, on the other hand, does not suffer from this problem and
is able to exploit weight repetition and weight sparsity to the fullest and is most efficient.

6.2   U NDERSTANDING BENEFITS OF S PARSITY DURING INFERENCE
In this section, we aim to understand the potential benefits of weight sparsity to a binary network
during inference. To do this, we count the number of quantized weights with zero values and divide
it by the total number of quantized weights to calculate the percentage of sparsity. We find that


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Efficiency Analysis wrt Binary ResNet18 on Intel CPU: Our study shows
signed-binary excelling in every convolutional layer, depicted by bars for signed-
binary: w/ sparsity support and w/o sparsity support ; ternary: w/ sparsity support and
w/o sparsity support ; and one for binary , indicating its 100% density. Please refer to Figure 5.
The inference computations for signed-binary w/o sparsity support is aligned with blue distribu-
tion, matching binary performance. On the other hand, sparsity support reduces computation to
green-red distribution. Because negative and positive valued quantized weights exist in separate
regions of the network by design (see Figure 3), signed-binary quantization retains repetition,
resulting in speedup.

signed-binary ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet has 65% sparsity. Since density is (1 - sparsity) (Wu
et al., 2021), ResNet-18 has 35% density (see Figure 5a). if we switch from conventional binary
to signed-binary, we decrease the density from 100% to 35%. We would like to leverage the low
density to reduce the amount of computation activity during inference:
Throughput In a model with low density, represented by 1/x, there is one effectual multiplication
for every x total multiplications. By eliminating the ineffectual computations and the time associated
with them, there is the potential to improve throughput by a factor of x (Emer et al., 2021). Given
that the signed-binary has a 35% aggregate density—meaning only 35% of the multiplications are
effectual—exploiting sparsity during inference can lead to a potential 2.86× increase in throughput
compared to dense binary {1,-1}. In practice, the speedup we observe on real hardware is in the
range 1.26x-1.75x as the support for unstructured sparsity on general-purpose devices is an active
area of research (Wu et al., 2021). This speedup is comparable to the speedup due to unstructured
sparsity on general-purpose devices in recent papers (Gong et al., 2020; Hegde et al., 2019).
Energy Reduction To estimate energy reduction due to the unstructured sparsity during inference,
we use the cycle-level micro-architectural simulator (Muñoz-Matrı́nez et al., 2021) of a sparsity
supporting ASIC (Qin et al., 2020). We take their publicly released code and use it under default
configuration (details in supplementary D). We observe that decreasing density from 100% to 35%
for one-bit ResNet 18 leads to a ∼2x reduction in energy during inference. Thus, switching from
binary to signed-binary would lead to significant improvements in power consumption on ASICs.
7   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
The paper introduces the concept of repetition-sparsity trade-off and proposes Signed Binary, a
quantization-system co-design framework that addresses this trade-off by performing local bina-
rization resulting in global ternarization. Signed Binary exhibit Pareto optimality compared to prior
binary methods, improving accuracy per effectual parameter and enhancing computational efficiency
during inference with respect to speed, energy, and density. However, signed binary requires training
from scratch, which can be time-consuming and computationally expensive. Additionally, the under-
studied repercussions of quantization and, consequently, signed binary quantization on model bias
warrant further exploration. This work focuses on quantized system co-design for standard back-
bones to address repetition sparsity trade-off. While specialized low-bit specific architectures (Guo
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) for signed binary are outside the scope of this co-design explo-
ration, we encourage future research to explore these architectures for signed binary. Despite these
limitations, Signed Binary presents a promising approach for training efficient models that are both
accurate and computationally efficient, particularly well-suited for applications where hardware re-
sources are limited, such as mobile devices and embedded systems.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide all the hyperparameters for the key experiments including instructions on how to train
the models in the supplementary E. Further, since our work is about quantization system co-design,
we provide all the hyperparameters and configurations to reproduce our inference experiments in
supplementary D. Finally, implementation details and baselines for our method can be found in
supplementary F.

R EFERENCES
Y. Bai, Y. X. Wang, and E. Liberty. Proxquant: Quantized neural networks via proximal operators.
   In ICLR’19, arXiv (2018), 2018.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. Xnor-net++: Improved binary neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.13863, 2019.
Adrian Bulat, Georgios Tzimiropoulos, Jean Kossaifi, and Maja Pantic. Improved training of binary
  networks for human pose estimation and image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05868,
  2019.
Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Eyeriss v2: A flexible accelerator for
  emerging deep neural networks on mobile devices. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected
  Topics in Circuits and Systems, 9(2):292–308, 2019.
M. Courbariaux, Y. Bengio, and J. P. David. Binaryconnect: Training deep neural networks with
 binary weights during propagations. In NIPS’15, 2015.
M. Courbariaux, I. Hubara, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio. Binarized neural networks:
 Training deep neural networks with weights and activations constrained to +1 or -1. In NIPS’16,
 2016.
M. Cowan, T. Moreau, T. Chen, J. Bornholt, and L. Ceze. Automatic generation of high-performance
 quantized machine learning kernels. In CGO’20, 2020.
Pengcheng Dai, Jianlei Yang, Xucheng Ye, Xingzhou Cheng, Junyu Luo, Linghao Song, Yiran
  Chen, and Weisheng Zhao. Sparsetrain: Exploiting dataflow sparsity for efficient convolutional
  neural networks training. In 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), pp.
  1–6. IEEE, 2020.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
   image database. In CVPR’09, 2009.
Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, Mirella Lapata, Ming Zhou, and Ke Xu. Learning to generate
  product reviews from attributes. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, volume 1, pp. 623–632,
  2017.
Joel Emer, Angshuman Parashar, Vivienne Sze, Po-An Tsai, and Yannan Nellie Wu. Sparse tensor
  accelerators: Abstraction and modeling. In ISCA Tutorial 2021, 2021.
Cheng Fu, Hanxian Huang, Bram Wasti, Chris Cummins, Riyadh Baghdadi, Kim Hazelwood, Yuan-
  dong Tian, Jishen Zhao, and Hugh Leather. Q-gym: An equality saturation framework for dnn
  inference exploiting weight repetition. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Parallel
  Architectures and Compilation Techniques, pp. 291–303, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruihao Gong, Xianglong Liu, Shenghu Jiang, Tianxiang Li, Peng Hu, Jiazhen Lin, Fengwei Yu, and
  Junjie Yan. Differentiable soft quantization: Bridging full-precision and low-bit neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4852–4861,
  2019.
Zhangxiaowen Gong, Houxiang Ji, Christopher W Fletcher, Christopher J Hughes, Sara Baghsorkhi,
  and Josep Torrellas. Save: Sparsity-aware vector engine for accelerating dnn training and infer-
  ence on cpus. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
  (MICRO), pp. 796–810. IEEE, 2020.
Alex Graves, Abdel rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recur-
  rent neural networks. In IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal process-
  ing, 2013.
Nianhui Guo, Joseph Bethge, Christoph Meinel, and Haojin Yang. Join the high accuracy club on
  imagenet with a binary neural network ticket. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12933, 2022.
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR’16,
  2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
K. Hegde, J. Yu, R. Agrawal, M. Yan, M. Pellauer, and C. Fletcher. Ucnn: Exploiting computational
  reuse in deep neural networks via weight repetition. In ISCA’18, 2018.
Kartik Hegde, Hadi Asghari-Moghaddam, Michael Pellauer, Neal Crago, Aamer Jaleel, Edgar
  Solomonik, Joel Emer, and Christopher W Fletcher. Extensor: An accelerator for sparse tensor
  algebra. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
  tecture, pp. 319–333, 2019.
Q. Hu, P. Wang, and J. Cheng. From hashing to cnns: Training binaryweight networks via hashing.
  In AAAI’18, 2018.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
Yash Jain, Chi Ian Tang, Chulhong Min, Fahim Kawsar, and Akhil Mathur. Collossl: Collaborative
  self-supervised learning for human activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive,
  Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 6(1):1–28, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical
  report, Citeseer, 2009.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. ffcv. https://github.com/libffcv/ffcv/, 2022.
Fengfu Li, Bo Zhang, and Bin Liu. Ternary weight networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04711,
  2016.
Xiaofan Lin, Cong Zhao, and Wei Pan. Towards accurate binary convolutional neural network.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Zechun Liu, Baoyuan Wu, Wenhan Luo, Xin Yang, Wei Liu, and Kwang-Ting Cheng. Bi-real net:
  Enhancing the performance of 1-bit cnns with improved representational capability and advanced
  training algorithm. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp.
  722–737, 2018.
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, and Andrew Y Ng. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural net-
  work acoustic models. In ICML’13, ICML’13, 2013.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
  Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. What matters in learning from offline
  human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.
Francisco Muñoz-Matrı́nez, José L. Abellán, Manuel E. Acacio, and Tushar Krishna. Stonne: En-
  abling cycle-level microarchitectural simulation for dnn inference accelerators. In 2021 IEEE
  International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2021.
H. Pouransari, Z. Tu, and O. Tuzel. Least squares binary quantization of neural networks. In
  CVPRW’20, 2020.
Rohan Prabhakar, Sachit Kuhar, Rohit Agrawal, Christopher J Hughes, and Christopher W Fletcher.
  Summerge: an efficient algorithm and implementation for weight repetition-aware dnn inference.
  In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Supercomputing, pp. 279–290, 2021.
Eric Qin, Ananda Samajdar, Hyoukjun Kwon, Vineet Nadella, Sudarshan Srinivasan, Dipankar Das,
  Bharat Kaul, and Tushar Krishna. Sigma: A sparse and irregular gemm accelerator with flexible
  interconnects for dnn training. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
  Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 58–70. IEEE, 2020.
Haotong Qin, Ruihao Gong, Xianglong Liu, Mingzhu Shen, Ziran Wei, Fengwei Yu, and Jingkuan
  Song. Forward and backward information retention for accurate binary neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2250–
  2259, 2021.
Haotong Qin, Xiangguo Zhang, Ruihao Gong, Yifu Ding, Yi Xu, and Xianglong Liu. Distribution-
  sensitive information retention for accurate binary neural network. International Journal of Com-
  puter Vision, 131(1):26–47, 2023.
M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi. Xnor-net: Imagenet classification using
 binary convolutional neural networks. In ECCV’16, 2016.
Vivienne Sze, Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, and Joel S Emer. Efficient processing of deep neural
  networks. Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture, 15(2):1–341, 2020.
Hanrui Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Spatten: Efficient sparse attention architecture with
  cascade token and head pruning. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance
  Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 97–110. IEEE, 2021.
Ziheng Wang. Sparsert: Accelerating unstructured sparsity on gpus for deep learning inference.
  In Proceedings of the ACM international conference on parallel architectures and compilation
  techniques, pp. 31–42, 2020.
Yannan Nellie Wu, Po-An Tsai, Angshuman Parashar, Vivienne Sze, and Joel S Emer. Sparseloop:
  An analytical, energy-focused design space exploration methodology for sparse tensor accelera-
  tors. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software
  (ISPASS), pp. 232–234. IEEE, 2021.
Zihan Xu, Mingbao Lin, Jianzhuang Liu, Jie Chen, Ling Shao, Yue Gao, Yonghong Tian, and
  Rongrong Ji. Recu: Reviving the dead weights in binary neural networks. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5198–5208, 2021.
Dongqing Zhang, Jiaolong Yang, Dongqiangzi Ye, and Gang Hua. Lq-nets: Learned quantization
  for highly accurate and compact deep neural networks. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Yichi Zhang, Zhiru Zhang, and Lukasz Lew. Pokebnn: A binary pursuit of lightweight accuracy.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12475–12485, 2022.
Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen, and Yuheng Zou. Dorefa-net: Train-
  ing low bitwidth convolutional neural networks with low bitwidth gradients. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.06160, 2016.
Chenzhuo Zhu, Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Trained ternary quantization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1612.01064, 2016.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    M ETHOD V ISUALIZATION


Figure 8: The unified co-design framework, known as the Signed Binary approach, effectively inte-
grates all components to address the repetition-sparsity trade-off, thereby enhancing computational
efficiency while maintaining competitive accuracy. Signed binary EDE leads to more meaning-
ful representations, Signed binary quantization balances repetition and sparsity, and Latent-Full-
Precision weights align to create a smaller Laplacian-like distribution, as shown in the green-red
color (as opposed to the blue-colored Laplacian-like distribution that constitutes for total parameters
similar to binary’s Laplacian). Finally, on the bottom, co-design with signed binary kernel leads to
reducing arithmetic operations, resulting in faster inference on real hardware.

B    V ISUALIZING E XPLOITATION OF R EPETITION AND S PARSITY


Figure 9: Visualization of repetition and sparsity during inference in modern systems: (1) Input
and two filters that need to be multified (2) naive multiplication of weights and activations to create
output 1 and output 2. (3) Re-ordering of weights and activations to simplify work within each
filter (and exploit intra filter repetition phenomenon (Hegde et al., 2018)) (3) Using partial sums to
reduce the work across filters (and exploit intra filter repetition phenomenon (Hegde et al., 2018))
(4) exploiting sparsity (by acknowledging repetition of zero weights as a special case of weight
repetition (Sze et al., 2020; Hegde et al., 2018; Prabhakar et al., 2021).

                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    E XTENDED BACKGROUND

Weight Repetition: Quantization of weights in DNN leads to the same value being repeated again
and again in the weight tensor. This phenomenon is known as weight repetition (Hegde et al., 2018).
Since the weights are fixed during DNN inference, this leads to opportunities for optimizations. The
objective is to improve efficiency during inference with respect to time and energy by exploiting the
repetition of weights and reducing memory accesses (Sze et al., 2020).
Using weight repetition for efficiency first originated in the BNN (Courbariaux et al., 2016) which
talked about the idea of filter repetition in BNNs for efficient inference. The authors highlight that
the number of unique filters possible in a binary setting is bounded by the filter size. This is explained
with an example that a 3x3 2D filter can only have 29 unique filters in a binary network. (Courbariaux
et al., 2016) states that there are only 42% of unique filters per layer on average which can lead to
reducing the number of XNOR operations by 3x.
UCNN (Hegde et al., 2018) was the first work that demonstrated efficiency by using weight rep-
etition on ASICs. It performed efficient inference by reordering the weights and thus reorders
activations and operations. This reduces memory access and decreases the number of arithmetic
operations required during DNN inference. For example, if the filter weights are [a, b, a, a] and
activations are [w, x, y, z], UCNN would reorder it as a × (w + y + z) + b × (x) for efficient infer-
ence (Sze et al., 2020). They show that weight repetition is widespread and abundant across a range
of networks (like ResNet, and AlexNet) trained on a variety of datasets (CIFAR10, ImageNet). Fi-
nally, they show that weight repetition leads to a 4x improvement in throughput normalized energy
consumption with only 24% area overhead relative to the same baseline.
SumMerge (Prabhakar et al., 2021) extends the idea of UCNN even further by using both weight
repetition and weight sparsity for efficient DNN inference. For example, if b = 0 in the previous
example, SumMerge would compute a × (w + y + z) during inference. It enabled repetition and
sparsity aware inference on general purpose devices and showed that arithmetic operations could be
reduced by 20x and 15x for binary and ternary networks respectively. Q-Gym (Fu et al., 2022) is
Meta’s latest inference system that treats weight repetition as a combinatorial optimization problem
to achieve SOTA speedup on CPUs and GPUs for both single-threaded and multi-threaded settings.
D    I NFERENCE E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Deploying on CPUs We use SumMerge (Prabhakar et al., 2021) for this task. We run all exper-
iments on Intel Xeon Gold 6226 CPU. In order to make our test environment as close as possible
to the test environment of the authors of (Prabhakar et al., 2021), we disable simultaneous multi-
threading, and enable 2MB huge pages and disable dynamic frequency scaling as well. The test
methodology is exactly the same as used by the authors of (Prabhakar et al., 2021), i.e., each experi-
ment is run 50 times when the machine is unloaded and the values for run with the lowest execution
time are reported. All arithmetic operations are in floating-point. All DNN inference experiments
are subject to identical test environments and methodology.

ASIC We use STONNE (Muñoz-Matrı́nez et al., 2021), a cycle-level microarchitectural simulator
for DNN Inference Accelerator SIGMA (Qin et al., 2020) for this experiment. We use the docker
image released by the authors of (Muñoz-Matrı́nez et al., 2021). We use the standard configura-
tion of SIGMA with 256 multiplier switches, 256 read ports in SDMemory and 256 write ports in
SDMemory. The reduction networks is set to ASNETWORK and the memory controller is set to
SIGMA SPARSE GEMM. We use SimulatedConv2d function in the PyTorch frontend version of
STONNE. For a given convolutional layer, we run STONNE twice, once with 0% sparsity and once
with 65% sparsity. We calculate the reduction in energy consumption by dividing the energy of the
dense convolutional layer by the energy of the sparse convolutional layer. Since the weights’ preci-
sion (or bit-width) is a parameter of SIGMA, the reduction in energy due to sparsity when compared
to the dense model is not a function of the precision of the weights of the DNN.


E    T RAINING E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

CIFAR10 The data loader pipeline consists of simple augmentations - padding by 4 pixels on each
size, random crop to 32 × 32, Random Horizontal Flip with probability 0.5, and normalization. We


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


train from scratch for 350 epochs and use the Adam Optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014). We start
with an initial learning rate of 0.01 and reduce it by a factor of 10 at epochs 150, 200, and 320.
For apples-to-apples comparison with binary and ternary, we do a sweep over batch sizes {16, 32,
64, 128, 256} and activation functions (ReLU, PReLU, TanH) and report the best top-1 validation
accuracy. For ablations on (1) value assignment percentage and (2) comparison with binary networks
with comparable effectual operations, we select the batch size the to be 32 and activation function to
be PReLU. We compare the binary and signed-binary methods on their non-zero valued parameters
of quantized layers as other aspects would be similar. When comparing against prior art works, we
run these methods on our setup and report numbers. Further ablations on batch size and activation
function provided in the appendix.

ImageNet We train ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) using SBWN on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
We use standard practices used to train binary networks like (1) normalize the input using batch-
norm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) before convolution instead of after convolution (Rastegari et al.,
2016), (2) the first and the last layers are not quantized (Zhu et al., 2016; Pouransari et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2016; Bai et al., 2018). We use a first-order polynomial learning-rate annealing schedule
with Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) along with PReLU (He et al., 2015; Maas et al., 2013).
We use FFCV dataloader (Leclerc et al., 2022) with simple augmentations - Random Resize Crop to
224 × 224, Random Horizontal Flipping and Color Jitter with (brightness, contrast, saturation, hue)
set as (0.4, 0.4, 0.4, 0). We decrease the learning rate from 2.0 × e−4 to 2.0 × e−8 while training for
320 epochs and do not use weight decay and batch size of 256 for training. We compare the binary
and signed-binary methods on their non-zero valued parameters of quantized layers as other aspects
would be similar. When comparing against prior art, we report numbers as is from the literature
due to the high compute cost of running these experiments. Furthermore, for ResNet 34, we simply
increase the model size.

F    BASELINES AND I MPLEMENTATION
Baselines for Comparison with Prior work: Figure 4 shows comparison against prior-art methods:
DIR-Net Qin et al. (2023), LQ-Net Zhang et al. (2018), DSQ Gong et al. (2019), BC Courbariaux
et al. (2015), ProxQuant Bai et al. (2018), IR-Net Qin et al. (2021), DoReFA Zhou et al. (2016),
SQ-BWN Dong et al. (2017), BWN Rastegari et al. (2016), ABC-Net Lin et al. (2017), BWHN Hu
et al. (2018), LS Pouransari et al. (2020), Bi-Real Liu et al. (2018), .

Implementation Signed-Binary quantization is a local binarization scheme, i.e., the quantization
function takes full-precision latent weights of region of a convolutional layer as input and maps it to
either {0, 1}R×S×Ct or {0, −1}R×S×Ct . The values of the quantization function for these prede-
termined regions of a convolutional layer are determined randomly before training commences and
remain unchanged. Different regions can have distinct quantization functions for a convolutional
layer. This framework categorizes these regions into two buckets, optimizing efficiency by grouping
them based on their quantization function values for more streamlined training. For example, if
Ct = C, signed binary quantization becomes a pre-filter quantization scheme and each filter will
have a different quantization function. We quantize the full-precision latent weights of a convolu-
tional layer from R{R×S×C×K} to {0, 1}R×S×C×K×P and {0, −1}R×S×C×K×(1−P ) where P is
the percentage of filters whose quantization functions have the values {0,1} such that K × P is an
integer.
G    S IGNED -B INARY VS B INARY WRT E FFECTUAL PARAMETERS

We would like to compare binary with signed-binary when the DNN has the same number of non-
zero parameters. Signed-Binary ResNet trained on CIFAR10 has slightly greater than 50% sparsity.
If we reduce the total number of parameters of the binary ResNet by half, the resulting model would
have comparable number of non-zero weights to signed-binary ResNet. This is done by reducing
depth (see Table 6a) and by reducing width (see Table 6b). We train these models under identical
conditions (setup details in the appendix). To clarify, row 1 & row 2 of Table 6 have the same number
of total parameters while row 1 & row 3 have a comparable number of non-zero parameters. Thus,
signed-binary leads to a higher accuracy than binary when both methods have comparable number
of effectual operations.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Quant    # Parameters       Depth       Acc                  Quant     # Parameters      Width         Acc
     SB         0.46M            32       91.55%                   SB         0.27M           1×        90.05%
     B          0.46M            32       91.22%                    B         0.27M           1×        90.20%
     B          0.27M            20       90.16%                    B         0.14M         ⌈0.7×⌉       88.5%
(a) Reducing number of parameters by reduc-                    (b) Reducing number of parameters by reduc-
ing depth: We observe that accuracy of binary is               ing width: We observe that accuracy of binary is
1.3% lower than signed-binary with comparable                  1.7% lower than signed-binary with comparable
non-zero weights.                                              non-zero weights.

Table 6: Binary vs Signed-Binary with comparable non-zero weights: We observe that Signed-
Binary achieves higher accuracy when compared to binary with comparable effectual operations.


H      A DDITIONAL A BLATIONS ON CIFAR-10

We perform ablation on (1) batch sizes, (2) non-linearity on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009)
dataset and report the numbers in Table 7a and 7b respectively. The setup is the same as men-
tioned above. We observe that for our method, there is a drop in accuracy with higher batch size,
PReLU (Maas et al., 2013) works best and it is not sensitive to the choice of delta.

          Batch Size   Accuracy (Top-1)                             Non-Linearity      Accuracy (Top-1)
             16                 89.44                                     ReLU               88.64
             32                 90.05                                    PReLU               90.05
             64                 89.62                                     TanH               88.75
             128                89.59                                    LReLU               89.22

(a) Ablation on Batch Size: The setup is identi-
                                                               (b) Ablation on Non-Linearity: The setup is
cal across batch sizes and the non-linearity used is
                                                               identical across non-linearity and the batch size
PReLU. We observe a decrease in accuracy when
                                                               used is 32. We observe that PReLU works best
a high batch size of 256 is used.
                                                               for our method.
    Table 7: Additional Ablations on CIFAR10: Abations on batch size and non-linearity for SB.



I     L ATENT F ULL -P RECISION W EIGHTS & S TANDARDIZATION
Binary quantization has                         Standardization Strategy            Accuracy (%)
shown to improve accuracy
from standardization of la-                     Local Signed-Binary Regions               59.1
tent full-precision weights.                    Global Signed-Binary Block                61.2
However, this trend is not                      No Standardization                        61.4
observed in signed-binary
networks.                               Table 8: Comparison of Standardization Strategies on Accuracy


      (a) Negative SB Filters                 (b) Positive SB Filters.                (c) SB Conv Block.

Figure 10: Distribution of Latent Full-Precision Weights: While the local signed-binary weights are
neither zero mean, nor Laplacian, the entire conv block is zero mean Laplacian distribution. The
peaks in the image are because of clipping at ±1 along with thresholding at ±∆.



                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J   A RITHMETIC R EDUCTION A BLATION
Figure 11 compares the arithmetic reduction of
binary, ternary, and signed-binary quantization
for convolutional layers of various sizes. The
reduction is measured relative to dense com-
putation. The figure is created using Sum-
Merge’s DNN inference algorithm, which gen-
erates data-flow graphs with weight-dependent
structures. The experiment is conducted using
the original test settings and methodologies as
described by the original authors. The reported
arithmetic operation reduction is for uniform
distribution tensors. We observe that signed-     Figure 11: Arithmetic Reduction (higher is better)
binary is the most efficient and achieves the     for Binary, Ternary and Signed-Binary. Results
maximum arithmetic reduction for all convolu-     are relative to dense computation.
tional layers.
K    DATASETS
Licenses of ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) datasets used
in this paper are listed in Table 1. Every accuracy reported in this paper is on validation set of the
dataset.

                           Dataset          License             Source
                          ImageNet     Non-Commercial       ILSVRC2012
                          CIFAR10           N/A                CIFAR

             Table 9: Dataset with Licenses: License and source of the datasets used.

ImageNet and CIFAR10 are standard publicly used datasets. Since they do not own their images,
therefore they do not have a release license. Actual images may have their own copyrights but Ima-
geNet provides stipulations for using their dataset (for non-commercial use). We do not recommend
using the resulting signed-binary models trained on these datasets for any commercial use.


                                                  17
