Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G REEDY PIG: A DAPTIVE I NTEGRATED G RADIENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Deep learning has become the standard approach for most machine learning tasks.
         While its impact is undeniable, interpreting the predictions of deep learning models
         from a human perspective remains a challenge. In contrast to model training, model
         interpretability is harder to quantify and pose as an explicit optimization problem.
         Inspired by the AUC softmax information curve (AUC SIC) metric for evaluating
         feature attribution methods, we propose a unified discrete optimization framework
         for feature attribution and feature selection based on subset selection. This leads
         to a natural adaptive generalization of the path integrated gradients (PIG) method
         for feature attribution, which we call Greedy PIG. We demonstrate the success
         of Greedy PIG on a wide variety of tasks, including image feature attribution,
         graph compression/explanation, and post-hoc feature selection on tabular data. Our
         results show that introducing adaptivity is a powerful and versatile method for
         making attribution methods more powerful.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning sets state-of-the-art on a wide variety of machine learning tasks, including image
recognition, natural language understanding, large-scale recommender systems, and generative
models (Graves et al., 2013; He et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Bubeck et al., 2023). Deep
learning models, however, are often opaque and hard to interpret. There is no native procedure for
explaining model decisions to humans, and explainability is essential when models make decisions
that directly influence people’s lives, e.g., in healthcare, epidemiology, legal, and education (Ahmad
et al., 2018; Wiens & Shenoy, 2018; Chen et al., 2021a; Abebe et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023).
We are interested in two routines: (i) feature attribution and (ii) feature selection. Given an input
example, feature attribution techniques offer an explanation of the model’s decision by assigning an
attribution score to each input feature. These scores can then be directly rendered in the input space,
e.g., as a heatmap highlighting visual saliency (Sundararajan et al., 2017), offering an explanation of
model decisions that is human-interpretable. On the other hand, feature selection methods find the
set of most-informative features for a machine learning model across many examples to optimize
its prediction quality. While the goal of both feature attribution and feature selection is to find
the most impactful features, they are inherently different tasks with a disjoint set of approaches
and literature. Concretely, feature attribution considers one example per invocation, while feature
selection considers an entire dataset. For literature surveys, see (Zhang et al., 2021) for feature
attribution and interpretability see and (Li et al., 2017) for feature selection.
Our main contributions are as follows:
       • We consider the problem of feature attribution from first principles and, inspired by evalua-
         tion metrics in the literature (Kapishnikov et al., 2019), we propose a new formulation of
         feature attribution as an explicit subset selection problem.
       • Using this subset selection formulation, we ascribe the main shortcomings of the path
         integrated gradient (PIG) algorithms to their limited ability to handle feature correlations.
         This motivates us to introduce adaptivity to these algorithms, which is a natural way to
         account for correlations, leading to a new algorithm that we call Greedy PIG.
       • We leverage the generality of the subset selection formulation to propose different objectives
         for feature attribution based on model loss that can better capture the model’s behavior, as
         well as a unification between feature attribution and feature selection formulations.
       • We evaluate the performance of Greedy PIG on a variety of experimental tasks, including
         feature attribution, graph neural network (GNN) compression, and post-hoc feature selection.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Our results show that adaptivity is a powerful ingredient for improving the quality of deep
          learning model interpretability methods.

2     P RELIMINARIES & NOTATION
2.1   PATH INTEGRATED GRADIENTS (PIG)
Let f (·; ✓) be a pre-trained neural network with parameters ✓. Our work assumes that f is pre-
trained and therefore, we often omit ✓ for brevity. Suppose x 2 Rn is an input example. The path
integrated gradients (PIG) method of Sundararajan et al. (2017) attributes the decision of f given x ,
by considering a line path from the “baseline”1 example x (0) to x :

             : [0, 1] ! Rn      with      (t; x (0) , x ) = x (0) + t(x    x (0) )   for   t 2 [0, 1].        (1)

Then, the top features i 2 [n] maximizing the following (weighted) integral are chosen:
                                                   Z 1
                                               (0)       @
                         arg sort    (x [i] x [i] )           f ( (t))dt .                                    (2)
                           i2[n]                     0 @x [i]

Our work addresses a weakness of PIG, which is that it is a one-shot algorithm. Specifically, an
invocation to PIG computes (in-parallel) Eq. 1 and chooses (at-once) the indices ✓ [n] maximizing
Eq. 2.

2.2   S UBSET SELECTION
Subset selection is a family of discrete optimization problems, with goal of selecting subset S ✓
[n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} that maximizes a set function G : 2[n] ! R subject to a cardinality constraint k:

                                           S ⇤ = arg max G(S).                                                (3)
                                                  S✓[n],|S|k

Prominent examples of subset selection in machine learning include data summarization (Kleindessner
et al., 2019), feature selection (Cai et al., 2018; Elenberg et al., 2018; Bateni et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2021b; Yasuda et al., 2023), and submodular optimization (Krause & Golovin, 2014; Mirrokni &
Zadimoghaddam, 2015; Fahrbach et al., 2019b;a).
Throughout this work, we let 1 denote n-dimensional all-one vector, 1S 2 {0, 1}n be the indicator
vector of S, and let x S = 1S x 2 Rn where denotes Hadamard product.

3     O UR METHOD
3.1   M OTIVATION : D ISCRETE OPTIMIZATION FOR FEATURE ATTRIBUTION AND SELECTION
The general subset selection framework (§2.2) allows recovering several tasks. For (i) feature
attribution, the softmax information curve (SIC) of Kapishnikov et al. (2019) can be recovered from
(Eq. 3) by setting G(S) to the softmax output of a target class (see Eq. 4). For (ii) feature selection,
we can set G(S) to maximum log likelihood achievable by a model trained on a subset of features S.
Finally, if one sets G(S) to be the maximum model output perturbation achieved by only changing
the values of features in S, one recovers a task of finding counterfactual explanations.
The generality of framework (§2.2) encourages us to pose the tasks (i) and (ii) as instances. Conse-
quently, we inherit algorithms and intuitions from the subset selection and submodular optimization
literature. The area of submodular optimization has a vast literature with different theoretical analyses
and algorithms based on the specific properties of the set function. For example, for maximization
of weakly submodular functions, it is known that the greedy subset selection algorithm achieves
a constant approximation ratio. In general, determining the right realistic assumptions on the set
function is a major open problem in the area. As such, it is not yet clear which of these assumptions
are realistic for each use case. We believe this is a very important question for future work.

   1
     Sundararajan et al. (2017) uses a black-image and Kapishnikov et al. (2019) averages the integral over black-
and white-images. Random noise baselines have also been considered.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2 I NSTANTIATIONS
Multi-class attribution. Suppose that classifier f is the softmax output of a multi-class neural
network, then the softmax information curve of Kapishnikov et al. (2019) can be written in (§4.1;
Eq. 3) as:
               GATTRIBUTION S OFTMAX (S) = fc⇤ (x S ) , with c⇤ = arg max fj (x ).            (4)
                                                                                    j
Maximizing S in Eq. 4 chooses feature subset S that maintains the model’s decision, as compared to
the fully-observed example x . Crucially, however, the top class c⇤ doesn’t tell the whole story, since
the input might be ambiguous or the classifier might be uncertain. It is then natural that one would
want to capture the behavior of f on all classes, rather than just the top one. A natural alternative is
to re-use the objective (`) that the model was trained with, and incorporate it into a subset selection
problem. Specifically, we define the set function:
                        GATTRIBUTION KL (S) = `(f (x ), f (x S )) = f (x ) log f (x S ) ,               (5)
where, for classification, ` is the log-likelihood. This quantifies the similarity of probability dis-
tribution f (x S ), i.e., considering a subset of features, with the distribution f (x ), i.e., considering
all features. Maximizing G(S) under a cardinality constraint is then equivalent to seeking a small
number of features that capture the multiclass behavior of the model on a fixed input example.
Feature selection. Unlike feature attribution, outputting attributions for a single example, in feature
selection, the goal is to select a global set of features for all dataset examples, that maximize the
predictive capability of the model. Feature selection can be formulated by defining
                               GF EAT S ELECT (S) = max `(y , f (X S ; ✓)) ,                        (6)
                                                          ✓
i.e., the maximum log likelihood obtainable by training the model f on the whole dataset X , given
only the features in S. Such formulation of feature selection as subset selection has been studied
extensively, e.g., Liberty & Sviridenko (2017); Elenberg et al. (2018); Bateni et al. (2019); Chen
et al. (2021b); Yasuda et al. (2023); Axiotis & Yasuda (2023). To avoid re-training f , we consider a
simpler problem of post-hoc feature selection, with GF EAT S ELECT PH (S) = `(y , f (X S ; ✓)) where the
model parameters ✓ are pre-trained on all features.We leave further investigation of (6) to future work.
The post-hoc formulation has the advantage of making the objective differentiable, and thus directly
amenable to gradient-based approaches, while also not requiring access to the training process of f ,
which is seen as a black box. This can be particularly useful for applications with limited resources
or engineering constraints that discourage running or modifying the training pipeline. As we will
show in §5.3, high quality feature selection can be performed even in this restricted setting.
3.3 C ONTINUOUS EXTENSION
To make the problem (Eq. 3) amenable to continuous optimization methods, we rely on a continuous
extension g : [0, 1]n ! R with G(S) := g(1S ). The extension can be derived by replacing the
invocation of f on x S or X S in Eq.4–6 by an invocation on a path, similar to Eq. 1, but with domain
equal to the n-hypercube:
        g : [0, 1]n ! Rn with g(s; x (0) , x ) = x (0) + s (x x (0) ) for s 2 [0, 1]n . (7)
This makes it easy to adapt feature attribution methods from the literature to our framework and
is a lightweight assumption since loss functions in deep learning are continuous by definition. In
particular, the integrated gradients algorithm of Sundararajan et al. (2017) can simply be stated as
                                                 R1
computing the vector of feature scores given by t=0 rg(t1)dt.
3.4 G REEDY PATH INTEGRATED GRADIENTS (G REEDY PIG)
Given the framework in §3.1, we now move to identify and improve the weaknesses of the integrated
gradients algorithm. In contrast to previous works that focus on reducing the amount of “noise”
perceived by humans in the attribution result,2 we identify a different weakness of PIG—it is
sensitive to feature correlations. In §4.1, we show that even in simple linear regression settings,
PIG exhibits pathologies such as outputting attribution scores that are negative, or whose ordering
can be manipulated via feature replication. This leads us to introduce adaptivity to the algorithm.
We are motivated by the greedy algorithm for subset selection, which is known to provably tackle
submodular optimization problems, even when there are strong correlations between features.
    2
      In fact, as noticed in Smilkov et al. (2017), a noisy attribution output is not necessarily bad, since our goal
is to explain model predictions and not produce a human-interpretable understanding of the data, which is an
important but different task. Neural net predictions do not have to conform to human understanding of content.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Why Greedy captures correlations. A remarkable property of the greedy algorithm is that its
adaptivity property can automatically deal with correlations. Consider a set function G and three
elements i, j, k. Suppose that greedy initially selects element i. Then, it will recurse on the residual
set function G0 (S) = G(S [ {i}). Thus, in the next phases, correlations between i and the remaining
elements are eliminated, since i is fixed (selected). In other words, since greedy conditions on the
already selected variables, this eliminates their correlations with the rest of the unselected variables.
Greedy PIG. Inspired by the adaptivity complexity of submodular maximization (Balkanski &
Singer, 2018), where it has been shown that ⌦(log n/ log log n) adaptive rounds of evaluating G
are needed to achieve provably-better solution quality than one-shot algorithms (such as integrated
gradients), we propose a generalization of integrated gradients with multiple rounds. We call this
algorithm Greedy PIG since it greedily selects the top-attribution features computed by integrated
gradients in each round, i.e. the set of S ✓ [n] maximizing the arg sort of Eq. 2, and hardcodes their
corresponding entries in s to 1.

3.5   T HE GREEDY PIG ALGORITHM
Our idea is to iteratively compute the top features as attributed by integrated gradients, and select
these features by always including them in future runs of integrated gradients (and only varying the
rest of the variables along the integration path). We present this algorithm in detail in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Greedy PIG (path integrated gradients)
 1: Input: access to a gradient oracle for g : [0, 1]n ! R
 2: Input: number of rounds R, number of selections per round z
 3: Initialize S    ?                                                            . Selected set of features
 4: Initialize a    0                                                              . Vector of attributions
 5: for r = 1 to R
                 R 1do
 6:     Set â    t=0
                       rS̄ g(1S + t1S̄ )dt
 7:     Set Ŝ   topz (â)                                                 . Top-z largest entries of â
 8:     Update a    a + â Ŝ
 9:     Update S    S [ Ŝ
    return a, S

In practice, Greedy PIG can be implemented by repeated invocation of PIG (Eq. 1&2). The impact of
g (Eq. 7) can be realized by iteratively updating:
                                                                                            (j)
           Ŝ    top indices of Eq. 2 with    (.; x (j+1) , x ) with   x (j+1)      x Ŝ + x ¯         (8)
                                                                                            Ŝ


Specifically, Greedy PIG is related to a continuous version of Greedy. In the continuous setting,
selecting an element i is equivalent to fixing the i-th element of the baseline to its final value. The
i-th element now does not vary and its correlations with the remaining elements are eliminated. At a
high level, our approach has similarities to (Kapishnikov et al., 2021), which adaptively computes the
trajectory of the PIG path based on gradient computations.
Similar to previous work, the integral in Algorithm 1 on Line 6 can be estimated by discretizing it
into a number of steps. A simpler approach that we found to be competitive and more frugal is to
approximate the integral by a single gradient rS̄ g(1S ), which we call the Sequential Gradient (SG)
algorithm. It should be noted that, in contrast to integrated gradients, Algorithm 1 empirically does
not return negative attributions.

4     A NALYSIS
4.1   ATTRIBUTION AS SUBSET SELECTION
The integrated gradients method is widely used because of its simplicity and usefulness. Since its
inception, it was known to satisfy two axioms that Sundararajan et al. (2017) called sensitivity and
implementation invariance, as well as the convenient property that the sum of attributions is equal to
the function value. However, there is still no deep theoretical understanding of when this method (or
any attribution method, for that matter) succeeds or fails, or even how success is defined.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Previous works have studied a variety of failure cases. In fact, it is well-observed that the attributions
on image datasets are often “grainy,” a property deemed undesirable from a human standpoint
(although as stated before, it is not necessarily bad as long as the attributions are highly predictive
of the model’s output). In addition, there will almost always exist some negative attribution scores,
whose magnitude can be even higher than that of positive attribution scores. There have been efforts
to mitigate these effects for computer vision tasks, most notably by ascribing them to noise (Smilkov
et al., 2017; Adebayo et al., 2018), region grouping (Ancona et al., 2017; Kapishnikov et al., 2019),
or ascribing them to the magnitude of the gradient (Kapishnikov et al., 2021).
In this work, we take a different approach and start from the basic question:
                         What are attribution scores supposed to compute?
An important step towards answering this question was done in (Kapishnikov et al., 2019), which
defined the softmax information curve (SIC) for image classification. In short, the idea is that if we
only keep k features with the top attributions and drop the rest of the features, the softmax output of
the predicted class should be as large as possible. This is because then, the model prediction can be
distilled down to a small number of features.
Based on the above intuition, we define the problem in a more general form:
Definition 4.1 (Attribution as subset selection). Given a set function G : 2[n] ! R>0 , a value k 2 [n]
and a permutation r = (r1 , r2 , . . . , rn ) of [n], the attribution quality of r at level k is defined as
G({r1 , r2 , . . . , rk })/ maxS✓[n]:|S|=k G(S). We define the attribution quality of r (without reference
to k) as the area under the curve defined by the points (k, G({r1 , r2 , . . . , rk }) for all k 2 [n].
The key advantage of this approach is that we are able to pose attribution as an explicit optimization
problem, and hence we are able to compare, evaluate, and analyze the quality of attribution methods.
In addition, the formulation in Definition 4.1 gives us flexibility in picking the objective G to be
maximized. In fact, in §5.1 we propose setting G to be the log likelihood (i.e., negative cross entropy
loss) instead of the top softmax score. In §5.3, we will see how this formulation allows us to tie
attribution together with feature selection.
Note. As Definition 4.1 shows, we are interested in the problem of attributing predictions to a small
number of features. For example, when faced with redundant features, we wish to pinpoint only a
small number of them. This does not capture applications in which the goal is to find the attribution
for all features, where the goal would be to assign equal attribution score to all redundant features.
4.2 C ORRELATIONS AND ADAPTIVITY
Given the problem formulation in Definition 4.1, we are ready to study the strengths and weaknesses
of attribution methods. First, it is important to define the notion of marginal gain, which is a central
notion in subset selection problems.
Definition 4.2 (Marginal gain). Given a set function G : 2[n] ! R 0 , the marginal gain of the i-th
element at S ✓ [n] is defined by G(S [ {i}) G(S). When S is omitted, we simply define the
marginal gain as G({i}) G(?).
Marginal gains are important because they are closely related to the well-studied greedy algorithm
for subset selection (Nemhauser et al., 1978), and are crucial for its analysis. Therefore, a natural
question arises: Are the outputs of attribution methods correlated with the marginal gains?
For this, let us assume that the set function G is induced by a continuous relaxation g : [0, 1]n ! R.
We show that the integrated gradient attributions approximate the marginal gains up to an additive
term that depends on the second-order behavior of g, and corresponds to the amount of correlation
between variables. In fact, when the variables are uncorrelated, integrated gradient attributions are
equal to the marginal gains.
Lemma 4.3 (PIG vs marginal gain). Let H(w ) be the Hessian of a twice continuously differentiable
function g : [0, 1]n ! R at w . Then, for all i 2 [n],
                 Z 1                                                      X
                                                       1
                       ri g(t1)dt (g(1i ) g(0))              max           Hij (w ) ,
                   t=0                                 2 w 2[0,1]n ,i2[n]
                                                                           j6=i

where 1i is the i-th standard basis vector of R .n



                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 4.3 tells us that the quality of how well the integrated gradient attribution scores approximate
the marginal gains is strongly connected to correlations between input variables. Indeed, if these
correlations are too strong, the attributions can diverge in magnitude and sign, even in simple settings.
This motivates combining integrated gradients with adaptivity (e.g. the Greedy algorithm), since
adaptivity naturally takes correlations into account. The Greedy PIG algorithm, which we will define
in §3.5, is a natural combination of integrated gradients and Greedy.
We now look at a more concrete failure case of integrated gradients in Lemma 4.4, that can arise
because of feature redundancy, and how adaptivity can help overcome this issue.
Lemma 4.4 (Feature redundancy). Consider a continuous set function g : [0, 1]n ! R and t redun-
dant features numbered 1, 2, . . . , t, or in other words for any w 2 [0, 1]n we have g((w1 , . . . , wn )) =
h((max{w1 , . . . , wt }, wt+1 , . . . , wn )) for some h : [0, 1]n t+1 ! R. Then, the integrated gradients
algorithm with a baseline of 0 will assign equal attribution score to features 1 through t.
It follows from Lemma 4.4 that it is possible to replicate the top-attributed feature multiple times
such that the top attributions are all placed on redundant copies of the same feature, therefore missing
features t + 1 through n. This behavior arises because integrated gradients is a one-shot algorithm,
but it can be remedied by introducing adaptivity. Specifically, if we select one of the features
with top attributions, e.g., feature 1 and then re-run integrated gradients with an updated baseline
(1, 0, . . . , 0)> , then the new attribution scores of the redundant features 2, . . . , t will be 0. Therefore,
the remaining k 1 top attributions will be placed on the remaining features t + 1, . . . , n.

5    E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the effect of the adaptivity introduced by Greedy PIG. A comparison
with all attribution methods is out of scope, mainly because our proposed modification can be easily
adapted to other algorithms (e.g., SmoothGrad), and so, even though we provide comparisons with
different popular methods, we mostly concentrate on integrated gradients. We defer an evaluation of
adaptive generalizations of other one-shot algorithms to future work.
5.1 F EATURE ATTRIBUTION FOR I MAGE R ECOGNITION
Experimental setup. We use the MobileNetV2 neural network (Sandler et al., 2018) pretrained on
ImageNet, and compare different feature attribution methods on individual Imagenet examples. We
use the all-zero baseline for integrated gradients, which, because of the data preprocessing pipeline
of MobileNetV2, corresponds to an all-gray image. To ensure that our results hold across models, we
present additional results on ResNet50 in the appendix.
Top-class attribution. Kapishnikov et al. (2019) introduced the softmax information curve for
image classification, which plots the output softmax probability of the target class using only the top
attributions, as a function of the compressed image size. Since we are interested in a general method,
we instead plot the output softmax as a function of the number of top selected features. To perform
attribution based on our framework, we let c⇤ be the class output by the model f (x ; ✓) on input x
and with parameters ✓, and then define g top1 (s) := fc⇤ (x s; ✓)), where s 2 [0, 1]n and denotes
the Hadamard product. In other words, g top1 gives the softmax output of the (fixed) class predicted
by the model, after re-weighting input features by s. We can now run gradient-based attribution
algorithms on g. The results can be found in Figure 1 and Figure 7.
Loss attribution. Even though the top class attribution methodology can explain what are the most
important features that influence the model’s top predicted class, it might fail to capture other aspects
of the model’s behavior. For example, if the model has low certainty in its prediction, the softmax
output of the top class will be low. In fact, in such cases the attribution method can select a number
of features that give a much more confident output. However, it can instead be useful to capture the
outputs of all classes, and not just the top one. More generally, we can use arbitrary loss functions to
attribute certain aspects of the model’s behavior to the features.
Specifically, instead of asking which features are most responsible for a specific classification
output, we ask: Which features are most responsible for the distribution on output classes? In
other words, how close is the model’s multiclass output vector when fed a subset of features versus
when fed all the features? In order to answer this question, we use the loss function on which the
model is trained. For multiclass classification, this is usually set to using the negative cross entropy
loss `(ȳ , y ) = hȳ , log y i to define a set function G(S) = `(f (x ), f (x S )) and a corresponding


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm                                               softmax AUC (")        KL divergence AUC (#)
  Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017)              0.2639                     2.0812
  Smooth PIG (Smilkov et al., 2017)                             0.4433                     1.1366
  Blur PIG (Xu et al., 2020)                                    0.1903                     2.0812
  Guided PIG (Kapishnikov et al., 2021)                         0.2623                     2.0644
  Greedy PIG                                                    0.8486                     0.6655

Figure 1: Evaluating the attribution performance across 1466 examples randomly drawn from
Imagenet. The Softmax Information Curve (SIC) plots the softmax output of the top class as a
function of the number of features kept (there are 224 ⇥ 224 ⇥ 3 features total for these RGB images).
The Loss Information Curve (LIC) similarly plots the KL divergence from the output probabilities
on the features kept, to the output probabilities when all features are kept. To compute these results,
we run integrated gradients and guided integrated gradients with 2000 steps and Greedy PIG with
100 rounds, 20 steps each. Then, for each algorithm and number of features kept, we compute and
plot the median across all examples, as in Kapishnikov et al. (2019). Left: The Softmax Information
Curve (higher is better). Right: The Loss Information Curve (lower is better).


(a) Top 15000 attributions for class “sea snake”. Left: input, Middle: integrated gradients, Right: Greedy PIG.
               Algorithm                                               pointing accuracy (")
               Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017)                  0.66
               Greedy PIG                                                        0.83
(b) Pointing accuracy aggregated over 25 2x2 grids generated from examples that had the highest prediction
confidence from 1500 examples randomly drawn from the validation set of ImageNet.

Figure 2: Results from the pointing game Bohle et al. (2021) that is used for sanity checking image
attribution methods. We generate 2x2 grids of the highest prediction confidence images, and obtain
the attribution results for each class. For each (example, class) pair, we count it as a positive if the
majority of the top 15000 attributions are on the quadrant associated with that class. We measure
pointing accuracy as the fraction of such positives.


continuous extension g logloss (s) = `(f (x ), f (x s)). Maximizing G is equivalent to maximizing
`(f (x ), f (x S )). Fortunately, gradient-based attribution algorithms can be easily extended to arbitrary
objective functions. The results can be found in Figure 1 and Figure 8.

5.2   E DGE - ATTRIBUTION TO COMPRESS GRAPHS & INTERPRET G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
We use our method for graph compression with pre-trained
                                                 ⇣      ⇣GCN ⇣of Kipf &⌘Welling
                                                                             ⌘ (2017).
                                                                                 ⌘     We
use a three-layer GCN, as: GCN(E; ✓) = softmax A   cE A  cE A  cE X✓(1) ✓(2) ✓(3) , where
X 2 Rm⇥n contains features of all m nodes, E ✓ [m] ⇥ [m] denotes (undirected) edges with
a corresponding sparse (symmetric) adjacency matrix with (AE )ij = 1 iff in (i, j) 2 E; b· is the


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Cora                   (b) Pubmed                 (c) ogbn-arxiv

Figure 3: Pre-trained accuracy GCN with inference using edge-subset selected by various methods.
Solid lines plot accuracy vs. ratio of selected edges. Dashed line shows accuracy with all edges.

                                                           b = (D + Im ) 2 (A + Im )(D + Im ) 2 ;
symmetric-normalization with self-connections added, i.e., A
                                                                              1                      1


diagonal degree matrix D = diag(1> m A); and   denotes  element-wise non-linearity such as ReLU.
Given GCN pre-trained for node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019;
Hamilton et al., 2017), we are interested in inferring node labels using only a subset of the edges. The
edge subset can be chosen uniformly at random (Fig. 3: SRND⇠U ); or select edge (i, j) with probability
                            1
proportional to (Dii Djj ) 2 ; or according to edge-attribution assigned by PIG (Sundararajan et al.,
2017) (SPIG ); or using our method Greedy PIG (Alg. 1) (SGreedyPIG ), with
 g GNN (s; A(0) , A) = A(0) +s (A A(0) ) , with all-zero A(0) = 0 , and sparse s 2 Rm⇥m . (9)

Figure 3 shows that Greedy PIG can better compress the graph while maintaining performance of the
underlying model. The GCN model was pre-trained on the full graph with TF-GNN (Ferludin et al.,
2022), on datasets of ogbn-arxiv from Hu et al. (2020), and Cora and Pubmed from (Yang et al.,
2016). Inference on the full graph (using all edges) gives performance indicated with a dashed-red
line. We observe that removing > 50% of the graph edges, using GreedyPIG, has negligible effect on
GCN performance. For the GCN model assumptions, we ensure the selected edges S ✓ E correspond
to symmetric AS = A>   S by projecting the output of the gradient oracle on to the space of symmetric
matrices—by averaging the (sparse) gradient with its transpose, i.e., by re-defining:
                                               ✓              ◆>
                  ^       4 1 @ GNN           1 @ GNN
                 rs g(s) =        g    (s) +         g    (s)       for use in Alg. 1           (10)
                             2 @s             2 @s

We also use Greedy PIG to interpret the GCN. Specifically, zooming-into any particular graph node,
we would like to to explain the subgraph around the node that leads to the GCN output. Due to
space constraints, we report in the appendix subgraphs around nodes in the ogbn-arxiv dataset. Note
that Sanchez-Lengeling et al. (2020) apply integrated gradients on smaller graphs (e.g., chemical
molecules with at most 100 edges), whereas we consider large graphs (e.g., millions of edges).
5.3 P OST- HOC FEATURE SELECTION ON C RITEO TABULAR CTR DATASET
Feature selection is the task of selecting a subset of features on which to train a model, and dropping
the remaining features. There are many approaches for selecting the most predictive set of features (Li
et al., 2017). Even though in general feature selection and model training can be intertwined, often
it is easier to decouple these processes. Specifically, given a trained model, it is often desirable to
perform post-hoc feature selection, where one only has the ability to inspect and not modify the
model. This is also related to global feature attribution (Zhang et al., 2021).
Methodology. In Table 1, we compare the quality of different attribution methods for post-hoc
feature selection. To evaluate the quality of feature selection, we employ the following approach: 1.
Train a neural network model using all features. 2. Run each attribution method to compute global
attribution scores which are aggregate attribution scores over many input examples. 3. Pick the top-k
attributed features, and train new pruned models that only use these top features. Report the validation
loss of the resulting pruned models for different values of k. The results of the methodology described
above applied on a random subset of the Criteo dataset are presented in Table 1. We follow the
setup of Yasuda et al. (2023), who define a dense neural network with three hidden layers with sizes
768, 256 and 128. To make the comparison fair, we guarantee that all algorithms consume the same
amount of data (gradient batches). For example, Greedy PIG with T = 1 steps (which we also call
Sequential Gradient, see Section 3.5), uses 5x more data batches for each gradient computation than
Greedy PIG with T = 5.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Cross-entropy loss on Criteo CTR dataset using only the top-k features. Reported is the
minimum validation loss after 20K training steps with batch size 512. During selection, all of the
algorithms consume the same number of batches.

             Algorithm                           k=5        k = 10     k = 20     k = 30
             Integrated Gradients (T = 39)      0.4827      0.4641     0.4605      0.4533
             Greedy PIG (T = 1)                 0.4728     0.4629      0.4551     0.4508
             Greedy PIG (T = 5)                 0.4723     0.4627      0.4531     0.4509


6    R ELATED WORK
Feature attribution, also known as computing the saliency of each feature consists of a large class
of methods for explaining the predictions of neural networks. The attribution describes the impact
of each feature on the neural network’s output. In the following, we start with most-related to our
research, and then move onto broader and further topics.
Integrated gradients. Our work is most related to, and generalizes to set functions the work of
Sundararajan et al. (2017); Kapishnikov et al. (2021); Lundstrom et al. (2022); Qi et al. (2019); Goh
et al. (2021); Sattarzadeh et al. (2021). In their seminal work, Sundararajan et al. (2017) proposed path
integrated gradients (PIG), a method that assigns an importance score to each feature by integrating
the partial derivative with respect to a feature along a path that interpolates between the background
“baseline” and the input features. PIG, however, has some limitations. For example, it can be sensitive
to the choice of baseline input. Further, it can be difficult to interpret the results of path integrated
gradients when there are duplicate features or features that carry common information. It has also
been observed that PIG is sensitive to input noise (Smilkov et al., 2017), model re-trains (Hooker
et al., 2019), and in some cases provably unable to identify spurious features (Bilodeau et al., 2022).
Further discussion of related work is deferred to Appendix A.

7    C ONCLUSION
We view feature attribution and feature selection as instances of subset selection, which allows us
to apply well-established theories and approximations from the field of discrete and submodular
optimization. Through these, we give a greedy approximation using path integrated gradients
(PIG), which we coin Greedy PIG. We show that Greedy PIG can succeed in scenarios where
other integrated gradient methods fail, e.g., when features are correlated. We qualitatively show
the efficacy of Greedy PIG—it explains predictions of ImageNet-trained model as attributions on
input images, and it explains Graph Neural Network (GNN) as attributions on edges on ogbn-arxiv
graph. We quantitatively evaluate Greedy PIG for feature selection on the Criteo CTR problem,
and by compressing a graph by preserving only a subset of its edges while maintaining GNN
performance. Our evaluations show that Greedy PIG gives qualitatively better model interpretations
than alternatives, and scores higher on quantitative evaluation metrics.

R EFERENCES
Rediet Abebe, Moritz Hardt, Angela Jin, John Miller, Ludwig Schmidt, and Rebecca Wexler. Ad-
  versarial scrutiny of evidentiary statistical software. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’22, pp. 1733–1746, 2022.
Sami Abu-El-Haija, Bryan Perozzi, Amol Kapoor, Hrayr Harutyunyan, Nazanin Alipourfard, Kristina
  Lerman, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Mixhop: Higher-order graph convolutional archi-
  tectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, 2019.
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim. Sanity
  checks for saliency maps. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Muhammad Aurangzeb Ahmad, Carly Eckert, and Ankur Teredesai. Interpretable machine learning
 in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics,
 Computational Biology, and Health Informatics, pp. 559–560, 2018.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marco Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz Öztireli, and Markus Gross. Towards better understanding of
 gradient-based attribution methods for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06104,
 2017.
Kyriakos Axiotis and Taisuke Yasuda. Performance of `1 regularization for sparse convex optimiza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07405, 2023.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. PloS one, 10(7):e0130140, 2015.
David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki Kawanabe, Katja Hansen, and Klaus-
  Robert Müller. How to explain individual classification decisions. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 11:1803–1831, 2010.
Eric Balkanski and Yaron Singer. The adaptive complexity of maximizing a submodular function. In
  Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1138–1151,
  2018.
MohammadHossein Bateni, Lin Chen, Hossein Esfandiari, Thomas Fu, Vahab Mirrokni, and Afshin
 Rostamizadeh. Categorical feature compression via submodular optimization. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 515–523. PMLR, 2019.
Blair Bilodeau, Natasha Jaques, Pang Wei Koh, and Been Kim. Impossibility theorems for feature
  attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11870, 2022.
Moritz Bohle, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. Convolutional dynamic alignment networks for
 interpretable classifications. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 10029–10038, 2021.
Moritz Böhle, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. B-cos networks: Alignment is all we need for
 interpretability. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 10329–10338, 2022.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Jie Cai, Jiawei Luo, Shulin Wang, and Sheng Yang. Feature selection in machine learning: A new
   perspective. Neurocomputing, 300:70–79, 2018.
Irene Y Chen, Emma Pierson, Sherri Rose, Shalmali Joshi, Kadija Ferryman, and Marzyeh Ghassemi.
   Ethical machine learning in healthcare. Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science, 4:123–144,
   2021a.
Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin J Wainwright, and Michael I Jordan. L-shapley and c-shapley: Efficient
   model interpretation for structured data. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2019.
Lin Chen, Hossein Esfandiari, Gang Fu, Vahab S Mirrokni, and Qian Yu. Feature cross search
  via submodular optimization. In 29th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2021).
  Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021b.
Ethan R Elenberg, Rajiv Khanna, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sahand Negahban. Restricted strong
  convexity implies weak submodularity. The Annals of Statistics, 46(6B):3539–3568, 2018.
Matthew Fahrbach, Vahab Mirrokni, and Morteza Zadimoghaddam. Non-monotone submodular
 maximization with nearly optimal adaptivity and query complexity. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 1833–1842. PMLR, 2019a.
Matthew Fahrbach, Vahab Mirrokni, and Morteza Zadimoghaddam. Submodular maximization with
 nearly optimal approximation, adaptivity and query complexity. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth
 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pp. 255–273. SIAM, 2019b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Oleksandr Ferludin, Arno Eigenwillig, Martin Blais, Dustin Zelle, Jan Pfeifer, Alvaro Sanchez-
  Gonzalez, Sibon Li, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Peter Battaglia, Neslihan Bulut, et al. TF-GNN: Graph
  neural networks in tensorflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.03522, 2022.
Christopher Frye, Damien de Mijolla, Tom Begley, Laurence Cowton, Megan Stanley, and Ilya
  Feige. Shapley explainability on the data manifold. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Gary SW Goh, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Leander Weber, Wojciech Samek, and Alexander Binder.
  Understanding integrated gradients with smoothtaylor for deep neural network attribution. In 2020
  25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 4949–4956. IEEE, 2021.
Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recurrent
  neural networks. In 2013 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing,
  pp. 6645–6649. Ieee, 2013.
W. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Been Kim. A benchmark for interpretability
  methods in deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. In arXiv,
 2020.
Andrei Kapishnikov, Tolga Bolukbasi, Fernanda Viégas, and Michael Terry. Xrai: Better attributions
  through regions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 4948–4957, 2019.
Andrei Kapishnikov, Subhashini Venugopalan, Besim Avci, Ben Wedin, Michael Terry, and Tolga
  Bolukbasi. Guided integrated gradients: An adaptive path method for removing noise. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5050–5058, 2021.
Thomas Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Matthäus Kleindessner, Pranjal Awasthi, and Jamie Morgenstern. Fair k-center clustering for data
 summarization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3448–3457. PMLR, 2019.
Andreas Krause and Daniel Golovin. Submodular function maximization. Tractability, 3:71–104,
  2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6):84–90, 2017.
Jundong Li, Kewei Cheng, Suhang Wang, Fred Morstatter, Robert P Trevino, Jiliang Tang, and Huan
  Liu. Feature selection: A data perspective. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 50(6):1–45, 2017.
Edo Liberty and Maxim Sviridenko. Greedy minimization of weakly supermodular set functions.
  In Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques
  (APPROX/RANDOM 2017). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2017.
Lydia T. Liu, Serena Wang, Tolani Britton, and Rediet Abebe. Reimagining the machine learning
  life cycle to improve educational outcomes of students. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 120(9):e2204781120, 2023.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel D Lundstrom, Tianjian Huang, and Meisam Razaviyayn. A rigorous study of integrated
  gradients method and extensions to internal neuron attributions. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 14485–14508. PMLR, 2022.
Vahab Mirrokni and Morteza Zadimoghaddam. Randomized composable core-sets for distributed
  submodular maximization. In Proceedings of the forty-seventh annual ACM Symposium on Theory
  of Computing, pp. 153–162, 2015.
George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
  maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical programming, 14:265–294, 1978.
Gregory Plumb, Denali Molitor, and Ameet S Talwalkar. Model agnostic supervised local explana-
  tions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Zhongang Qi, Saeed Khorram, and Fuxin Li. Visualizing deep networks by optimizing with integrated
  gradients. In CVPR Workshops, volume 2, pp. 1–4, 2019.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Model-agnostic interpretability
 of machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2016 ICML Workshop on Human Interpretability in
 Machine Learning (WHI 2016). New York, NY, 2016.
Saliency. Framework-agnostic implementation for state-of-the-art saliency methods (xrai, blurig,
  smoothgrad, and more). https://github.com/PAIR-code/saliency, 2017.
Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling, Jennifer Wei, Brian Lee, Emily Reif, Peter Wang, Wesley Qian, Kevin
  McCloskey, Lucy Colwell, and Alexander Wiltschko. Evaluating attribution for graph neural
  networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5898–5910,
  2020.
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4510–4520, 2018.
Sam Sattarzadeh, Mahesh Sudhakar, Konstantinos N Plataniotis, Jongseong Jang, Yeonjeong Jeong,
  and Hyunwoo Kim. Integrated grad-cam: Sensitivity-aware visual explanation of deep convolu-
  tional networks via integrated gradient-based scoring. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1775–1779. IEEE, 2021.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. Contributions to Theory Games (AM-28), 1953.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMLR, 2017.
K Simonyan, A Vedaldi, and A Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: visualising image
  classification models and saliency maps. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR). ICLR, 2014.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825, 2017.
J Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and M Riedmiller. Striving for simplicity: The
   all convolutional net. In ICLR (workshop track), 2015.
Mukund Sundararajan and Amir Najmi. The many shapley values for model explanation. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 9269–9278. PMLR, 2020.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jenna Wiens and Erica S Shenoy. Machine learning for healthcare: on the verge of a major shift in
  healthcare epidemiology. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 66(1):149–153, 2018.
Shawn Xu, Subhashini Venugopalan, and Mukund Sundararajan. Attribution in scale and space.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  9680–9689, 2020.
Zhilin Yang, William W Cohen, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Revisiting semi-supervised learning with
  graph embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
Taisuke Yasuda, MohammadHossein Bateni, Lin Chen, Matthew Fahrbach, Gang Fu, and Vahab
  Mirrokni. Sequential attention for feature selection. ICLR 2023, 2023.
Yu Zhang, Peter Tiňo, Aleš Leonardis, and Ke Tang. A survey on neural network interpretability.
  IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 5(5):726–742, 2021.


                                               13
