Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S PLIT AND M ERGE : A LIGNING P OSITION B IASES IN
L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL BASED E VALUATORS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise as automated evaluators for
         assessing the quality of answers generated by AI systems. However, these LLM-
         based evaluators exhibit position bias, or inconsistency, when used to evaluate
         candidate answers in pairwise comparisons, favoring either the first or second an-
         swer regardless of content. To address this limitation, we propose P ORTIA, an
         alignment-based system designed to mimic human comparison strategies to cal-
         ibrate position bias in a lightweight yet effective manner. Specifically, P ORTIA
         splits the answers into multiple segments, aligns similar content across candidate
         answers, and then merges them back into a single prompt for evaluation by LLMs.
         We conducted extensive experiments with six diverse LLMs to evaluate 11,520 an-
         swer pairs. Our results show that P ORTIA markedly enhances the consistency rates
         for all the models and comparison forms tested, achieving an average relative im-
         provement of 47.46%. Remarkably, P ORTIA enables less advanced GPT models
         to achieve 88% agreement with the state-of-the-art GPT-4 model at just 10% of the
         cost. Furthermore, it rectifies around 80% of the position bias instances within the
         GPT-4 model, elevating its consistency rate up to 98%. Subsequent human eval-
         uations indicate that the P ORTIA-enhanced GPT-3.5 model can even surpass the
         standalone GPT-4 in terms of alignment with human evaluators. These findings
         highlight P ORTIA’s ability to correct position bias, improve LLM consistency, and
         boost performance while keeping cost-efficiency. This represents a valuable step
         toward a more reliable and scalable use of LLMs for automated evaluations across
         diverse applications.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable results on various
tasks, sometimes even exceeding human performance (Kojima et al., 2022; Thapa et al., 2023).
However, assessing the quality of LLM-generated answers poses challenges. Specifically, n-gram
matching metrics like BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) can quantify token-level overlap with reference
texts but fall short in evaluating semantic quality. While human evaluators provide more accurate
and valuable feedback, often considered the “gold standards,” their scalability is generally low, given
that they are costly and time-consuming. As a result, there emerges a growing need for automated
evaluation methods that reliably align with human yet remain efficient and cost-effective.
Recently, researchers have investigated the use of powerful LLMs like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to
evaluate the quality of text generated in response to open-ended questions (Zheng et al., 2023).
Notably, robust LLM evaluators such as GPT-4 have been shown to align remarkably well with
both controlled and crowdsourced human preferences, achieving over 60% agreement (Wang et al.,
2023a). These studies suggest that LLMs can emulate human evaluations, offering a scalable and
transparent alternative to the expensive and time-intensive human assessment of text quality.
While LLMs have advanced capabilities, they are not flawless evaluators and have been identified
to possess certain biases. One notable bias is the position bias (Zheng et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023a), in which an LLM might prefer either the first or second answer in a pairwise comparison,
regardless of its content, as illustrated in Figure 1. Even the state-of-the-art GPT-4 model is not
immune to position bias (Zheng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023; Zeng et al.,
2023), and the behavior of its various versions can be inconsistent over time (Chen et al., 2023).


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, owing to pronounced position biases in less-powerful GPT models, much of the prior
research (Zheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) has been compelled to use the expensive GPT-4
for LLM evaluations, emphasizing the necessity for a more cost-effective approach to large-scale
assessments.
To address these limitations, we propose P ORTIA1 , an alignment-based system designed to calibrate
position bias. Inspired by human long-text reading strategies (Ratnasari, 2023), P ORTIA splits the
answers into multiple segments, aligns similar content across candidate answers, and then merges
them back into a single prompt to feed to LLM evaluators. Specifically, P ORTIA first identifies
possible split positions at sentence boundaries within each answer. It then conducts a length align-
ment between the candidates to generate segments of roughly equal length across answers. If this
length alignment does not yield a consistent verdict, P ORTIA further undertakes an iterative seman-
tic alignment to identify the optimal split positions, enabling the merging of segments across candi-
dates. Since this lightweight approach does not require changes to the models themselves, P ORTIA
is readily adaptable to enhance a variety of LLM evaluators for improved evaluation consistency.
We conducted comprehensive experiments using six LLMs as evaluators to assess 11,520 answer
pairs across three prevalent pairwise comparison forms. Our results show that P ORTIA markedly
boosts consistency rates for all the tested models and templates, achieving an average relative im-
provement of 47.46% and rectifying an average of 62.31% of the initially inconsistent cases. Fur-
thermore, P ORTIA addresses between 36% and 86% (over 80% for two-thirds of the comparison
templates) of the position bias occurrences within the GPT-4 model, elevating its consistency rate
up to 98%. Moreover, efficiency and cost evaluations indicate that P ORTIA enables the less advanced
GPT-3.5 model to achieve 88% agreement with the state-of-the-art GPT-4 model at merely 9.57% of
the cost. Additionally, a user study involving five human participants demonstrated enhanced agree-
ment between P ORTIA-optimized evaluators and human evaluators. Remarkably, the agreement of
human evaluators with P ORTIA-enhanced GPT-3.5 even exceeds that with the standalone GPT-4.
A subsequent ablation study suggests that P ORTIA’s two key components — length alignment and
semantic alignment — are beneficial for improving consistency across different comparison forms.


2    BACKGROUND

Paradigms of Using LLM-based Evaluators. Recent work has explored using LLMs such as GPT-
4 to evaluate and compare the performance of AI systems (Wang et al., 2023a; Chan et al., 2023;
Zheng et al., 2023; Hada et al., 2023). Conceptually, there are two distinct LLM-based compari-
son paradigms: single-wise comparison and pairwise comparison. In single-wise comparison, LLM
evaluators are provided with one answer each time and are asked to score each answer independently,
causing that position bias is not an issue in single-wise LLM evaluation and therefore beyond the
scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we find that the absolute scores of LLM may lack clear interpre-
tation. To demonstrate this, we conducted a preliminary study where we examined the consistency
of single-wise comparison across a total of 80 test cases, each involving three sets of value ranges.
Our findings indicate that the scores from single-wise comparison do not strictly adhere to a linear
mapping relationship across different scales (more discussion in Appendix B).
Pairwise comparison presents two answers side-by-side and asks evaluators to select the superior
one. In particular, pairwise comparison methods can be further categorized into three forms: score-
based, likert-based, and relation-based. In score-based comparison, evaluators assign a score to each
answer and then compare these scores to determine the better answer. The likert-based method (Ra-
jani et al., 2023) requires evaluators to score answers on a likert scale (Likert, 1932), where lower
scores indicate a strong preference towards the first answer, middle scores represent a close tie, and
higher scores signal a preference for the second answer. Additionally, the relation-based comparison
solicits direct inputs from the evaluators about their preference for one answer over another. This
approach aims to avoid the use of potentially arbitrary scores, guiding evaluators to make relative
comparisons between answers instead. The details of these three forms are shown in Appendix A.1.

    1
      The name P ORTIA is inspired by the intelligent and astute character, Portia, from Shakespeare’s “The
Merchant of Venice.” In the play, Portia assists a judge in making fair decisions within the legal rules. Just as
Portia requests the exact amount of flesh to be cut, our method seeks to make fair splits of the original answers
for comparison.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Position Bias in Pairwise Comparison. Despite the generally encouraging performance of pair-
wise comparison methods, we note that LLM evaluators are not perfect and can exhibit certain
biases. A primary concern is the position bias (Zheng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a), whereby
the LLM may favor the first (or second) answer in a pairwise comparison, regardless of its content.
In fact, LLMs have shown notable sensitivity to small changes in prompts (Zhao et al., 2021; Zhu
et al., 2023). For clarity, we provide a formal definition of position bias as well as the consistency.
As illustrated in Table 4 (refer to Appendix A.1), the evaluation input comprises a fixed template
with three placeholders. The input set for the LLM evaluators can be represented as {Q, R1 , R2 },
where Q denotes the question set, and R1 and R2 are the two sets of answers for comparison.
The LLM evaluators produce the verdict V = LLM ({Q, R1 , R2 }), which indicates the preferred
answer out of the two candidates. Assuming that the LLM evaluators are flawless, the verdict V
should be independent of the permutation Π of R1 and R2 . Thus, position bias can be expressed
as: Π ̸⊥ ⊥ V . On an individual sample level, for a specific question q ∈ Q and answers r1 , r2 ,
consistency is achieved if the verdict v remains the same when the positions of r1 , r2 are switched:
LLM ({q, r1 , r2 }) = LLM ({q, r2 , r1 }).

3      T HE P ORTIA S YSTEM
Design Intuition. It is worth noting that both human evaluators and LLMs encounter difficulties in
making consistent evaluations when faced with lengthy and intricate answers (Kintsch & Keenan,
1973; Wijesiriwardene et al., 2023). A common cognitive approach among individuals is to de-
compose information into smaller units, thereby simplifying the comparison process (Ratnasari,
2023). Inspired by this observation, P ORTIA is designed to split candidate answers into segments,
merge specific segments across candidates that share “comparable” content, and eventually align
them. Based on this intuition, P ORTIA seeks to mimic effective human comparison procedures,
aiming to calibrate position bias and enhance the consistency of LLM evaluators. That said, for
each question, the verdicts of P ORTIA should be consistent with any permutation of the answers,
i.e., LLM ({q, r1 , r2 }) = LLM ({q, r2 , r1 }).

 [Question]: What are the most effective ways to deal with stress?       Original           [Question]: What are the most effective ways to deal with stress?       PORTIA
 Assistant A: (gpt-3.5-turbo)             Assistant B: (Claude-v1)                          Assistant A: (gpt-3.5-turbo)             Assistant B: (Claude-v1)
 Here are some effective ways to deal      Here are some of the most effective ways         Here are some effective ways to deal     Here are some of the most effective ways
 with stress:                              to deal with stress:                             with stress:                             to deal with stress:
 1. Exercise regularly: Physical           • Exercise regularly. Exercise is a great        1. Exercise regularly: Physical          • Exercise regularly. Exercise is a great
 activity can help reduce stress and       way to release pent up stress and tension.       activity can help reduce stress and      way to release pent up stress and tension.
 improve mood.                             XXX                                              improve mood.                            XXX
 2. Practice relaxation techniques: XXX    • Practice mindfulness. XXX                      2. Practice relaxation techniques: XXX   • Practice mindfulness. XXX
 3. Get enough sleep: XXX                  • Practice deep breathing and relaxation         3. Get enough sleep: XXX                 • Practice deep breathing and relaxation
 4. Eat a healthy diet: XXX                techniques. XXX                                  4. Eat a healthy diet: XXX               techniques. XXX
 5. Connect with others: XXX               • Get enough sleep. XXX                          5. Connect with others: XXX              • Get enough sleep. XXX
 6. Time management: XXX                   • Eat a healthy, balanced diet. XXX              6. Time management: XXX                  • Eat a healthy, balanced diet. XXX
 7. Seek professional help: XXX            • Spend time with others. XXX                    7. Seek professional help: XXX           • Spend time with others. XXX
                                           • Limit unhealthy habits. XXX                                                             • Limit unhealthy habits. XXX
                                           • Seek professional help if needed. XXX                                                   • Seek professional help if needed. XXX
                                           • Take periodic breaks. XXX                                                               • Take periodic breaks. XXX

 Assessment                                                                                 Assessment
               ,which one is better? =>       is better.             Inconsistent                       ,which one is better? =>       is better.               Consistent
               ,which one is better? =>       is better.                Result                          ,which one is better? =>       is better.                 Result


Figure 1: A sample pairwise LLM-based evaluation improved by P ORTIA. Left: The original eval-
uation exhibiting inconsistency. Right: Consistent evaluation after applying P ORTIA. Details of the
answers, comparison forms, and evaluation contents have been simplified or omitted for clarity. For
more detailed information, readers can refer to Appendix A.2.
3.1       C ONSIDERATIONS IN D ESIGNING A “S PLITTING & M ERGING ” S CHEME
Prior to presenting the technical design of P ORTIA, it is imperative to introduce the following key
design considerations. It should be noted that our objective is not to improve the original answers,
but rather to assist the evaluators in accurately evaluating the quality of the answers. Consequently,
our design objectives encompass the attainment of three specific properties:
Content Preservation. Content preservation refers to ensuring the segmented answers encompass
the entirety of the information present in the original answer, without any omissions or additions
of new content. For a given original answer r1 , the set of split answer segments {r11 , r12 , ..., r1k }
should fully encompass the content of r1 . This implies that when the segments are concatenated, the
                                               Pk
entirety of the original content is preserved ( i=1 r1i = r1 ). This consideration helps to preserve
the meaning and information of the original answer during the process of splitting. The preservation
of content is critical in order for evaluators to assess the same substantive answer content that is
divided into segments, without any alterations or incomplete information.


                                                                                        3
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Order Preservation. Order preservation refers to preserving the original sequence of the informa-
   tion presented in the answer. This is important for fair evaluation, as re-ordering or re-arranging
   the content may impact the assessment of answer quality. For example, if the sequence of actions
   (i.e., answer) in response to the question “What should you do in the morning after waking up?”
   is re-ordered such that “eat lunch” before “brush teeth,” it may be perceived as an answer of lower
   quality. By preserving the order, we ensure the segmentation process does not introduce artifacts
   that could unintentionally alter assessment. This enables the LLM evaluators to accurately evaluate
   answers in comparison to the original.
   Resource efficiency. Resource efficiency refers to minimizing computational costs incurred by the
   splitting process, beyond the standard cost when querying the LLM evaluator. To this end, it is
   important for the segmentation process to introduce a minimal number of extra tokens and to be
   executed rapidly, thus avoiding significant overhead.

   3.2    T HE C ORE S PLITTING A LGORITHM

   Due to the page limit, we direct interested readers to Appendix C for a comprehensive overview of
   utilizing P ORTIA for LLM evaluation. Here we concentrate on P ORTIA’s core splitting algorithm,
   as illustrated in Alg. 1. Intuitively, P ORTIA first identifies semantically or syntactically similar
   segments across answers. It then aligns these answer segments and merges them sequentially into
   a single prompt for the LLM evaluators to make a final verdict. Specifically, the inputs include
   the question q, two candidate answers r1 and r2 , the LLM evaluator’s verdict function v(), and the
   specified number of splits k. The output of Alg. 1 is a consistent verdict v ∈ (1, 2, 3), where 1
   indicates that r1 is superior, 2 suggests that r2 is better, and 3 represents a tie.

   Algorithm 1: Alignment-based Splitting Process (P ORTIA)
   Input: Question: q, Answers: r1 , r2 , Evaluator’s verdict v(), Split number k
   Output: Consistent evaluation v ∈ (1, 2, 3)
   /* Step1: identify answers’ formats with split positions.                                                  */
     positions
 1 r1            = f ormat(r1 ), r2positions = f ormat(r2 )
   /* Step2: length alignment.                                                                                */
      (1)      (k)                     positions          (1)      (k)
 2 [r1 , ...r1 ] = equalsplit(r1                 , k), [r2 , ...r2 ] = equalsplit(r2positions , k)
              (1)    (1)     (k)    (k)                 (1)    (1)      (k)  (k)
 3 if v(qi , r1 , r2 , ..., r1 , r2 ) == v(qi , r2 , r1 , ..., r2 , r1 ) then
         /* Consistent, return answer                                                                         */
 4       return v
 5 end
   /* Step3: semantic alignment.                                                                              */
 6 else
 7       smax = 0, ns = 0, Search all = F alse, r1bestparts = [], r2bestparts = []
 8       while not Search all do
 9            r1parts = partition(r1positions , k, ns ), r2parts = partition(r2positions , k, ns ),ns + = 1
              scum = ki=1 similarity(r1parts [i], r2parts [i])
                         P
10
              /* Update max similarity score, keep best split positions.                                      */
11            if scum > smax then
12                  smax = scum , r1bestparts = r1parts , r2bestparts = r2parts
13            end
14       end
                    (1)  (1)       (k)   (k)                  (1)   (1)     (k)  (k)
15       if v(qi , r1 , r2 , ..., r1 , r2 ) == v(qi , r2 , r1 , ..., r2 , r1 ) then
16            return v
17       end
18 end



   Overall, the splitting process can be divided into three stages. In the first phase, possible split
   positions are determined at the boundaries of sentences (line 1). Segmenting at sentence breaks (e.g.,
   periods or question marks) reduces the likelihood of producing incomplete words or fragmented
   syntactic units in different segments. This particular design decision aids in maintaining semantic
   consistency and enhancing readability in each segment. Notably, natural language and programming
   language have different definitions for sentence boundaries; for instance, the period sign “.” in
   Python denotes accessing a specific object member property. Therefore, in instances where answers


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


involve code blocks, we leverage treesitter (tre) to parse code blocks and locate suitable split
positions that preserve the code’s structure and execution sequence. This allows P ORTIA to split
lengthy pieces of code into smaller, logically connected units to facilitate more accurate comparison.
The second stage performs length alignment, splitting each answer into k segments of comparable
length (line 2). Specifically, we first find the k−1 points that divide the answer into k equal segments
according to the number of characters. Subsequently, we select the split location that is closest to
                                                                                     (1)    (k)
each of the split positions obtained in the first stage, and designate them as [r1 , ...r1 ].2 The k
corresponding answer segments are subsequently merged again and used for evaluation by the LLM
evaluator. If the LLM evaluator consistently returns the same verdicts for all length-aligned splits,
then the verdict is returned (lines 3-5).
If inconsistent assessments persist after length alignment, P ORTIA proceeds to semantic alignment
as the third stage (lines 7-14). Specifically, given a fixed k and a set of possible split positions,
we aim to iteratively search for the optimal split positions that maximize the cumulative semantic
similarity between corresponding segments of the two answers. Note that ns represents the index
number of the current segmentation, and Search all becomes True when ns reaches the maximum
number of possible split combinations Cal. Semantic similarity between segments r1t and r2t is com-
                                          Intersection(set(r1t ),set(r2t ))
puted by token overlap: sim score = max(len(set(rt )),len(set(r      t      . Notably, the choice of value k
                                                       1             2 )))
as well as the similarity metric would have an impact on the efficiency of P ORTIA, and we provide
the theoretical analysis in Section 4.3. We also consider applying other similarity metrics, such as
LM-based metrics (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). However, we argue that employing such intricate
metrics is not necessary for P ORTIA, as they usually entail extra computing resources, and introduce
more hyper-parameters while yielding only marginal improvements in performance; see further dis-
cussion in Appendix E. Finally, P ORTIA would yield consistent verdict if applicable (lines 15-17).
Note that the above three stages are carried out in a sequential manner, whereas semantic alignment
is only performed when length alignment is inadequate for ensuring consistent assessments.

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets. We evaluate P ORTIA using the MT-Bench benchmark (Zheng et al., 2023), following the
experimental setup in Wang et al. (2023a). MT-Bench contains 80 elaborated questions spanning 8
categories (Writing, Roleplay, Reasoning, Math, Coding, Extraction, STEM, and Humanities). For
each question, MT-Bench provides several candidate answers from different LLMs. We consider
eight different combinations of LLM answers (see more details in Appendix D), and we consider all
three comparison forms (score-based, likert-based, and relation-based) in the pairwise comparison
paradigm. Thus, we have 80 ∗ 8 ∗ 3 = 1920 inputs to evaluate each LLM evaluator. We interpret
the datasets as large and diverse enough to provide a comprehensive evaluation of P ORTIA across
different LLMs and comparison forms.
Implementation Details. In this work, we include both locally deployable models that are open-
source and proprietary models that are accessed through only cloud APIs as LLM evaluators. For
local models, we select Chatglm2 (Zeng et al., 2022) and Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023), due to their
notable efficacy and convenient local deployment capabilities. For cloud-based LLMs, we use GPT
(including both GPT-4 and GPT-3.5) (OpenAI, 2023) from OpenAI, Qwen (qwe) from Alibaba, and
Claude2 (cla) from Anthropic. The rationale for using these models is based on their exceptional
performance, since they are considered among the most advanced and powerful in the world. Details
on the specific LLM versions evaluated are provided in Appendix D. We run experiments on a GPU
server with Intel Xeon Platinum 8276 CPU, 256GB of RAM, and 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. This
server is capable of performing cloud API calls and local LLM inference.
Deterministic Results. To assure reproducibility, we employ various methods to mitigate the inher-
ent randomness in the decoding process of LLMs. For models using cloud API, the hyper-parameter
“temperature” is uniformly set to 0 across all evaluators. For local models, the sampling function is
deactivated during the decoding phase to get deterministic results.

    2
        We present an illustration with two detailed algorithms in Appendix F to ease the understanding.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Evaluators    De. Method          Model             Relation-based     Score-based       Likert-based
                                 % Origin Con              28.28              47.34             50.62
      Claude2        API         % P ORTIA Con         83.28 (↑194.48%)   65.16 (↑37.64%)   94.84 (↑87.36%)
                                % Fixed Coverage           79.44              52.22             91.27
                                 % Origin Con               63.12            52.66               8.12
       Qwen          API         % P ORTIA Con          78.13 (↑23.78%)   71.09 (↑35.0%)     9.38 (↑15.52%)
                                % Fixed Coverage            65.66            59.78               6.46
                                 % Origin Con               38.44            58.59              26.72
      Chatglm2      Local        % P ORTIA Con          61.72 (↑60.56%)   74.06 (↑26.4%)    64.22 (↑140.34%)
                                % Fixed Coverage            56.09            51.02              60.30
                                 % Origin Con               36.41              N/A               N/A
      Llama2        Local        % P ORTIA Con          68.75 (↑88.82%)        N/A               N/A
                                % Fixed Coverage            22.51              N/A               N/A
                                 % Origin Con              78.12              39.22             78.91
      GPT-3.5        API         % P ORTIA Con          88.59 (↑13.4%)    54.84 (↑39.83%)   98.60 (↑24.94%)
                                % Fixed Coverage           70.63              42.06             96.32
                                 % Origin Con              93.44             92.75             61.50
       GPT-4         API         % P ORTIA Con          97.03 (↑3.84%)    98.00 (↑5.66%)    63.50 (↑3.25%)
                                % Fixed Coverage           80.99             86.33             36.09

Table 1: The main results of P ORTIA across LLM evaluators. All metrics presented are higher-
is-better values. “% Origin Con” and “% P ORTIA Con” are the percentages of consistent results
in the original setting when enhanced by P ORTIA, respectively. “% Fixed Coverage” denotes the
percentage of inconsistent original assessments that are later corrected by P ORTIA. “De Method”
specifies whether the LLM evaluator uses local or cloud API deployment.

4.2    M AIN R ESULTS

As shown in Table 1, P ORTIA improves the consistent rate among all evaluators. The values depicted
in the table correspond to the mean values obtained from the analysis of all eight combinations
of tested models. We observe that P ORTIA relatively improves the consistent rate by 3.25% to
194.48%, depending on the evaluator, with the highest fixed coverage at 96.32% (meaning that
nearly all the inconsistent results are resolved). GPT-4 exhibits the highest average consistency rate,
which is in line with the findings of previous work (Wang et al., 2023a), and P ORTIA further boosts
its consistency up to 98%. Moreover, we observe that GPT-4 exhibits subpar performance on the
likert-based form, not just compared to its performance on other forms, but also when compared
to GPT-3.5. Upon analyzing results on likert-based forms, over 78% of GPT-4’s inconsistency
provides a score of 5, reflecting its bias for the second answer, and our method rectifies 36.09% of
them. Notably, we only report the results of Llama2 in relation-based form, as it fails to provide
meaningful evaluations in score-based and likert-based forms (see more details in Appendix G).
The impact of the comparison form on consistency rates is also observed, with evaluators displaying
various preferences. For instance, it is seen that GPT-3.5 exhibits the least consistent performance
when evaluated on the score-based form, whereas Claude2 struggles most on the relation-based
form. GPT-4, Qwen, and Chatglm2 exhibit the highest degree of inconsistency when assessed on
the likert-based form. This suggests that appropriately matching comparison forms to evaluators’
capabilities is important. Nevertheless, P ORTIA offers high enhancement for forms and LLM eval-
uators. The substantial improvements highlight the generalizability of P ORTIA. In summary, these
findings clearly validate P ORTIA’s effectiveness at mitigating inconsistency for both cutting-edge
and less powerful LLM evaluators.


4.3    E FFICIENCY AND C OST A NALYSIS

To demonstrate the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of P ORTIA, this section first performs a the-
oretical analysis of P ORTIA’s efficiency, and then evaluates its actual costs in terms of temporal,
monetary, and environmental factors. Specifically, we measure the efficacy of P ORTIA-enhanced
LLMs in terms of their agreement rate with GPT-4.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                       1012
                                                                                                                                   Avg-10       Avg-30
                                                                                                                       1011


Avg. # input token length
                                         Rela-ori       Score-ori        Likert-ori
                            2500         Rela-min       Score-min        Likert-min                                    1010        Avg-20       Avg-40
                                         Rela-max       Score-max        Likert-max
                                                                                                                        109


                                                                                                       # Computation
                                                                                                                        108
                            2000
                                                                                                                        107
                                                                                                                        106
                            1500                                                                                        105
                                                                                                                        104
                                                                                                                        103
                            1000                                                                                        102
                                                                                                                        101
                                                                                                                        100
                            500                                                                                           0
                                     0              2          4             6            8                                    1            2            3        4          5   6
                                                                    #K                                                                                       #K


(a) Average input token length with different k. “ori”                                                 (b) Computation operations with different k. The
represents the original input length. “min” and “max”                                                  number behind “Avg” is the average potential split po-
represent the minimum and maximum input lengths,                                                       sitions for each answer. The y-axis has been logarized
respectively.                                                                                          to ease reading.

Figure 2: Theoretical estimation of P ORTIA’s cost with different k in terms of input length and
computation operations.

Theoretical analysis. We first theoretically analyze P ORTIA’s computational efficiency. As the
number of answer segments k increases, the average input length for LLM evaluators also grows
correspondingly. In line with line 1 in Alg. 1, the added tokens stem from two sources: fixed-
length system prompts based on comparison forms, and split boundary prompts (an example shown
in Table A.2) that scale linearly with k. Consequently, the additional input length scales as O(K),
as depicted in Figure 2(a). Notably, the average input length of the relation-based form exceeds the
other two, as it requires more tokens for the system prompt. More details are in Appendix A.
In accordance with line 9 in Alg. 1, the total number of computation operations Cal is calculated
as: Cal = Cpk−11
                   ∗ Cpk−1
                        2
                           , where p1 and p2 are the potential split positions in the two answers. Cpk−1
                                                                                                      1
       k−1
and Cp2 are the combination counts for the first and second answers, respectively. Using average
position numbers of 10, 20, 30, and 40, we derive the total calculations as depicted in Figure 2(b).
Intuitively, raising the value of k can improve the algorithm’s performance by exploring more split
position combinations. However, this also results in an exponential surge in the total computation
operations, compromising efficiency. As such, we conducted controlled experiments to identify the
optimal value of k, and in our case, we found that setting k = 3 strikes a balance between efficiency
and precision. Full details about this controlled experiment can be found in Appendix E.

                                                           AR origin             AR fix        Carbon Emitted                          Avg Cost                Avg Time
                                                                (%)                (%)        (CO2 eq / per 1k)                    (USD / per 1k)             (s / per 1k)
                                         GPT-4                           -            -                                 N/A                     29.78             13,446
                                         GPT-3.5                    82.50        88.59                                  7.22                     2.85              2,192
                                         Qwen                       60.83        69.58                                  N/A                     35.49              6,083
                                         Chatglm2                   20.34        39.16                                  2.15                     4.09              1,983
                                         Claude2                    43.44        75.09                                  N/A                     27.17             11,561

Table 2: Real-world comparison of different LLM evaluators’ results before and after fix by P ORTIA
with that of GPT-4, including resource consumption. “AR” denotes the agreement rate with GPT-4.
Real-World Performance and Cost Analysis. Next, we measure the level of agreement between
the P ORTIA-enhanced LLM evaluators and GPT-4 (considered as the “gold standard.”). Note that
to offer a fair evaluation, we exclusively consider GPT-4 evaluation outputs that are originally con-
sistent. In the context of a question with two possible answers, it is deemed as an agreement only
when both GPT-4 and P ORTIA-enhanced assessments are consistent and identical. As evidenced
in Table 2, agreement rates are enhanced by an average of 16.32% after alignment. Claude2 has the
highest gain at 31.65%, while GPT-3.5 achieves the highest agreement rate with GPT-4 at 88.59%.
Additionally, we take consideration of the resource usage in terms of temporal, monetary, and envi-
ronmental factors. As shown in Table 2, Chatglm2 exhibits the lowest inferencing time. However,
the cost of GPT-3.5 is lower than that of Chatglm2, while its carbon emission is higher3 , which is
                            3
                                The carbon emission of GPT-3.5 is estimated following Chien et al. (2023).


                                                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mainly due to the fact that the cloud API models usually run on GPU clusters with more powerful
GPUs. We estimate the cost using the official pricing for cloud APIs and the Azure ND A100 v4
instances for local models. It is worth mentioning that GPT-3.5 incurs less than 10% of the average
cost of GPT-4, while maintaining an approximate agreement level of 88% with GPT-4. In brief,
the usage of P ORTIA results in a substantial level of concurrence with GPT-4 while maintaining
a minimal computational burden, hence showcasing a proficient and eco-friendly alignment. The
significant enhancements in performance and resource utilization underscore the usefulness of this
approach in boosting various LLMs for this crucial evaluation work.

4.4   H UMAN STUDY

                                    GPT-3.5     Qwen    Chatglm2     Claude2    GPT-4
              Ori Human AR (%)      55.00       35.00   16.25        6.25       60.00
              Fix Human AR (%)      63.75       35.00   17.50        47.50      65.00

Table 3: Main results from human evaluation comparing the model pair “gpt-3.5-turbo” v.s.
“Claude-v1” on 80 questions. “AR” represents the agreement rate.
We conducted a human evaluation to further assess the performance of P ORTIA. The model pair
“gpt-3.5-turbo” v.s. “Claude-v1” is selected to compare human agreement rates on original ver-
sus P ORTIA-enhanced assessments across 80 questions, as these two models have similar perfor-
mance (Zheng et al., 2023), making it challenging for LLM evaluators to make decisions. We recruit
five experts, including two industrial developers and three academic researchers as participants. For
each participant, we create an online questionnaire that provides one question with two answers, not
specifying their origin. Before the questionnaire, brief instructions on the task and evaluation criteria
are provided. During the human evaluation process, we observe some instances where human evalu-
ators make directly opposing assessments. This highlights the inherent subjectivity and unreliability
of human evaluation. We attribute these disagreements to the diversity of human values (Peng et al.,
1997), and simply use a majority vote to determine the final result.
The human evaluation results presented in Table 3 demonstrate increased agreement rates between
humans and LLM evaluators after applying P ORTIA. On average, human agreement on original
LLM assessments improves by 11.25% after enhancement. Notably, the original human agreement
rate for Claude2 is only 6.25%, but increases substantially to 47.50% after enhancement. In addition,
while the original human agreement lags behind GPT-4 across evaluators, P ORTIA-enhanced GPT-
3.5 surpasses the original GPT-4, indicating enhanced consensus. Taken together, these quantitative
findings provide evidence that P ORTIA effectively augments the assessments of all LLM evaluators
to achieve greater concordance with human evaluators. The framework also enables weaker LLMs
to reach comparability with stronger counterparts in terms of human alignment.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDY
To ascertain the individual contributions of each component in P ORTIA, we conduct ablation exper-
iments on five distinct LLM evaluators. The results are quantified in terms of the “Fixed Coverage”
metric, as depicted in Figure 3. To facilitate visual interpretation, variants of P ORTIA incorporating
or excluding specific components are denoted by different colored bars in the histogram. Addition-
ally, texture patterns in the bars indicate the comparison form used. The plain blue bar represents
the score-based form, while the blue bar with slash lines corresponds to the relation-based form.
The results reveal that both semantic and length alignment confer improvements to P ORTIA’s per-
formance. Specifically, across all evaluators, semantic alignment shows a greater contribution to
enhancing the likert-based form, which is likely attributable to the likert scale’s greater dependence
on precise semantic meaning for its standardized categorical ratings. In contrast, for the score-based
and relation-based forms, both alignment methods contribute comparably, with slight differences
between the LLM evaluators. A plausible explanation is that the latter two forms better imitate
human evaluators by considering semantic meaning and answer length in a balanced way.
Furthermore, we find that the trends of fixed coverage rate are consistent across comparison forms
for P ORTIA and ablations (without semantic or length alignment). likert-based form has the highest
fixed coverage rates, followed by relation-based, with score-based form having the lowest rates. The


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          100                PORTIA          score-based
                                             PORTIA w/o SA   relation-based



     Fixed Coverage (%)
                          75                 PORTIA w/o LA   likert-based


                          50
                          25
                           0
                    Claude2        Qwen        Chatglm2       GPT-3.5       GPT-4
Figure 3: Fixed coverage rate across five LLM evaluators for P ORTIA and variants excluding se-
mantic alignment (P ORTIA w/o SA) or length alignment (P ORTIA w/o LA).
exceptions are Qwen on likert-based form and GPT-4 on all forms, where we manually check and
find that: (1) Qwen prefers the second answer for over 90% of examples, no matter whether P ORTIA
is used. (2) GPT-4 has the highest fixed coverage rate on relation-based form, which is probably
because GPT-4 performs consistently enough (more than 97% consistent rate), and therefore, the
improvement on likert-based form is not obvious. Overall, aside from the outliers, these results
suggest that likert-based form is the most challenging, and we attribute this to that it requires the
evaluators to assign a single score that contains an assessment of two answers, which is more difficult
than simply choosing the better one like relation-based form.

5   R ELATED W ORK
Automatic Evaluation of AI Outputs. Automated evaluation using standard metrics like
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is a popular approach to assessing the quality
of AI-generated text. However, these metrics are limited in their ability to assess meaning, rea-
soning, and logical consistency. Recent efforts have focused on developing more robust semantic
similarity metrics using neural representations (Zhang et al., 2019), but they are still imperfect prox-
ies for human assessment. LLM has emerged as a promising alternative for evaluation. Notably,
Chiang & yi Lee (2023) were the first to demonstrate the potential of LLMs as an alternative to
human evaluation. Meanwhile, G-EVAL (Liu et al., 2023) designed a prompt-based evaluator to
assess the quality of natural language generation outputs. LLM-EVAL (Lin & Chen, 2023) provided
a unified schema for evaluating multiple dimensions of conversation quality, while PandaLM (Wang
et al., 2023b) enabled reproducible automated assessment by collecting diverse human annotations
and training a model to predict fair assessments.
Biases in LLM Evaluators. Besides position bias, Zheng et al. (2023) identify two additional
biases: verbosity bias, which refers to a preference for longer answers, and self-enhancement bias,
which involves a preference for self-generated answers. However, the definition of verbosity bias is
not clear, and we observe that human evaluators also tend to prefer longer answers. Furthermore,
self-enhancement bias is not universal for all evaluators (Zheng et al., 2023). Given these consid-
erations, we focus on addressing position bias, as its mitigation can directly improve the efficiency
and accuracy of a wide variety of LLM evaluators already in real-world use (Li et al., 2023).
Multi-agent LLMs. In addition to single-agent LLM, researchers have explored multi-agent LLMs.
For example, Wu & Aji (2023) propose rounds of proposal and debate among multiple LLM in-
stances to reach consensus answers with improved reasoning. Complementarily, Chateval (Chan
et al., 2023) implements a multi-agent debate framework to move beyond individual prompting
strategies, and the multi-Elo rating system (Wu & Aji, 2023) substantially improves evaluation qual-
ity and factual accuracy for multi-LLMs. While powerful, these efforts are orthogonal to our work.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented P ORTIA, an alignment-based technique to address position bias for LLM
evaluators. By aligning similar content segments across candidate answers, P ORTIA effectively
reduced position bias, boosting consistency rates with a relative improvement of 47.46%. Notably,
it not only enabled replacing expensive models like GPT-4 with more affordable alternatives but also
elevated the consistency rate of GPT-4 itself. P ORTIA provided a valuable step towards accessible,
eco-friendly LLM evaluators that are more reliable and robust for diverse real-world applications.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement. Our work aims to improve the consistency of LLM-based evaluators, which can
be utilized to assess the quality of AI-generated answers. Mitigating positional biases in LLM evalu-
ators constitutes an initial step toward addressing higher-level biases in AI systems, including gender
and racial biases. More consistent LLM-based evaluators can provide human-like evaluations at a
lower cost, supplying feedback to reduce biases during training. However, we recognize that mali-
cious actors could exploit these methods to intentionally train models that go against human values.
The open-source LLMs could be leveraged as consistent evaluators to guide the training of harmful
models such as Worm-GPT (wor). While our work targets constructive applications, we caution that
like any technology, consistent LLM evaluators could potentially be misused. Researchers should
consider ethical implications and preventative measures. Overall, we believe the benefits of more
fair and accurate AI outweigh the risks, but responsibility is required in deployment.
Reproducibility Statement. All our results are reproducible using the code repository we will
release. All experimental details, including hyperparameters, are reported in Section 3.2 and Ap-
pendix E. We reuse the benchmark datasets from Zheng et al. (2023), with the different comparison
prompt forms detailed in Appendix A.

R EFERENCES
claude2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2.
qwen. https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen-7B/blob/main/tech_memo.md.
treesitter. https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/.
wormgpt. https://wormgpt.ai/.
Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
  Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.07201, 2023.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. How is chatgpt’s behavior changing over time? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09009, 2023.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human evalu-
  ations?, 2023.
Andrew A Chien, Liuzixuan Lin, Hai Nguyen, Varsha Rao, Tristan Sharma, and Rajini Wijayawar-
  dana. Reducing the carbon impact of generative ai inference (today and in 2035). In Proceedings
  of the 2nd Workshop on Sustainable Computer Systems, pp. 1–7, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL, 2019. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Rishav Hada, Varun Gumma, Adrian de Wynter, Harshita Diddee, Mohamed Ahmed, Monojit
  Choudhury, Kalika Bali, and Sunayana Sitaram. Are large language model-based evaluators the
  solution to scaling up multilingual evaluation?, 2023.
Walter Kintsch and Janice Keenan. Reading rate and retention as a function of the number of
 propositions in the base structure of sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 5(3):257–274, 1973.
 ISSN 0010-0285. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(73)90036-4. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0010028573900364.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916, 2022.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.
Rensis Likert. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of psychology, 1932.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Yen-Ting Lin and Yun-Nung Chen. LLM-eval: Unified multi-dimensional automatic evaluation
  for open-domain conversations with large language models. In Proceedings of the 5th Work-
  shop on NLP for Conversational AI (NLP4ConvAI 2023), pp. 47–58, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.nlp4convai-1.5. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.nlp4convai-1.5.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Kaiping Peng, Richard E Nisbett, and Nancy YC Wong. Validity problems comparing values across
  cultures and possible solutions. Psychological methods, 2(4):329, 1997.
Nazneen Rajani, Nathan Lambert, Sheon Han, Jean Wang, Osvald Nitski, Edward Beeching, and
  Lewis Tunstall. Can foundation models label data like humans? Hugging Face Blog, 2023.
  https://huggingface.co/blog/llm-v-human-data.
Oktavia Yovi Ratnasari. Students’difficulties in reading comprehension and the strategies to deal
  with the difficulties. Jurnal Penelitian, Pendidikan, dan Pembelajaran, 18(13), 2023.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D19-1410. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.
Surendrabikram Thapa, Usman Naseem, and Mehwish Nasim. From humans to machines: can
  chatgpt-like llms effectively replace human annotators in nlp tasks. In Workshop Proceedings of
  the 17th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and
  Zhifang Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926,
  2023a.
Yidong Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Zhengran Zeng, Linyi Yang, Cunxiang Wang, Hao Chen, Chaoya Jiang,
  Rui Xie, Jindong Wang, Xing Xie, et al. Pandalm: An automatic evaluation benchmark for llm
  instruction tuning optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05087, 2023b.
Thilini Wijesiriwardene, Ruwan Wickramarachchi, Bimal Gajera, Shreeyash Gowaikar, Chandan
  Gupta, Aman Chadha, Aishwarya Naresh Reganti, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. Analogical-a
  novel benchmark for long text analogy evaluation in large language models. In Findings of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 3534–3549, 2023.
Minghao Wu and Alham Fikri Aji. Style over substance: Evaluation biases for large language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03025, 2023.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
  Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02414, 2022.
Zhiyuan Zeng, Jiatong Yu, Tianyu Gao, Yu Meng, Tanya Goyal, and Danqi Chen. Evaluating large
  language models at evaluating instruction following. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07641, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluat-
  ing text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Xinghua Zhang, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Yangyu Lv, Tingwen Liu, Fei Huang, Hongbo Xu,
  and Yongbin Li. Wider and deeper llm networks are fairer llm evaluators. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.01862, 2023.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.
Kaijie Zhu, Jindong Wang, Jiaheng Zhou, Zichen Wang, Hao Chen, Yidong Wang, Linyi Yang, Wei
  Ye, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Yue Zhang, et al. Promptbench: Towards evaluating the robustness of
  large language models on adversarial prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04528, 2023.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROMPT T EMPLATES

A.1    C OMPARISON F ORMS



    [Question] {Q}
    [The Start of Assistant A’s response] {R1} [The End of Assistant A’s response]
    [The Start of Assistant B’s response] {R2} [The End of Assistant B’s response]
    [System]
    Please act as an impartial judge and evaluate the quality of the responses provided by two AI assistants
    to the user question displayed below.
    You should choose the assistant that follows the user’s instructions and answers the user’s question
    better. Your evaluation should consider factors such as the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, depth,
    creativity, and level of detail of their responses. Begin your evaluation by comparing the two responses
    and provide a short explanation.
    Avoid any positional biases and ensure that the order in which the responses were presented does not
    influence your decision. Do not allow the length of the responses to influence your evaluation. Do not
    favor certain names of the assistants. Be as objective as possible.
    After providing your explanation, output your final verdict by strictly following this format: [[A]] if
    assistant A is better, [[B]] if assistant B is better, and [[C]] for a tie.


Table 4: The relation-based evaluation form with three slots ({Q}, {R1} and {R2}) from (Zheng
et al., 2023).



    [Question] {Q}
    [The Start of Assistant A’s response] {R1} [The End of Assistant A’s response]
    [The Start of Assistant B’s response] {R2} [The End of Assistant B’s response]
    [System]
    We would like to request your feedback on the performance of two AI assistants in response to the
    user question displayed above.
    Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of details of their responses. Each assistant re-
    ceives an overall score on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher score indicates better overall performance.
    Please first output a single line containing only two values indicating the scores for Assistant A and
    B, respectively. The two scores are separated by a space. In the subsequent line, please provide a
    comprehensive explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential bias and ensuring that the order
    in which the responses were presented does not affect your judgment.


         Table 5: The score-based evaluation form with three slots ({Q}, {R1} and {R2}).



    [Question] {Q}
    [The Start of Assistant A’s response] {R1} [The End of Assistant A’s response]
    [The Start of Assistant B’s response] {R2} [The End of Assistant B’s response]
    [System]
    We would like to request your feedback on the performance of two AI assistants in response to the
    user question displayed above.
    Please compare the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of details of their responses.
    The rating should be from the set of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7, where higher numbers indicated that Assistant
    A was better than Assistant B. Please first output a single line containing only one value indicating the
    preference between Assistant A and B.
    In the subsequent line, please provide a brief explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential
    bias and ensuring that the order in which the responses were presented does not affect your judgment.


         Table 6: The likert-based evaluation form with three slots ({Q}, {R1} and {R2}).



                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   [Question] {What are the most effective ways to deal with stress?}
   [The Start of Assistant A’s response part 1]
   Here are some effective ways to deal with stress:
   1. Exercise regularly: Physical activity can help reduce stress and improve mood.
    [The End of Assistant A’s response part 1]
   [The Start of Assistant B’s response part 1]
   Here are some of the most effective ways to deal with stress:
   • Exercise regularly. Exercise is a great way to release pent up stress and tension. Even taking a 30
   minute walk can help clear your mind and relieve stress.
    [The End of Assistant B’s response part 1]
   [The Start of Assistant A’s response part 2]
   2. Practice relaxation techniques: Deep breathing, meditation, and yoga are some effective ways to
   relax and reduce stress levels.
   3. Get enough sleep: Lack of sleep can increase stress levels. Try to get at least 7-8 hours of sleep
   each night.
   4. Eat a healthy diet: A well-balanced diet can help reduce stress levels and improve overall health.
    [The End of Assistant A’s response part 2]
   [The Start of Assistant B’s response part 2]
   • Practice deep breathing and relaxation techniques. Things like meditation, yoga, and mindfulness
   exercises can help lower your stress levels. Taking some deep breaths can help you calm down in the
   moment.
   • Get enough sleep. Aim for 7 to 8 hours of sleep per night. Lack of sleep can intensify stress. Sleep
   helps your body and mind rest and recharge.
   • Eat a healthy, balanced diet. A healthy diet can boost your mood and reduce stress. Focus on whole
   foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean protein. Limit caffeine and alcohol intake.
   • Spend time with others. Social support from family and friends can help reduce stress levels. Con-
   necting to others can help take your mind off your worries and boost your mood.
    [The End of Assistant B’s response part 2]
   [The Start of Assistant A’s response part 3]
   5. Connect with others: Spending time with friends and family, joining a support group, or participat-
   ing in social activities can help reduce stress levels and improve mood.
   6. Time management: Prioritizing tasks and creating a schedule can help reduce stress and increase
   productivity.
   7. Seek professional help: If stress is impacting your daily life, consider seeking professional help
   such as therapy or counseling.
    [The End of Assistant A’s response part 3]
   [The Start of Assistant B’s response part 3]
   • Limit unhealthy habits. Things like smoking, excessive drinking, or drug use can worsen symptoms
   of stress. Try to avoid these unhealthy habits as much as possible.
   • Practice mindfulness. Spending time each day being fully present and aware of your thoughts and
   feelings can help reduce stress and increase feelings of calm. Try yoga, meditation, or simply sit in a
   quiet space for a few minutes.
   • Seek professional help if needed. If you are dealing with chronic or severe stress, it may help to talk
   to a therapist. A counselor can provide advice and coping strategies tailored to your situation. Therapy
   and counseling can be very effective at reducing stress and anxiety.
   • Take periodic breaks. It is important to take time each day to unwind and do something you enjoy.
   Read a book, take up a hobby, or simply relax in a bath. Taking breaks prevents burnout and recharges
   your body and mind.
    [The End of Assistant B’s response part 3]
   [System]
   Please act as an impartial judge and evaluate the quality of the responses provided by two AI assistants
   to the user question displayed below.
   You should choose the assistant that follows the user’s instructions and answers the user’s question
   better. Your evaluation should consider factors such as the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, depth,
   creativity, and level of detail of their responses. Begin your evaluation by comparing the two responses
   and provide a short explanation.
   Avoid any positional biases and ensure that the order in which the responses were presented does not
   influence your decision. Do not allow the length of the responses to influence your evaluation. Do not
   favor certain names of the assistants. Be as objective as possible.
   After providing your explanation, output your final verdict by strictly following this format: [[A]] if
   assistant A is better, [[B]] if assistant B is better, and [[C]] for a tie.


Table 7: The detailed prompt illustrated in Figure 1. We use relation-based form to construct the
system prompt. The prompt in green is the “split boundary prompts”.

                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    A LIGNMENT T EMPLATES

B     A P RELIMINARY S TUDY OF S INGLE - WISE C OMPARISON

    [Question] {Q}
    [The Start of Assistant A’s response] {R1} [The End of Assistant A’s response]
    [The Start of Assistant B’s response] {R2} [The End of Assistant B’s response]
    [System]
    We would like to request your feedback on the performance of two AI assistants in response to the
    user question displayed above.
    Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of details of their responses. Each assistant re-
    ceives an overall score on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher score indicates better overall performance.
    Please first output a single line containing only two values indicating the scores for Assistant A and
    B, respectively. The two scores are separated by a space. In the subsequent line, please provide a
    comprehensive explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential bias and ensuring that the order
    in which the responses were presented does not affect your judgment.
    We would like to request your feedback on the performance of one AI assistants in response to the user
    question displayed above.
    Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of details of their responses. The assistant
    receives an overall score on a scale of {min score} to {max score} (with a minimum interval of
    {interval}), where a higher score indicates better overall performance.
    Please first output a single line containing only one value indicating the score for Assistant. In the
    subsequent line, please provide a comprehensive explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential
    bias and ensuring that the order in which the responses were presented does not affect your judgment.


Table 8: The score-based evaluation form for single-wise comparison with six slots ({Q}, {R1},
{R2}, {min score}, {max score}, {interval} ).

In this section, following the same setting as Zheng et al. (2023), we conduct a preliminary study
of single-wise score-based LLM comparison. We use the template shown in Table 8 to generate
the input for LLM evaluators. For each question, we generate three sets of value ranges, setting
min score to 0, max score to 1, 10, and 100, and interval to 0.1, 1, and 10, respectively. In theory, if
the single-wise answer is steady and robust, the score should scale accordingly to the value ranges.
For example, if the score is 0.7 when the max score is 1, the score should be 7 when the max score
is 10, and 70 when max score is 100.
The LLM evaluators are asked to score each answer independently. We use the answers from “llama-
13b” as the input for LLM evaluators, and choose “GPT-3.5” as the LLM evaluator. Among a total
of 80 test cases, we find that the single-wise comparison does not remain consistent for any of them.
Therefore, we conclude that the absolute scores of single-wise comparison do not strictly adhere to
a linear mapping relationship across different scales, potentially undermining their significance. It
is worth noting that although single-wise comparison has been used in prior research by Chiang &
yi Lee (2023); Liu et al. (2023); Zheng et al. (2023) to evaluate open-ended questions. It does not
involve comparing two responses together, thereby eliminating any position bias. As a result, our
paper primarily focuses on the position bias in pairwise comparison.

C     P ORTIA ’ S P IPELINE
This section explains the full pipeline of utilizing P ORTIA for LLM evaluation. As depicted in Fig-
ure 4, typically there are four key steps: (1) Data preparation, (2) Comparison method selection,
(3) Evaluation, and (4) Answer extract.
In the first step, we prepare the data for evaluation, which includes the questions and corresponding
answers from two different LLMs to be compared. If P ORTIA is not implemented, we next choose
the comparison method and formulate the input prompt, which has a great impact on the evaluation
results, as we discussed in Section 4.2. The selected LLM evaluator is then queried with this prompt
to obtain judgments. Note that the raw evaluation results require additional processing for two
reasons: (1) the output format may differ from the desired final verdicts and (2) the LLM evaluators
may deviate from expected responses. For example, the LLM evaluator may fail to return the likert


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Flow before fixing                  Flow after fixing
    Answer Candidates           Pairwise method           ②   LLM            ③     Answer Extractor
                                     Likert-based             Evaluators             SFT LLM-based
               Answer1     ①
                                     Score-based                                      Rule-based
    Question                                              ③                  ④
               Answer2
                                    Relation-based
                                             ②                              ④                 ⑤
               ①
 Alignment and reconstruction
    Format Reco    Semantic Align    Length Align                   Inconsistent          Consistent


Figure 4: This is the overview of using P ORTIA for LLM evaluation. “Reco” and “SFT” are short
for “recognition” and “supervised fine-tuning”, respectively.


score for some questions but instead return the final verdict directly. Therefore, we design an answer
extractor to extract the final verdict from the evaluation results. Specifically, we adopt a hybrid
method to extract the final verdict, which first tries to extract with a rule-based system, and if it fails,
then it tries with a supervised fine-tuning Chatglm2 (Zeng et al., 2022) model.
The P ORTIA-enhanced evaluation would necessitate an additional step of alignment and reconstruc-
tion, which constitutes the core of our framework. As elucidated in the main text, this procedure is
vital for assessing the LLM answers’ quality with less position bias.


D     LLM D ETAILS

In this section, we provide more details about the LLM evaluators and answers used in our experi-
ments.
LLM Evaluators. We evaluate P ORTIA using six distinct LLMs as evaluators:

       • GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) is a large multimodal model capable of processing image and text
         inputs to generate text outputs. GPT-4 demonstrates human-level aptitude on various pro-
         fessional and academic benchmarks. We utilize the 8K context length “gpt-4-0613” con-
         figuration by default.
       • GPT-3.5 is a 175B parameter model from OpenAI offered in 4K and 16K context length
         versions. Our experiments use the 4K context “gpt-3.5-turbo-0301” model as default.
       • Claude2 (cla) is the latest large language model released by Anthropic. It supports at most
         100k tokens as input. We leverage the default Claude2 API in our tests.
       • Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023), an open-source series of LLMs from Meta AI ranging from
         7B to 70B parameters, is trained on 2 trillion tokens and doubles Llama1’s context length.
         Its fine-tuned iterations utilize over 1 million human annotations. We evaluate both 7B and
         13B Llama2 chat models.
       • Qwen (qwe) is a partially open-sourced LLM model released by Alibaba. We use the
         default API service provided by Alibaba cloud in our experiments.
       • Chatglm2 (Zeng et al., 2022) is the second-generation version of the open-source bilingual
         chat model ChatGLM-6B. We use the offered 6B version in our experiments.

LLM answers. As mentioned in Section 4.1, we consider eight answer combinations from dif-
ferent LLMs, specifically, the pairs are: “gpt-3.5-turbo” versus “claude-v1”, “llama-13b” versus
“vicuna-13b”, “alpaca-13b” versus “vicuna-13b”, “gpt-3.5-turbo” versus “gpt-4”, “gpt-4” versus
“claude-v1”, “vicuna-13b” versus “vicuna-7b”, “vicuna-7b” versus “alpaca-13b”, and “gpt-4” ver-
sus “vicuna-13b”. Note that the answers are generated by the LLMs without any post-processing,
and we reuse these answers from previous work (Zheng et al., 2023).


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    LM M ETRIC

In this section, we first introduce the LM metric used in our experiments. Then we conduct a
controlled experiment to find the optimal number of splits k across different metrics in terms of
performance and efficiency.
LM Metric. We use the Sentence-BERT (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) to measure the similarity be-
tween pairs. Sentence-BERT is a modification of the pretrained BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) network
that uses siamese and triplet network structures to derive semantically meaningful sentence embed-
dings that can be compared using cosine-similarity. This is efficient while maintaining the accuracy
of BERT.
Efficiency Evaluation. We use the same setup as in Section 4.1 to conduct the experiment. Accord-
ing to the theoretical analysis in Section 4.3, we set k ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} and evaluate their efficiency,
the results are shown in Table 9. Note that k is the number of segments after splitting, thus k = 1
means no splitting would be performed, which leads to 0 in terms of execution time. In short, it can
be interpreted from the table that the execution time grows exponentially with the increasing k.

                                            k=1      k=2      k=3      k=4
                           Token-overlap    0        0.31     3.71     33.12
                           Bert-model       0        2.37     21.3     295.10

          Table 9: Average execution time per input of different metrics with different k.


                                            k=1      k=2      k=3      k=4
                           Token-overlap    -        53.3     66.7     73.3
                           Bert-model       -        55.9     66.7     66.7

                Table 10: Fixed coverage rates of different metrics with different k.

Performance Evaluation. Following the experimental setup described above, we set k ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4} and evaluate their performance. To clarify, we use the answers from the LLM “gpt-
3.5-turbo” and “claude-v1” in our experiments (under the same conditions outlined in Section 4.4),
where in total of 80 questions are fed to GPT-3.5 for evaluation. The results are shown in Table 10,
where we can see that with the increasing k, the fixed coverage rates of both metrics are increasing,
and when k = 3, the fixed coverage rate of both metrics is the same, which is 66.7%. However,
further increasing k results in limited additional gains in coverage. Considering the execution time
which grows exponentially with the increasing k, we choose k = 3 with token-overlap as the default
setting in our experiments.


F    A LGORITHM I LLUSTRATION

To elucidate the operational details of the proposed splitting algorithm, we provide a schematic de-
piction in Figure 5. Given two LLM-generated answers, the algorithm first identifies all candidate
split positions coinciding with sentence boundaries in each answer. It then performs length align-
ment by initially dividing each answer equally into k partitions and recording the corresponding split
positions. Next, for each answer, the split position closest to the recorded locations is selected from
the candidate positions. The answers are partitioned into k segments at these chosen split positions.
The resulting segments are fed as inputs to the LLM evaluator to obtain the respective judgments.
In cases where inconsistent judgments persist, the algorithm proceeds with semantic alignment to
further divide each answer into k parts. Specifically, an iterative search is conducted for optimal split
positions that maximize the cumulative semantic similarity between the corresponding segments
from the two answers. This traversal terminates when the complete set of potential split positions has
been evaluated. Through this process based on both length and semantic alignment, the algorithm is
able to decompose the LLM answers into aligned parts for more consistent and reliable evaluation.


                                                   17
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      K=2
    Answer1                                                                                  Answer1
                                                                             Step2: Length
    Answer2                                                                  Alignment       Answer2

                                     Step1: Format

    Answer1                                                                  Step3: Semantic Answer1
                                                                             Alignment
    Answer2                                                                                  Answer2

            Possible split positions      Near equal-split positions
            K equidistant position       Highest cumulative score position


    Figure 5: Schematic illustration of the proposed splitting algorithm, depicting its operation when
    configured with k = 2 (i.e., division into two parts).

    Algorithm 2: Details of Step 3: Semantic Alignment (k = 2)
   /* Step3: semantic alignment.                                                                       */
1  smax = 0, r1bestparts = [], r2bestparts = []
                           positions
 2 for i in range(len(r1             )) do
 3      for j in range(len(r2positions )) do
 4           pos1 = r1positions [i], pos2 = r2positions [j]
 5           r1parts [0] = r1 [: pos1 ], r2parts [0] = r2 [: pos2 ]
 6           r1parts [1] = r1 [pos1 :], r2parts [1] = r2 [pos2 :]
             scum = 2i=1 similarity(r1parts [i], r2parts [i])
                        P
 7
             /* Update max similarity score, keep best split positions.                                */
 8           if scum > smax then
 9                smax = scum , r1bestparts = r1parts , r2bestparts = r2parts
10           end
11      end
12 end


    Algorithm 3: Details of Step 3: Semantic Alignment (k = 3)
    /* Step3: semantic alignment.                                                          */
1   smax = 0, r1bestparts = [], r2bestparts = []
                            positions
 2 for i1 in range(len(r1             )) do
  3     for i2 in range(i1 + 1, len(r1positions )) do
  4          for j1 in range(len(r2positions )) do
  5              for j2 in range(j1 + 1, len(r2positions )) do
  6                   pos11 = r1positions [i1 ], pos21 = r2positions [j1 ]
  7                   pos12 = r1positions [i2 ], pos22 = r2positions [j2 ]
  8                   r1parts [0] = r1 [: pos11 ], r2parts [0] = r2 [: pos21 ]
  9                   r1parts [1] = r1 [pos11 : pos12 ], r2parts [1] = r2 [pos21 : pos22 ]
 10                   r1parts [2] = r1 [pos12 :], r2parts [2] = r2 [pos22 :]
                      scum = 3i=1 similarity(r1parts [i], r2parts [i])
                                 P
 11
                      /* Update max similarity score, keep best split positions.
                           */
 12                   if scum > smax then
 13                        smax = scum , r1bestparts = r1parts , r2bestparts = r2parts
 14                   end
15               end
16           end
17      end
18 end


                                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    O N L LAMA 2
Although LLMs can be effective evaluators, they are not infallible. In some cases, LLM evaluators
may struggle to provide a meaningful verdict. We find that these models would become too conser-
vative to make a verdict, no matter how the answers are split and aligned. Below is an example of
the Llama2 models (Touvron et al., 2023) that are not well-served as evaluators.

    Assistant A: Alpaca-13b, Assistant B: Vicuna-13b
    [Question] {How can I improve my time management skills?}
    [The Start of Assistant A’s response]
    Improving time management skills involves setting priorities, breaking tasks into smaller chunks, del-
    egating tasks, avoiding multitasking, and taking regular breaks. Additionally, it is important to have a
    positive attitude and be realistic with goals. Making a to-do list, tracking time, and using technology
    to automate mundane tasks can also help improve time management skills.
     [The End of Assistant A’s response]
    [The Start of Assistant B’s response]
    Improving your time management skills can help you to be more productive, focused, and less
    stressed. Here are some tips to help you improve your time management skills: 1. Set clear goals:
    Identify what you want to achieve and set specific, measurable, and realistic goals. Prioritize your
    tasks and focus on the most important ones first. 2. Use a calendar or planner: Use a tool to organize
    your time and schedule your tasks. This can help you to stay on track and make the most of your time.
    3. Break down tasks: Break down larger tasks into smaller, more manageable steps. This can help
    you to focus on one step at a time and make steady progress. 4. Eliminate distractions: Identify and
    eliminate distractions that may be preventing you from being productive. This can include turning off
    your phone, closing unnecessary tabs on your computer, or finding a quiet place to work. 5. Practice
    self-discipline: Use self-discipline to stay focused and avoid procrastination. Set a timer for each task
    and challenge yourself to complete it before the timer goes off. 6. Take breaks: Take regular breaks
    to rest and recharge. This can help you to stay focused and avoid burnout. 7. Review your progress:
    Regularly review your progress and adjust your strategy as needed. This can help you to stay on track
    and make improvements over time.
     [The End of Assistant B’s response]

    Evaluator: {Llama2-7b-chat}, Form: {score-based}, Assessment: {\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n }
    Evaluator: {Llama2-7b-chat}, Form: {likert-based}, Assessment: {””}
    Evaluator: {Llama2-13b-chat}, Form: {score-based}, Assessment: {Please proceed with your
    evaluation.}
    Evaluator: {Llama2-13b-chat}, Form: {likert-based}, Assessment: {\n\nPlease provide your
    feedback.}



  Table 11: The assessments of Llama2-7b-chat and Llama2-13b-chat on two comparison forms.


                                                       19
