Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AMPLE -E FFICIENT L EARNING OF POMDP S
WITH M ULTIPLE O BSERVATIONS I N H INDSIGHT

 Jiacheng Guo∗ Minshuo Chen∗ Huan Wang† Caiming Xiong† Mengdi Wang∗ Yu Bai†
 ∗
   Princeton University † Salesforce Research



                                            A BSTRACT
         This paper studies the sample-efficiency of learning in Partially Observable Markov
         Decision Processes (POMDPs), a challenging problem in reinforcement learning
         that is known to be exponentially hard in the worst-case. Motivated by real-world
         settings such as loading in game playing, we propose an enhanced feedback model
         called “multiple observations in hindsight”, where after each episode of interaction
         with the POMDP, the learner may collect multiple additional observations emitted
         from the encountered latent states, but may not observe the latent states themselves.
         We show that sample-efficient learning under this feedback model is possible
         for two new subclasses of POMDPs: multi-observation revealing POMDPs and
         tabular distinguishable POMDPs. Both subclasses generalize and substantially
         relax revealing POMDPs—a widely studied subclass for which sample-efficient
         learning is possible under standard trajectory feedback. Notably, distinguishable
         POMDPs only require the emission distributions from different latent states to be
         different instead of linearly independent as required in revealing POMDPs.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Partially observable reinforcement learning problems, where the agent must make decisions based
on incomplete information about the environment, are prevalent in practice, such as robotics (Ope-
nAI et al., 2019), economics (Zheng et al., 2020) and decision-making in education or clinical
settings (Ayer et al., 2012). However, from a theoretical standpoint, it is well established that learn-
ing a near-optimal policy in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) requires
exponentially many samples in the worst case (Mossel & Roch, 2005; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016).
Such a worst-case exponential hardness stems from the fact that the observations need not provide
useful information about the true underlying (latent) states, prohibiting efficient exploration. This is
in stark contrast to fully observable RL in MDPs in which a near-optimal policy can be learned in
polynomially many samples, without any further assumption on the MDP (Kearns & Singh, 2002;
Auer et al., 2008; Azar et al., 2017).
Towards circumventing this hardness result, one line of recent work seeks additional structural
conditions under which a polynomial sample complexity is possible (Katt et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2022a; Efroni et al., 2022). A prevalent example there is revealing POMDPs (Jin et al., 2020a; Liu
et al., 2022a), which requires the observables to reveal some information about the true latent state
so that the latent state is (probabilistically) distinguishable from the observables. Another approach,
which we explore in this paper, entails using enhanced feedback models that deliver additional
information beyond what is provided by standard trajectory-based feedback. This is initiated by
the work of Lee et al. (2023), who proposed the framework of Hindsight Observable POMDPs
(HOMDPs). In this setting, latent states are revealed in hindsight after each episode has finished.
This hindsight revealing of latent states provides crucial information to the learner, and enables the
adaptation of techniques for learning fully observable MDPs (Azar et al., 2017). As a result, it allows
a polynomial sample complexity for learning any POMDP (tabular or with a low-rank transition)
under this feedback model, negating the need for further structural assumptions (Lee et al., 2023).
In this paper, we investigate a new feedback model that reveals multiple additional observations—
emitted from the same latent states as encountered during each episode—in hindsight to the learner.
As opposed to the hindsight observable setting, here the learner does not directly observe the latent
states, yet still gains useful information about the latent states via the additional observations. This
model resembles practical scenarios such as the save/load mechanism in game playing, in which


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the player can replay the game from a previously saved state. Similar feedback models such as RL
with replays (Amortila et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023) have also been considered in
the literature in fully observable settings. This feedback model is also theoretically motivated, as the
additional observations in hindsight provide more information to the learner, which in principle may
allow us to learn a broader class of POMDPs than under standard feedback as studied in existing
work (Jin et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2022a; Zhan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022b).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
   • We define a novel feedback model—POMDPs with k multiple observations (k-MOMDP)—
     for enhancing learning in POMDPs over the standard trajectory feedback (Section 3). Under
     k-MOMDP feedback, after each episode is finished, the learner gains additional observations
     emitted from the same latent states as those visited during the episode.
   • We propose k-MO-revealing POMDPs, a natural relaxation of revealing POMDPs to the multiple
     observation setting, and give an algorithm (k-OMLE) that can learn k-MO-revealing POMDPs
     sample-efficiently under k-MOMDP feedback (Section 4). Concretely, we provide learning
     results for both the tabular and the low-rank transition settings.
   • We propose tabular distinguishable POMDPs as an attempt towards understanding the minimal
     structural assumption for sample-efficient learning under k-MOMDP feedback (Section 5.1).
     While being a natural superset of k-MO-revealing POMDPs for all k, we also show a reverse
     containment that any distinguishable POMDP is also a k-MO-revealing POMDP with a suffi-
     ciently large k. Consequently, any distinguishable POMDP can be learned sample-efficiently by
     reducing to k-MO-revealing POMDPs and using the k-OMLE algorithm (Section 5.2).
   • For distinguishable POMDPs, we present another algorithm OST (Section 5.3) that achieves a
     sharper sample complexity than the above reduction approach and is computationally efficient
     given a POMDP planning oracle. The algorithm builds on a closeness testing subroutine using
     the multiple observations to infer the latent state up to a permutation. Technically, compared
     with the reduction approach whose proof relies implicitly on distribution testing results, the OST
     algorithm utilizes distribution testing techniques explicitly in its algorithm design.

1.1 R ELATED W ORK
Sample-efficient learning of POMDPs Due to the non-Markovian characteristics of observations,
policies in POMDPs generally rely on the complete history of observations, making them more
challenging to learn compared to those in fully observable MDPs. Learning a near-optimal policy in
POMDPs is statistically hard in the worst case due to an exponential sample complexity lower bound
in the horizon (Mossel & Roch, 2005; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016; Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987),
and also computationally hard (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Vlassis et al., 2012).
To circumvent this hardness, a body of work has been dedicated to studying various sub-classes
of POMDPs, such as revealing POMDPs (Hsu et al., 2012; Guo et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2020c;
Liu et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023), and decodable POMDPs (Efroni et al., 2022) (with block
MDPs (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016; Du et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020) as a special case). Other
examples include reactiveness (Jiang et al., 2017), revealing (future/past sufficiency) and low rank (Cai
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), latent MDPs (Kwon et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022), learning short-
memory policies (Uehara et al., 2022b), and deterministic transitions (Uehara et al., 2022a). Our
definitions of k-MO-revealing POMDPs and distinguishable POMDPs can be seen as additional
examples for tractably learnable subclasses of POMDPs under a stronger feedback (k-MOMDP).
More recently, Zhan et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022a); Liu et al. (2022b); Zhong et al. (2022) study
learning in a more general setting—Predictive State Representations (PSRs), which include POMDPs
as a subclass. Zhan et al. (2022) show that sample-efficient learning is possible in PSRs, and Chen
et al. (2022a) propose a unified condition (B-stability, which subsume revealing POMDPs and
decodable POMDPs as special cases) for PSRs, and give algorithms with sharp sample complexities.
Our results on (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDPs can be viewed as an extension of the results of Chen
et al. (2022a) for revealing POMDPs, adapted to the multiple observation setting.
POMDPs with enhanced feedback Another line of work studies various enhanced feedback
models for POMDPs (Kakade et al., 2023; Amortila et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023).
Kakade et al. (2023) propose an interactive access model in which the algorithm can query for


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


samples from the conditional distributions of the Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). Shi et al. (2023)
study the POMDP with partial hindsight state information, in which the agent can get access to a
partial representation of the latent states. In their model, the agent immediately observes the partial
information of the latent states, whereas, in our work, the agent gets the information after an episode.
Closely related to our work, Lee et al. (2023) study the Hindsight Observable Markov Decision
Processes (HOMDPs) as a special type of POMDPs, where the latent states are revealed to the learner
in hindsight. Our feedback model can be viewed as a conceptual weakening of their model. Yet
we remark that neither is strictly stronger than the other (learner can use neither one to simulate the
other); see Section 3 for details. Also, in the fully observable setting, Amortila et al. (2022); Li et al.
(2021) have studied feedback models similar to ours where the learner could backtrack and revisit
previous states.
Distribution testing Our analyses for distinguishable POMDPs build on several techniques from
the distribution testing literature (Paninski, 2008; Andoni et al., 2009; Indyk et al., 2012; Ba et al.,
2011; Valiant & Valiant, 2011; Goldreich & Ron, 2011; Batu et al., 2013; Acharya et al., 2015; Chan
et al., 2013); see (Canonne, 2020) for a review. Notably, our OST algorithm builds on subroutines for
the closeness testing problem, which involves determining whether two distributions over a set with
n elements are ε-close from samples. Batu et al. (2013) were the first to formally define this problem,
proposing a tester with sub-linear (in n) sample complexity with any failure probability δ. Subsequent
work by Chan et al. (2013) introduced testers whose sample complexity was information-theoretically
optimal for the closeness testing problem with a constant
                                                             probability. The sample complexity of their
tester in ℓ1 norm is Θ max{n2/3 /ε4/3 , n1/2 /ε2 } . Our OST algorithm uses an adapted version of
their tester and the technique of Batu et al. (2013) to determine whether two latent states are identical
with any failure probability through the multiple observations emitted from them.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Notations For any natural number n ∈ N, we use [n] to represent the set [n] = 1, 2, . . . , n. We use
Im to denote the identity matrix within Rm×m . For vectors, we denote the ℓp -norm as ∥ · ∥p and
∥ · ∥p→p , and the expression ∥x∥A represents the square root of the quadratic form x⊤ Ax. Given a
set S, we use ∆(S) to denote the set of all probability distributions defined on S. For an operator O
defined on S and a probability distribution b ∈ ∆(S), the notation Ob : O → R denotes the integral
of O(o | s) with respect to b(s), where the integration is performed over the entire set S. For two
series {an }n≥1 and {bn }n≥1 , we use an ≤ O(bn ) to mean that there exists a positive constant C
such that an ≤ C · bn . For λ ≥ 0, we use Poi(λ) to denote the Poisson distribution with parameter λ.
POMDPs In this work, we study partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
with a finite time horizon, denoted as P. The                POMDP can be represented by the tuple P =
  S, A, H, O, d0 , {rh }H                H            H
                           h=1 , {Th }h=1 , {Oh }h=1 , where S denotes the state space, A denotes the set
of possible actions, H ∈ N represents the length of the episode, O represents the set of possible
observations, and d0 represents the initial distribution over states, which is assumed to be known.
The transition kernel Th : S × A → S describes the probability of transitioning from one state to
another state after being given a specific action at time step h. The reward function rh : O → [0, 1]
assigns a reward to each observation in O, and Oh : S → ∆(O) is the observation distribution
function at time step h. For a given state s ∈ S and observation o ∈ O, Oh (o | s) represents the
probability of observing o while in state s. Note that (with known rewards and initial distribution)
a POMDP can be fully described by the parameter θ = ({Th }H                                H
                                                                                h=1 , {Oh }h=1 ). We use τh :=
(o1:h , a1:h ) = (o1 , a1 , · · · , oh−1 , ah−1 , oh , ah ) to denote a trajectory of observations and actions at
time step h ∈ [H]. We use S, A, O to denote the cardinality of S, A, and O respectively.
A policy π is a tuple π = (π1 , . . . , πH ), where πh : τh−1 × O → ∆(A) is a mapping from
histories up to step h to actions. We define the value function for π for model θ by Vθ (π) =
            PH
EPo1:H ∼π [
                                                                                           ∗
             h=1 rh (oh )], namely as the expected reward received by following π. We use V (θ) =
                    ∗
maxπ Vθ (π) and π (θ) = arg maxπ Vθ (π) to denote the optimal value function and optimal policy
for a model θ. We denote the parameter of the true POMDP as θ∗ . We also use the shorthand
V (π) := Vθ∗ (π).

3    POMDP S WITH M ULTIPLE O BSERVATIONS
In this section, we propose POMDPs with k multiple observations (k-MOMDP), a new enhanced
feedback model for learning POMDPs defined as follows. In the t-th round of interaction, the learner


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1. Plays an episode in the POMDP with a policy π t , and observes the standard trajectory feedback
               t,(1)              t,(1)
       τ t = (o1 , at1 , · · · , oH , atH ) (without observing the latent states {sth }h∈[H] ).
                                                 t,(2:k) iid
    2. Receives k − 1 additional observations oh         ∼ Oh (·|sth ) for h ∈ [H] after the episode ends.
At k = 1, the feedback model is the same as the standard trajectory feedback. At k > 1, the k − 1
additional observations cannot affect the trajectory τ t but can reveal more information about the past
encountered latent states, which could be beneficial for learning (choosing the policy for the next
round). We remark that such a “replay” ability has also been explored in several recent works, such
as Lee et al. (2023) who assume that the learner could know the visited states after each iteration, and
Amortila et al. (2022); Li et al. (2021) who assume that the learner could reset to any visited states
then continue to take actions to generate a trajectory.
We consider a general setting where the value of k in k-MOMDP can be determined by the learner.
Consequently, for a fair comparison of the sample complexities, we take into account all observations
(both the trajectory and the (k − 1) additional observations) when counting the number of samples,
so that each round of interaction counts as kH observations/samples.
Relationship with the hindsight observable setting Closely related to k-MOMDP, Lee et al.
(2023) propose the hindsight observable setting, another feedback model for learning POMDPs in
which the learner directly observes the true latent states {sth }h∈[H] after the t-th episode. In terms of
their relationship, neither feedback model is stronger than (can simulate) the other in a strict sense,
when learning from bandit feedback: Conditioned on the k − 1 additional observations, the true
latent state could still be random; Given the true latent state, the learner in general, does not know the
emission distribution to simulate additional samples. However, our multiple observation setting is
conceptually “weaker” (making learning harder) than the hindsight observatbility setting, as the true
latent state is exactly revealed in the hindsight observable setting but only “approximately” revealed
in our setting through the noisy channel of multiple observations in hindsight.
A natural first question about the k-MOMDP feedback model is that whether it fully resolves
the hardness of learning in POMDPs (for example, making any tabular POMDP learnable with
polynomially many samples). The following result shows that the answer is negative.
Proposition 1 (Existence of POMDP not polynomially learnable under k-MO feedback for any
finite k). For any H, A ≥ 2, there exists a POMDP with H steps, A actions, and S = O = 2
(non-revealing combination lock) that cannot be solved with o(AH−1 ) samples with high probability
under k-MOMDP feedback for any k ≥ 1.
Proposition 1 shows that some structural assumption on the POMDP is necessary for it to be sample-
efficiently learnable in k-MOMDP setting (proof can be found in Appendix B.1), which we investigate
in the sequel. This is in contrast to the hindsight observable setting (Lee et al., 2023) where any
tabular POMDP can be learned with polynomially many samples, and suggests that k-MOMDP as an
enhanced feedback model is in a sense more relaxed.

4     k-MO- REVEALING POMDP S
We now introduce the class of k-MO-revealing POMDPs, and show that they are sample-efficiently
learnable under k-MOMDP feedback.
4.1 D EFINITION
To introduce this class, we begin by noticing that learning POMDPs under the k-MOMDP feedback
can be recast as learning an augmented POMDP under standard trajectory feedback. Indeed, we can
simply combine the observations during the episode and the hindsight into an augmented observation
  (1:k
{oh )}h∈[H] which belongs to Ok = {o(1:k) : o(i) ∈ O}. The policy class that the learner optimizes
over in this setting is a restricted policy class (denoted as Πsingleobs ) that is only allowed to depend on
                 (1)                                                (1:k)
the first entry oh instead of the full augmented observation oh .
We now present the definition of a k-MO revealing POMDP, which simply requries its aug-
mented POMDP under the k-MOMDP feedback is (single-step) revealing. For any matrix
                                                         k
O = {O(o|s)}o,s∈O×S ∈ RO×S and any k ≥ 1, let O⊗k ∈ RO ×S denote the column-wise k
                                           k
self-tensor of O, given by O⊗k (o1:k |s) = i=1 O(oi |s).
                                          Q


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2 (MO-revealing POMDP). For any k ≥ 1 and α ∈ (0, 1], a POMDP is said to be
(α, k)-MO-revealing if its augmented POMDP under the k-MOMDP feedback is α-revealing. In
other words, a POMDP is k-MO-revealing if for all h ∈ [H], the matrix O⊗k
                                                                       h has a left inverse
  ⊗k+     S×O k        ⊗k+ ⊗k
Oh     ∈R       (i.e. Oh Oh = IS ) such that
                                           O⊗k+
                                            h   1→1
                                                    ≤ α−1 .

Above, we allow any left inverse of O⊗kh and use the matrix (1 → 1) norm to measure the revealing
constant following Chen et al. (2023), which allows a tight characterization of the sample complexity.
As a basic property, we show that (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDPs are strictly larger subclasses of
POMDPs as k increases. The proof can be found in Appendix B.2.
Proposition 3 (Relationship between (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDPs). For all α ∈ (0, 1] and k ≥ 1,
any (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDP is also an (α, k + 1)-MO-revealing POMDP. Conversely, for all
k ≥ 2, there exists a POMDP that is (α, k + 1)-MO-revealing for some α > 0 but not (α′ , k)-MO-
revealing for any α′ > 0.
Proposition 3 shows that (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDPs are systematic relaxations of the standard
α-revealing POMDPs (Jin et al., 2020c; Liu et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023), which corresponds to
the special case of (α, k)-MO-revealing with k = 1. Intuitively, such relaxations are also natural, as
the k-multiple observation setting makes it easier for the observations to reveal information about the
latent state in any POMDP. We remark in passing that the containment in Proposition 3 is strict.
4.2 A LGORITHM AND G UARANTEE
In this section, we first introduce the k-OMLE algorithm and then provide the theoretical guarantee
of k-OMLE for the low-rank POMDPs.
Algorithm: k-Optimistic Maximum Likelihood Estimation (k-OMLE) Here, we provide a brief
introduction to Algorithm k-OMLE. The algorithm is an adaptation of the OMLE algorithm (Liu
et al., 2022a; Zhan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022b) into the k-MOMDP feedback
setting. As noted before, we can cast the problem of learning under k-MOMDP feedback as learning
in an augmented POMDP with the restricted policy class Πsingleobs . Then, the k-OMLE algorithm is
simply the OMLE algorithm applied in this problem.
Concretely, each iteration t ∈ [T ] of the k-OMLE algorithm consists of two primary steps:
                                                    t                                t
  1. The learner executes exploration policies {πh,exp  }0⩽h⩽H−1 , where each πh,exp       is defined via
                                               t
     the ◦h−1 notation as follows: It follows π for the first h − 1 steps, then takes the uniform action
     Unif(A), and then takes arbitrary actions (for example using Unif(A) afterwards (Line 5). All
     collected trajectories are then incorporated into D (Line 6).
  2. The learner constructs a confidence set Θt within the model class Θ, which is a super level set of
     the log-likelihood of all trajectories within the dataset D (Line 7). The policy π k is then selected
     as the greedy policy with respect to the most optimistic model within Θk (Line 3).
Theoretical guarantee Our guarantee for k-OMLE requires the POMDP to satisfy the k-MO-
revealing condition and an additional guarantee on its rank, similar to existing work on learning
POMDPs (Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022b). For simplicity of the presentation,
here we consider the case of POMDPs with low-rank latent transitions (which includes tabular
POMDPs as a special case); our results directly hold in the more general case where d is the PSR
rank of the problem (Chen et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022b; Zhong et al., 2022).
Definition 4 (Low-rank POMDP (Zhan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a)). A POMDP P is called low-
rank POMDP with rank d if its transition kernel Th : S × A → S admits a low-rank decomposition
of dimension d, i.e. there exists two mappings µ∗h : S → Rd , and ϕ∗h : S × A → Rd such that
                          ⊤
Th (s′ | s, a) = µ∗h (s′ ) ϕ∗h (s, a).
We also make the standard realizability assumption that the model class contains the true POMDP:
θ∗ ∈ Θ (but otherwise does not require that the mappings {µ∗h , ϕ∗h }h are known).
We state the theoretical guarantee for k-OMLE on low-rank POMDPs. The proof follows directly by
adapting the analysis of Chen et al. (2022a) into the augmented POMDP (see Appendix C.1).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 k-Optimistic Maximum Likelihood Estimation (k-OMLE)
Input: Model class Θ, parameter β > 0, and k ∈ N.
 1: Initialize: Θ1 = Θ, D = ∅.
 2: for iteration t = 1, · · · , T do
 3:    Set θt , π t = arg maxθ∈Θt ,π Vθ (π).
 4:    for h = 0, · · · , H − 1 do
                                      t
 5:       Set exploration policy πh,exp  := π t ◦h−1 Unif(A).
 6:                   t
          Execute πh,exp to collect a k-observation
                                                     trajectory τkt,h , and add (πh,exp
                                                                                  t
                                                                                        , τkt,h ) to D, where τkt,h =
             t,(1:k)           t,(1:k)   t,(1:k)
          o1     , a1 , . . . , o H  , aH           as in Section 3.
 7:    Update confidence set
                                               X                                 X
                    Θt+1 = θb ∈ Θ :                     log Pπθb (τt ) ⩾ max               log Pπθ (τt ) − β .
                                                                       θ∈Θ
                                            (π,τt )∈D                          (π,τt )∈D
               T
 8: Return π .


Theorem 5 (Results of k-OMLE for (α, k)-MO-revealing low-rank POMDPs). Suppose the true
model θ∗ is a low-rank POMDP with rank d, is realizable (θ∗ ∈ Θ), and every θ ∈ Θ is (α, k)-MO-
revealing. Then choosing β = O(log (NΘ /δ)), with probability at least 1 − δ, Algorithm 1 outputs a
policy π T such that V ∗ − V (π T ) ⩽ ε within
                                         e poly(H)kdA log NΘ / α2 ε2

                          N = T Hk = O
samples. Above, NΘ is the optimistic covering number of Θ defined in Appendix C.
We also state a result of tabular (α, k)-revealing POMDPs. Note that any tabular POMDP is also a
low-rank POMDP with rank d = SA, hence Theorem 5 applies; however the result below achieves a
slightly better rate (by using the fact that the PSR rank is at most S).
Theorem 6 (Results of k-OMLE for (α, k)-MO-revealing tabular POMDPs). Suppose θ∗ is (α, k)-
MO-revealing and Θ consists of all tabular (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDPs. Then, choosing β =
O(H S 2 A + SO + log(1/δ)), then with probability at least 1 − δ, Algorithm 1 outputs a policy
π T such that V ∗ − V (π T ) ⩽ ε within the followinng number of samples:
                              e poly(H)kSA(S 2 A + SO)/ α2 ε2 .

                              O

We remark that the rate asserted in Theorem 5 & 6 also hold for the Explorative Estimation-To-
Decisions (Explorative E2D) (Foster et al., 2021) and the Model-based Optimistic Posterior Sam-
pling (Agarwal & Zhang, 2022) algorithms (with an additional low-rank requirement on every θ ∈ Θ
for Explorative E2D), building upon the unified analysis framework of Chen et al. (2022b;a). See
Appendix C.1 for details.

5     D ISTINGUISHABLE POMDP S
Given k-MO-revealing POMDPs as a first example of sample-efficiently learnable POMDPs under
k-MOMDP feedback, it is of interest to understand the minimal structure required for learning under
this feedback. In this section, we investigate a natural proposal—distinguishable POMDPs, and study
its relationship with k-MO-revealing POMDPs as well as sample-efficient learning algorithms.
5.1 D EFINITION
The definition of distinguishable POMDPs is motivated by the simple observation that, if there exist
two states si , sj ∈ S that admit exactly the same emission distributions (i.e. Oh ei = Oh ej ∈ ∆(O)),
then the two states are not distinguishable under k-MOMDP feedback no matter how large k is. Our
formal definition makes this quantitiative, requiring any two states to admit α-different emission
distributions in the ℓ1 (total variation) distance.
Definition 7 (Distinguishable POMDP). For any α ∈ (0, 1], a POMDP is said to be α-distinguishable
if for all h ∈ [H] (where ei ∈ RS denotes the i-th standard basis vector),
                                            min ∥Oh (ei − ej )∥1 ≥ α.
                                           i̸=j∈S

Qualitatively, we say a POMDP is distinguishable if it is α-distinguishable for some α > 0.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notably, distinguishability only requires the emission matrix Oh to have distinct columns. This is
much weaker than the (single-step) revealing condition (Jin et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2022a; Chen
et al., 2022a; 2023) which requires Oh to have linearly independent columns. In other words, in a
distinguishable POMDP, different latent states may not be probabilistically identifiable from a single
observation as in a revealing POMDP; however, this does not preclude the possibility that we can
identify the latent state with k > 1 observations.
Also, we focus on the natural case of tabular POMDPs (i.e. S, A, O are finite) when considering
distinguishable POMDPs1 , and leave the question extending or modifying the definition to infinitely
many states/observations to future work.
5.2 R ELATIONSHIP WITH k-MO- REVEALING POMDP S
We now study the relationship between distinguishable POMDPs and k-MO-revealing POMDPs.
Formal statement and proof of the following results see Appendix D.1 and Appendix D.2.
We begin by showing that any k-MO revealing POMDP is necessarily a distinguishable POMDP. This
is not surprising, as distinguishability is a necessary condition for k-MO-revealing—if distinguisha-
bility is violated, then there exists two states with identical emission distributions and thus identical
emission distributions with k iid observations for any k ≥ 1, necessarily violating k-MO-revealing.
Proposition 8 (k-MO revealing POMDPs ⊂ Distinguishable POMDPs). For any α ∈ (0, 1], k ≥ 1,
any (α, k)-revealing tabular POMDP is a distinguishable POMDP.
Perhaps more surprisingly, we show that the reverse containment is also true in a sense if we allow k
to be large—Any α-distinguishable POMDP is also a k-MO revealing POMDP for a suitable large k
depending on (S, O, α), and revealing constant Θ(1).
Theorem 9 (Distinguishable ⊂ MO-revealing with large k). There exists an absolute constant
C √> 0 such that any α-distinguishable POMDP is also (1/2, k)-MO-revealing for any k ≥
C O log(SO)/α2 .
Proof by embedding a distribution test The proof of Theorem 9 works by showing that, for
any distinguishable POMDP, the k-observation emission matrix O⊗k    h admits a well-conditioned left
inverse with a suitably large k. The construction of such a left inverse borrows techniques from
distribution testing literature, where we embed an identity test (Batu et al., 2013; Chan et al., 2013)
with k observations into a S × Ok matrix, with each column consisting of indicators of the test
result. The required condition for this matrix to be well-conditioned (and thus O⊗k h admitting a left
                                                       √
inverse) is that k is large enough—precisely k ≥ O(  e O/α2 ) (given by known results in identity
testing (Chan et al., 2013))—such that the test succeeds with high probability.
Sample-efficient learning by reduction to k-MO-revealing case Theorem 9 implies
                                                                              √ that, since any
α-distinguishable POMDP is also a (1/2, k)-MO-revealing POMDP with k = O( O log(SO)/α2 ),
it can be efficiently learned by the k-OMLE algorithm, with number of samples
                                           √
                              e poly(H)SA O(S 2 A + SO)/ α2 ε2
                              O                                                              (1)

given by Theorem 6. This shows that any distinguishable POMDP is sample-efficiently learnable
under k-MOMDP feedback by choosing a proper k.
5.3 S HARPER A LGORITHM : OST
We now introduce a more efficient algorithm—Optimism with State Testing (OST; Algorithm 2)—for
learning distinguishable POMDPs under k-MOMDP feedback.
Recall that in a distinguishable POMDP, different latent states have α-separated emission distributions,
and we can observe k observations per state. The main idea in OST is to use closeness testing
algorithms (Chan et al., 2013; Batu et al., 2013) to determine whether any two k-fold observations are
from the same state. As long as all pairwise tests return correct results, we can perform a clustering
to recover a “pseudo” state label that is guaranteed to be the correct latent states up to a permutation.
    1
      When S is infinite (e.g. if the state space S is continuous), requiring any two emission distributions to differ
by α in ℓ1 distance may be an unnatural requirement, as near-by states could yield similar emission probabilities
in typical scenarios.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Optimism with State Testing (OST)
Input: POMDP planner POP, parameters β1 , β2 > 0 and k ∈ N.
 1: Initialize: Emission and transition models O1 , T1 , initial pseudo state space [nh1 ] = ∅ (i.e. nh1 = 0) and
    initial visitation counts n1h (s) = n1h (s, a) = 0 for all s ∈ Se1 , a ∈ A and h ∈ [H].
 2: for iteration t = 1, · · · , T do
 3:    for all (s, a) ∈ [S] × Ando                      o                      np                o
                                    p
 4:        Set bt (s, a) = min         β1 /nt (s, a), 2H and bt (s) = min           β2 /nt (s), 2 as the exploration
           bonus.
 5:        Set rbht (s, a) = min{1, r̄ht (s, a) + Hbt (s) + bt (s, a)}, where r̄t is defined in (2).
 6:    Update π t = P OP (Tbt , O  bt , rbt ).

                                                                                     t,(1:k)                  t,(1:k)
 7:    Execute π t to collect a k-observation trajectory τkt , where τkt = o1                  , a1 , . . . , o H       , aH .
 8:    Call A SSIGN _P SEUDO _S TATES (Algorithm 3) to obtain pseudo states {e   sth }h∈[H] .
            t+1       P                l
 9:    Set nh (s) = l∈[t],h∈[H] 1{e   sh = s} for all (h, s) ∈ [H] × [S].
            t+1
                                         slh = s ∧ alh = a} for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × [S] × A.
                         P
10:    Set nh (s, a) = l∈[t],h∈[H] 1{e
11:    Update Tbt+1 and Obt+1 by (3).
12: return π t .


Algorithm 3 Pseudo state assignment via closeness testing (A SSIGN _P SEUDO _S TATES)
 1: for h ∈ [H] do
 2:    assigned = 0.
 3:    for se ∈ [nth ] do
                                   t,(1:k)    t′ ,(1:k)                                           ′
 4:        if closeness_test(oh            , oh         ) = accept (Algorithm 4) for all t′ ∈ [e
                                                                                               sth = se] then
                     t                           t+1       t
 5:            Set seh = se, assigned = 1, nh = nh , break
 6:    if assigned = 0 then
 7:        Set seth = nth + 1, nt+1
                                  h    = nth + 1.



Given the pseudo states, we can then adapt the techniques from the hindsight observable setting (Lee
et al., 2023) to accurately estimate the model of the POMDP and learn a near-optimal policy.
Algorithm description We first define a planning oracle (Lee et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2020b), which
serves as an abstraction of the optimal planning procedure that maps any POMDP (T, O, r) to an
optimal policy of it.
Definition 10 (POMDP Optimal Planner). The POMDP planner POP takes as input a transition
function T := {Th }H                                        H
                      h=1 , an emission function O := {Oh }h=1 , and a reward function r : S × A →
[0, 1] and returns a policy π = POP(T, O, r) to maximize the value function under the POMDP with
latent transitions {Th }H                     H
                         h=1 , emissions {Oh }h=1 , and reward function r.

OST operates over T rounds, beginning with arbitrary initial Tb1 and O       b1 of the model. We set the
initial pseudo state space as an empty set. Then, at each iteration t, OST calculates reward bonuses
bt (s, a) and bt (s) to capture the uncertainty of Tbt and O
                                                           bt , quantified by the number of visits to each
latent state in the pseudo state space (Line 4). The bonuses defined in (2) are added to the following
empirical reward estimates (Line 5). We then call POP to calculate the policy for the current iteration
and deploy it to obtain a k-observation trajectory from the k-MOMDP feedback (Line 6-7).
                                                                     r(o)1{sℓh =s,oℓh =o}
                                 r̄ht (s, a) =
                                                 P           P
                                                   o∈O       ℓ∈[t]      min{1,nth (s)}
                                                                                          .                                      (2)


                                                                         st1 , . . . , setH ) to the trajectory
We next employ closeness testing and clustering to assign pseudo states (e
                                                           t,(1:k)
τkt (Line 8) using Algorithm 3. For each k-observation oh          generated in the new iteration, we
                                                 t′ ,(1:k)
perform a closeness test with all past {oh    }t′ >t to check if they belong to the same pseudo state:
Two states are the same state if their k observations pass closeness testing, different if they fail it.
                                                                      t,(1:k)
Using the test results, we perform a simple “clustering” step: If oh          passes the closeness test
               t′ ,(1:k)                                                                                      t,(1:k)
against all {oh      } who has been assigned as pseudo state se, then we assign se to oh       . If the state
is not assigned after all tests, then that indicates the encountered latent state has not been encountered


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Closeness Testing closeness_test({o(i) }i∈[k] , {e
                                                             o(i) }i∈[k] )
Input: [o[i] ]i∈[k] , [e
                       o[i] ]i∈[k]
 1: Sample N1 , · · · , NM ∼ Poi(k/M ), where M = O(log(1/δ)).
 2: return fail if N1 + · · · + NM > k.
 3: for j ∈ [M ] do
 4:    Bj = {N1 + · · · + Nj−1 + 1, · · · , N1 + · · · + Nj }.
         (j)     P                     eo(j) = P
 5:    No = i∈Bj 1{oi = o}, N                           oi = o}.
                                                 i∈Bj 1{e
         (j)         P             (j)   (j) 2    (j)     (j)    (j) eo(j) ) ≤ 3Nj }.
                                                                              p
 6:    Z = 1{ o∈O ((No − No ) − No − No )/(No + N
                                       e                e
 7: return accept if j∈[M ] z (j) ≥ M/2, else reject
                          P



                                                                                  t,(1:k)
before (not in the current pseudo state space [nth ]), in which case we assign oh           with a new pseudo
state nth + 1, which enlarges the pseudo state space to [nt+1          t
                                                              h ] = [nh + 1].
Our particular closeness testing algorithm (Algorithm 4) adapts the test and analysis in Chan et al.
(2013) and makes certain modifications, such as repeating a test with a Poisson number of samples
log(1/δ) times to reduce the failure probability from a Θ(1) constant to δ, as well as imposing a hard
upper limit k on the total sample size (so that the test can be implemented under the k-MOMDP
feedback), instead of a Poisson number of samples which is unbounded.
Finally, using the assigned pseudo states, we update the visitation counts of each (pseudo) state
s and state-action (s, a) (Line 9-10). Then we update the pseudo latent models (Tbt+1 , O            bt+1 ) =
    t+1 H          t+1 H
({Th }h=1 , {Oh }h=1 ) using empirical estimates based on the previous data (Line 11):
  b              b
                                    1{sℓh =s,sℓh+1 =s′ }                           1{sℓh =s,oℓh =o}
         Tbht+1 (s′ | s, a) = ℓ∈[t] min{1,n                b t+1 (o | s) = P
                             P
                                             t+1
                                                 (s,a)}
                                                         , Oh                ℓ∈[t] min{1,nt+1 (s)} .       (3)
                                               h                                             h

Theoretical guarantee We now present the main guarantee for OST for learning distinguishable
POMDPs. The proof can be found in Appendix D.3. Further, OST is computationally efficient given
the planning oracle P OP , as all other operations in Algorithm 2 takes poly(H, S, A, O, T, k) time.
Theorem 11 (Learnining distinguishable POMDPs by OST). For any α-distinguishable√POMDP,
choosing β1 = O(H 3 log(OSAHK/δ)), β2 = O(O log(OSKH/δ)) and k = O((               e    O/α2 +
  2/3   4/3
O /α )), with probability at least 1 − δ, the output policy of Algorithm 2 is ε-optimal after the
following number of samples:
                                                                     √
                                                         SO SA O SAO2/3

                       SO SAk
       O poly(H) ·
        e                  +         =  O
                                        e   poly(H)  ·       +           +              .
                       ε2     ε2                         ε2       ε2 α 2    ε2 α4/3

The proof of Theorem 11 builds on high-probability correctness guarantees of closeness_test,
which enables us to adapt the algorithm and analysis of the hindsight observable setting Lee et al.
(2023) if all tests return the correct results (so that pseudo states coincide with the true latent states up
to a permutation). Compared to the rate obtained by k-OMLE (Eq. (1)), Theorem 11 achieves a better
sample complexity (all three terms above are smaller the S 2 AO1.5 /(α2 ε2 ) term therein, ignoring H
factors). Technically, this is enabled by the explicit closeness tests built into OST combined with
a sharp analysis of learning tabular POMDPs with observed latent states, rather than the implicit
identity tests used in the reduction approach (Theorem 9) with the k-OMLE algorithm.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated k-Multiple Observations MDP (k-MOMDP), a new enhanced feedback
model that allows efficient learning in broader classes of Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes (POMDPs) than under the standard feedback model. We introduced two new classes of
POMDPs—k-MO-revealing POMDPs and distinguishable POMDPs and designed sample-efficient
algorithms for learning in these POMDPs under k-MOMDP feedback. Overall, our results shed light
on the broader question of when POMDPs can be efficiently learnable from the lens of enhanced
feedbacks. We believe our work opens up many directions for future work, such as lower bounds
for the sample complexities, identifying alternative efficiently learnable classes of POMDPs under
k-MOMDP feedback, generalizing distinguishable POMDPs to the function approximation setting,
or developing more computationally efficient algorithms.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Mengdi Wang acknowledges the support by NSF grants CPS-2312093, DMS-1953686, IIS-2107304,
CMMI1653435, ONR grant 1006977 and C3.AI.

R EFERENCES
Jayadev Acharya, Constantinos Daskalakis, and Gautam Kamath. Optimal testing for properties of
  distributions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.

Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based RL with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity, 2022.

Philip Amortila, Nan Jiang, Dhruv Madeka, and Dean P. Foster. A few expert queries suffices for
  sample-efficient RL with resets and linear value approximation, 2022.

Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Krzysztof Onak, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. External sampling. In
  Automata, Languages and Programming: 36th International Colloquium, ICALP 2009, Rhodes,
  Greece, July 5-12, 2009, Proceedings, Part I 36, pp. 83–94. Springer, 2009.

Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.

Turgay Ayer, Oguzhan Alagoz, and Natasha K. Stout. Or forum—a POMDP approach to person-
  alize mammography screening decisions. Operations Research, 60(5):1019–1034, 2012. ISSN
  0030364X, 15265463. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/23323677.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for rein-
 forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR,
 2017.

Khanh Do Ba, Huy L Nguyen, Huy N Nguyen, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Sublinear time algorithms for
  earth mover’s distance. Theory of Computing Systems, 48:428–442, 2011.

Tuugkan Batu, Lance Fortnow, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Warren D Smith, and Patrick White. Testing
  closeness of discrete distributions. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 60(1):1–25, 2013.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Introduction to applied linear algebra: vectors, matrices,
  and least squares. Cambridge university press, 2018.

Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Reinforcement learning from partial observation: Linear
  function approximation with provable sample efficiency. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2485–2522. PMLR, 2022.

Clément L Canonne. A survey on distribution testing: Your data is big. but is it blue? Theory of
  Computing, pp. 1–100, 2020.

Siu-On Chan, Ilias Diakonikolas, Gregory Valiant, and Paul Valiant. Optimal algorithms for testing
  closeness of discrete distributions, 2013.

Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable RL with B-stability: Unified structural
  condition and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14990, 2022a.

Fan Chen, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Unified algorithms for RL with decision-estimation coefficients:
  No-regret, PAC, and reward-free learning, 2022b.

Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Lower bounds for learning in
  revealing POMDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01333, 2023.

Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient RL with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665–1674. PMLR, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5832–
  5850. PMLR, 2022.
Dylan J. Foster, Sham M. Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. CoRR, abs/2112.13487, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2112.13487.
Oded Goldreich and Dana Ron. On testing expansion in bounded-degree graphs. Studies in Complexity
  and Cryptography. Miscellanea on the Interplay between Randomness and Computation: In
  Collaboration with Lidor Avigad, Mihir Bellare, Zvika Brakerski, Shafi Goldwasser, Shai Halevi,
 Tali Kaufman, Leonid Levin, Noam Nisan, Dana Ron, Madhu Sudan, Luca Trevisan, Salil Vadhan,
 Avi Wigderson, David Zuckerman, pp. 68–75, 2011.
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Shayan Doroudi, and Emma Brunskill. A PAC RL algorithm for episodic
  POMDPs. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 510–518. PMLR, 2016.
Daniel Hsu, Sham M Kakade, and Tong Zhang. A spectral algorithm for learning hidden markov
  models. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(5):1460–1480, 2012.
Piotr Indyk, Reut Levi, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Approximating and testing k-histogram distributions
  in sub-linear time. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI symposium on
  Principles of Database Systems, pp. 15–22, 2012.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Contex-
  tual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.
Chi Jin, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete POMDPs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 18530–18539, 2020a.
Chi Jin, Sham M. Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete POMDPs, 2020b.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020c.
Sham M. Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Gaurav Mahajan, and Cyril Zhang. Learning hidden
  markov models using conditional samples, 2023.
Sammie Katt, Frans Oliehoek, and Christopher Amato. Bayesian reinforcement learning in factored
  POMDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.05612, 2018.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time.
 Machine learning, 49:209–232, 2002.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. PAC reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Jeongyeol Kwon, Yonathan Efroni, Constantine Caramanis, and Shie Mannor. RL for latent mdps:
  Regret guarantees and a lower bound. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  24523–24534, 2021.
Jonathan N Lee, Alekh Agarwal, Christoph Dann, and Tong Zhang. Learning in POMDPs is
  sample-efficient with hindsight observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13857, 2023.
Gen Li, Yuxin Chen, Yuejie Chi, Yuantao Gu, and Yuting Wei. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning is feasible for linearly realizable mdps with limited revisiting, 2021.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforcement
  learning not scary? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08967, 2022a.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle–a generic
  model-based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14997, 2022b.
Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state abstrac-
  tion and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 6961–6971. PMLR, 2020.
Elchanan Mossel and Sébastien Roch. Learning nonsingular phylogenies and hidden markov models.
  In Proceedings of the thirty-seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 366–375,
  2005.
OpenAI, Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur
  Petron, Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, Jonas Schneider, Nikolas
  Tezak, Jerry Tworek, Peter Welinder, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, and Lei
  Zhang. Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand, 2019.
Liam Paninski. A coincidence-based test for uniformity given very sparsely sampled discrete data.
  IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 54(10):4750–4755, 2008.
Christos H Papadimitriou and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of markov decision processes.
  Mathematics of operations research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.
Ming Shi, Yingbin Liang, and Ness Shroff. Theoretical hardness and tractability of POMDPs in RL
 with partial hindsight state information, 2023.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Computationally
 efficient PAC RL in POMDPs with latent determinism and conditional embeddings. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.12081, 2022a.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Provably efficient re-
 inforcement learning in partially observable dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.12020,
 2022b.
Gregory Valiant and Paul Valiant. Estimating the unseen: an n/log (n)-sample estimator for entropy
  and support size, shown optimal via new clts. In Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM
  symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 685–694, 2011.
Nikos Vlassis, Michael L Littman, and David Barber. On the computational complexity of stochastic
  controller optimization in POMDPs. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 4(4):
  1–8, 2012.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Embed to control partially observed sys-
  tems: Representation learning with provable sample efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13476,
  2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. PAC reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, David C. Parkes,
  and Richard Socher. The ai economist: Improving equality and productivity with ai-driven tax
  policies, 2020.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  A posterior sampling framework for interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01962,
  2022.
Runlong Zhou, Ruosong Wang, and Simon S Du. Horizon-free reinforcement learning for latent
  markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11604, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
                                     k
Lemma A.1. Suppose Ys ∈ {0, 1}O for all s ∈ S, and the locations of the 1′ s are disjoint within
the rows s ∈ S. The matrix Y is defined by
                                            ⊤
                                            Y1
                                     Y :=  ...  ∈ RS×O .
                                                      k



                                               YS⊤
Then we have
                                           ∥Y∥1→1 = 1.

                                                                                            k
Proof of Lemma A.1. Let’s analyze the action of Y on an arbitrary non-zero vector x ∈ RO . Since
each column of Y has at most one non-zero element, which is 1, the action of Y on x is:
                                     P k                
                                          O                       
                                          i=1   Y1,i xi      xj1
                                             ..              . 
                             Yx =                        .. 
                                                        =
                                              .
                                       POk                   xjS
                                         i=1 YS,i xi

Here, xjs is the element of x corresponding to the non-zero entry in row s of Y. Then, we have:
                                                             k
                                         S
                                         X                  O
                                                            X
                               ∥Y∥ x =         |xjs | ≤           |xi | = ∥x∥ .
                                         s=1                i=1

               ∥Yx∥                                     k
It follows that ∥x∥11 ≤ 1 for any non-zero x ∈ RO , so ∥Y∥1→1 ≤ 1.
                                               ∥Yx∥
Now let’s find a non-zero vector x for which ∥x∥ 1 = 1. Let x be the vector with all elements equal
                                                     1
to 1, i.e., xi = 1 for all i. Then, the action of Y on x is:
                                                          
                                                        1
                                              Yx =  ...  .
                                                          
                                                        1

This gives us ∥Y∥1→1 ≥ 1.
Combining the two inequalities, we finish the proof of Lemma A.1.

Lemma A.2. Suppose E is a matrix satisfies that ∥E∥1→1 < 1, then I + E is invertible.

Proof. To prove this lemma, we will show that I + E has no eigenvalue equal to zero. If there 0 is an
eigenvalue and there exists x ̸= 0, s.t.
                                          (I + E)⃗x = 0,
which means
                                          ∥x∥1 = ∥Ex∥1 .
This implies that ∥E∥1→1 ≥ 1, which contradicts with the fact that ∥E∥1→1 < 1. Hence I + E must
be invertible.

B    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3
B.1 P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Proof. Inspired by the bad case in Liu et al. (2022a), we construct a combination lock to prove the
proposition, which is defined as follows:


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider two states, labeled as a "good state" (sg ) and a "bad state" (sb ), and two observations, og
and ob . For the initial H − 1 steps, the emission matrices are

                                              1/2 1/2
                                                            .
                                              1/2 1/2
while at step H, the emission matrix becomes

                                                     1    0
                                                                  .
                                                     0    1

This implies that no information is learned at each step h ∈ [H − 1], but at step H, the current latent
state is always directly observed.
In our model, there are A different actions with the initial state set as sg . The transitions are defined
as follows: For every h ∈ [H − 1], one action is labeled "good", while the others are "bad". If the
agent is in the "good" state and makes the "good" action, it remains in the "good" state. In all other
scenarios, the agent transitions to the "bad" state. The good action is randomly selected from A for
each h ∈ [H − 1]. The episode concludes immediately after oH is obtained.
All observations during the initial H − 1 steps get a reward of 0. At step H, observation og produces
a reward of 1, while observation ob yields 0. Therefore, the agent receives a reward of 1 solely if it
reaches the state sg at step H, i.e., if the optimal action is taken at every step.
Assume we attempt to learn this POMDP using an algorithm X , where we are given T episodes, with
k-multiple observations, to interact with the POMDP. Regardless of the selection of k, no information
can be learned at step h ∈ [H − 1], making the best strategy a random guess of the optimal action
sequence. More specifically, the probability that X incorrectly guesses the optimal sequence, given
that we have T guesses, is
                           H−1             H−1
                           A       −1       A
                                         /         = (AH−1 − T )/AH−1 .
                                T              T
For T ≤ AH−1 /10, this value is at least 9/10. Therefore, with a minimum probability of 0.9, the
agent learns nothing except that the chosen action sequences are incorrect, and the best policy it
can produce is to randomly select from the remaining action sequences, which is less efficient than
(1/2)-optimal. This concludes our proof.

B.2 P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
Proof. First, we prove the existence of an (α, k + 1)-MO-revealing POMDP P that is not an (α, k)-
MO-revealing POMDP. To this end, it suffices to consider a POMDP with a single step (H = 1) with
emission matrix O ≡ O1 ∈ RO×S .
We consider the following POMDP with H = 1, O = 2 and S = k + 2. We denote O = {o1 , o2 } and
S = {s1 , · · · , sk+2 }. The probabilities O(o1 | si ) and O(o2 | si ) for i ∈ [k + 2] are denoted as ui
and vi respectively, with {v1 , . . . , vk+2 } ⊂ (0, 1) being distinct. It should be noted that ui + vi = 1
for any i.
                                            k
We first consider the rank of O⊗k ∈ R2 ×(k+2) . Note that O⊗k (o1:k |s) only depends on the number
of o1 ’s and o2 ’s within o1:k , which only has k + 1 possibilities (ok1 , ok−1
                                                                            1   o2 , · · · , ok2 ). Therefore, Ok
                                                          ⊗k
only has at most (k + 1) distinct rows, and thus rank(O ) ≤ k + 1. Since k + 1 < min {2k , k + 2}
for all k ≥ 2, O⊗k is rank-deficient, and thus the constructed POMDP with emission matrix O is not
an (α′ , k)-MO-revealing POMDP for any α′ > 0.
Next, we consider the rank of O⊗k+1 . Using similar arguments as above, O⊗k+1 has (k + 2) distinct
rows, and thus its rank equals the rank of the corresponding (k + 2) × (k + 2) submatrix:
                                  k+1
                                           uk+1           uk+1
                                                                 
                                   u1       2      ···     k+2
                                  uk1 v1 uk2 v2 · · · uk vk+2 
                                                         k+2
                                                                 .
                                                                
                                  ..         ..   ..       ..
                                  .           .      .      .   
                                    k+1     k+1            k+1
                                   v1      v2      ···    vk+2


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By rescaling each column i with 1/uk+1  i   , the resulting matrrix is a Vandermonde matrix generated
by distinct values {vi /ui }i∈[k+2] , and thus has full rank (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2018, Exercise
6.18). This implies that O⊗k+1 is full-rank and thus admits a finite left inverse (for example its
pseudo inverse) (O⊗k+1 )+ with finite (1 → 1) norm. This shows the constructed POMDP is
                                                     −1
(α, k + 1)-MO-revealing with α = (O⊗k+1 )+ 1→1 > 0.
Now we prove that any (α, k)-MO-revealing POMDP P is also an (α, k + 1)-MO-revealing POMDP.
Let P be an (α, k)-revealing POMDP. Fix any h ∈ [H] and let O ≡ Oh for shorthand. Let (aij )ij
represent the O⊗k matrix of P, where i ∈ Ok and j ∈ S. Let (bij )ij denote the O⊗k+ matrix of P,
where i ∈ S and j ∈ Ok .
By the definition of O⊗k+ , we have the following equations:
                        X
                               bs,o1 ···ok ao1 ···ok ,s′ = 1 {s = s′ } ,                  ∀s, s′ ∈ S.       (4)
                             o1 ···ok ∈O k

Let (āij )ij represent the O⊗k+1 matrix of P, where i ∈ Ok+1 and j ∈ S. Note that we have
āo1 ···ok+1 ,s = ao1 ···ok ,s O(ok+1 | s).
Now we construct O⊗k+1+ = (b̄ij )ij as b̄s,o1 ···ok+1 := bs,o1 ···ok . For all s, s′ ∈ S, we have:
          X                                           X
                  b̄s,o1 ···ok+1 āo1 ···ok+1 ,s′ =               bs,o1 ···ok ao1 ···ok ,s′ O(ok+1 | s′ )
         o1 ···ok+1 ∈O k+1                                o1 ···ok+1 ∈O k+1
                                                              X
                                                      =                     bs,o1 ···ok ao1 ···ok ,s′
                                                          o1 ···ok   ∈O k

                                                      = 1 {s = s′ } ,

where the last equation follows from (4). This shows that the constructed (O⊗k+1 )+ is indeed a left
                                                      k+1
inverse of O⊗k+1 . Further, for any vector v ∈ RO , we have
                             X X                                     X X
           (O⊗k+1 )+ v 1 =              b̄s,o1 ···ok+1 vo1 ···ok+1 =       bs,o1 ···ok vo1 ···ok+1
                                      s∈S o1:k+1                                    s∈S o1:k+1
             X                                     X
         ≤          (O⊗k )+ v:,ok+1 1 ≤ α−1               v:,ok+1 1 = α−1 ∥v∥1 .
             ok+1                                  ok+1

This shows that (O⊗k+1 )+ 1→1 ≤ α−1 . Since the above holds for any h ∈ [H], we have P is an
(α, k + 1)-revealing POMDP.

C       P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
C.1 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 AND T HEOREM 6
First, we define the optimistic cover and optimistic covering number for any model class Θ and ρ > 0.
The definition is taken from Chen et al. (2022b).

Lemma C.1 (Optimistic cover and optimistic covering number (Chen          et al., 2022b)). Suppose that
there is a context space X . An optimistic ρ-cover of Θ is a tuple P, Θ0 , where Θ0 ⊂ Θ is a finite
                                                                      e
          n               o
     e= P
set, P      eθ (·) ∈ RT H             specifies a optimistic likelihood function for each θ ∈ Θ0 , such
              0        ⩾0
                                    θ0 ∈Θ0 ,π∈Π
that:
                                                                                        eπ (τ ) ⩾
  1. For θ ∈ Θ, there exists a θ0 ∈ Θ0 satisfying: for all τ ∈ T H and π, it holds that P θ0
      π
     Pθ (τ );

  2. For θ ∈ Θ0 , maxπ Pπθ (τH = ·) − P
                                      eπ (τH = ·)
                                       θ                                  ⩽ ρ2 .
                                                                      1

The optimistic covering
                        number
                               NΘ (ρ) is defined as the minimal cardinality of Θ0 such that there
exists P such that P, M0 is an optimistic ρ-cover of Θ.
       e            e


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remind that we consider the k-MOMDP as an augmented POMDP and note that we are going to find
                                                                                             (1)
the optimized policy in Πsingleobs , which only depends on the single immediate observation oh .
Our k-OMLE algorithm can be seen as an adaptation of Algorithm OMLE in Chen et al. (2022a) to
the augmented POMDP with policy class Πsingleobs .
Chen et al. (2022a) showed that OMLE achieves the following estimation bound for low-rank
POMDPs.

Theorem C.2 (Theorem 9 in Chen et al. (2022a)). Choosing β = O(log (NΘ /δ)),  then with
probability at least 1 − δ, Algorithm OMLE outputs a policy π T such that V∗ − Vθ∗ π T ⩽ ε, after
                                 e poly(H)dP SR A log NΘ / α2 ε2

                                O
samples, where they considered POMDPs as Predictive State Representations (PSRs), and dP SR is
the PSR rank. In our setting, the poly(H) is H 5 (accounting for the additional H 2 factor introduced
by reward scaling and H factor by counting the number of samples instead of episodes). For low-rank
POMDP, dP SR ≤ d, where d is the rank of the decomposition of the transition kernel.

In the proof of Theorem 9 in Chen et al. (2022a), the use of the policy class is based on the fact that
the policy π t at each iteration is chosen to be the optimal policy within the model confidence set
Θt for that round, specifically π t = arg maxθ∈Θt ,π Vθ (π). By replacing the policy class with Πres ,
we still maintain this property, ensuring that the chosen policy remains optimal within the updated
model confidence set. Therefore, the replacement is valid and does not affect the optimality of the
selected policies throughout the algorithm. In k-OMLE, we can select the model class as an O(ε/k)
covering of the original model class (with a single observation), which will induce an O(ε)-covering
of the augmented POMDP class by the k-fold product structure of the augmented emission matrix.
Therefore, since the covering number only depends logarithmically on the precision parameter, the
ε-covering number for the augmented POMDP class will not change when omitting the logarithmic
term. Hence, by invoking Theorem C.2 and the above argument, we obtain the convergence rate
stated in Theorem 5.
For tabular POMDPs with S states, the PSR rank becomes S. Additionally, Liu et al. (2022a) showed
that log NΘ (ρ) ≤ O(H(S 2 A + SO) log(HSOA/ρ)). By utilizing this result and repeating the

discussion about the covering number as above, the covering number is also O e H(S 2 A + SO) .
Therefore, we can derive the convergence rate for the tabular case.

Extension to Explorative E2D and MOPS The above augmentation (considering k-MOMDP
as an augmented POMDP and searching in Πsingleobs ) can also be applied to extend Theorem 10 in
Chen et al. (2022a). The theorem is achieved by Algorithm Explorative Estimation-to-Decisions
(Explorative E2D). Furthermore, it can be extended to Theorem F.6 in Chen et al. (2022a), which is
achieved by Model-based optimistic posterior sampling (MOPS). The OMLE, Explorative E2D, and
MOPS extension to k-MOMDPs share the same sample complexity rates.
MOPS and E2D require slightly stronger conditions compared to OMLE. While OMLE only necessi-
tates θ∗ to possess the low PSR rank structure, E2D requires every model within Θ to exhibit the
same low-rank structure. All three algorithms require every model within Θ to be k-MO-revealing,
not just θ∗ .

D    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5
D.1 P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 8
Proof. We utilize proof by contradiction to establish the validity of this problem. Suppose we have a
tabular POMDP, denoted by P, that is not distinguishable. Hence there exists i, j ∈ S, such that
                                        ∥Oh (ei − ej )∥1 = 0,
which means that there must exist two different states, s1 and s2 belonging to S, such that they share
the same emission kernels. As a result, the columns associated with s1 and s2 will be identical.
Consequently, the k-fold tensor power of the observation space O⊗k for P will be a rank-deficient
matrix, implying that it lacks a left inverse. This leads us to conclude that P cannot be a revealing
POMDP. This contradiction substantiates our original proposition, hence completing the proof.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 9
Proof. Consider any α-distinguishable POMDP and any fixed h ∈ [H].
Step 1. By lemma D.3, we construct tests Zs = {Zs (o1:k )}o1:k ∈Ok for each s ∈ S, such that
Zs ≤ 1/2 with probability at least 1 − δ under Oh (·|s), and Zs ≥ 1 with probability at least 1 − δ
under Oh (·|s′ ) for any s′ ̸= s.
Step 2. For every s ∈ S, define “identity test for latent state s”:

                       Ys (o1:k ) = 1 Zs (o1:k ) = min′
                                                          Z s′ (o1:k )  ∈ {0, 1},
                                                        s ∈S
                                                                                                         k
with an arbitrary tie-breaking rule for the min (such as in lexicographic order). Understand Ys ∈ RO
as a vector. Define matrix
                                                ⊤
                                                 Y1
                                        Yh :=  ...  ∈ RS×O .
                                                               k



                                                  YS⊤
By step 1, we have
                                            Yh O⊗k+
                                                h   = IS + E,
where the matrix E ∈ RS×S satisfies |Eij | ≤ Sδ. We pick δ = 1/(2S 2 ) (which requires k ≥
√                                                     Ok
  O/α2 log 1/δ). Further, notice that each Ys ∈ {0, 1} , and the locations of the 1’s are disjoint
within the rows s ∈ S. By Lemma A.1 we have
                                              ∥Yh ∥1→1 = 1.

Step 3. Notice that (where {e⊤
                             s }s∈S are rows of E)
                                       X           X
                     ∥E∥1→1 = max          e⊤s x ≤   ∥es ∥∞ ≤ S 2 δ ≤ 1/2.
                                  ∥x∥1 =1
                                            s∈S           s∈S

By Lemma A.2 we know that IS + E is invertible. Further, we have
                                    ∞                           ∞
                                    X                           X          k             1
      (IS + E)−1 1→1 = IS +             (−1)k E k         ≤1+         ∥E∥1→1 =                 ≤ 2.
                                                                                    1 − ∥E∥1→1
                                    k=1             1→1         k=1

Finally, define the matrix
                                                                       k
                                 O⊗k+
                                  h   := (IS + E)−1 Yh ∈ RS×O .
We have O⊗k+
         h   O⊗k
              h = (IS + E)
                          −1
                             Yh O⊗k
                                 h = (IS + E)
                                             −1
                                                (IS + E) = IS . Further,
                          O⊗k+
                           h   1→1
                                   ≤ (IS + E)−1 1→1 · ∥Yh ∥1→1 ≤ 2.
This completes the proof.

D.3 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 11
Proof. First, we introduce the Hindsight Observable Markov Decision Processes (HOMDPs),
POMDPs where the latent states are revealed to the learner in hindsight.
HOMDP (Lee et al., 2023) There are two phases in the HOMDP: train time and test time. During
train time, at any given round t ∈ [T ], the learner produces a history-dependent policy π t which
is deployed in the partially observable environment as if the learner is interacting with a standard
POMDP. Once the t th episode is completed, the latent states st1:H are revealed to the learner in
hindsight, hence the terminology hindsight observability. Lee et al. (2023) showed that HOP-B
achieves the following estimation bound for HOMDPs.

Theorem D.1 (Theorem 4.2 in Lee et al. (2023)). Let M be a HOMDP model with S latent states
and O observations. With probability at least 1 − δ, HOP-B outputs a sequence of policies π 1 , . . . , π T
such that
                                           e H 52 (SO + SA) T .
                                                   p
                             Reg(T ) = O


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adapted to modified setting where each latent state yields K observations, by adapting their proof
(using all K observations collectively to estimate the emission matrices), we have

                                          e H 52 (SO/K + SA) T .
                                                 p
                            Reg(T ) = O                                                        (5)

Our proof is a reduction from the result (5) combined with results for closeness testing to ensure that
states are correct (up to permutation). Suppose in algorithm 2, the pseudo-states are indeed true states
(up to permutation). Then, our algorithm 2 achieves the sample complexity
                                                         √               !!
                                         6    SO SA O SAO2/3
                          T kH = O H ·
                                   e              + 2 2 + 2 4/3               .
                                              ε2      ε α         ε α
Now we explain our proof, our Algorithm 2 are different from HOP-B in two points:
  1. HOP-B works for HOMDP, where the exact information of the pseudo-states can be immediately
     known. In k-MOMDP, we cannot determine the exact state even when we can distinguish all the
     states. Therefore, Algorithm 2 reduces to the HOP-B algorithm up to permute.
  2. Since we cannot know the exact pseudo-states, we couldn’t assume the reward on the pseudo
     state space X is known for each s ∈ X . We can only estimate the reward towards the estimated
     emission kernel.

                               X X rh (o)1 sℓh = s, oℓh = o        X
                    t                                                  b t (o | s)rh (o),
                  r̄h (s, a) =                  t              =       O
                                               nh (s)
                              o∈O ℓ∈[t]                                  o∈O

     where Ob t is the estimated emission kernel in the t-th iteration. This leads to an extra error
                                                                                       P
     between the estimated reward function r̄ and true reward function rh (s, a) = o∈O O(o |
     s)rh (o).
     Since we assume the reward function r can be bounded by 1, the error between the estimated
     reward function r̄ and true reward function r(s, a) can be bounded as:
                                                  X
                         r̄h (s, a) − rh (s, a) =    b t (o | s) − O(o | s))rh (o)
                                                    (O
                                                   o∈O
                                                   X
                                               ≤         ∥O
                                                          b t (o | s) − O(o | s)∥.
                                                   o∈O
                                  p
     which can be bounded by (O log(SOT H/δ))/(nt (s)) with probability 1 − δ as showed in
     Lee et al. (2023). Hence we can additionally handle the reward estimation, however, this will
     not result in a change of the rate, as we can just choose a larger constant in the exploration bonus
     for states in their HOP-B algorithm (line4, β2 ) to ensure optimism still holds.
The previous theorem requires the pseudo-states to be true. To ensure this requires the guarantee
of closeness testing, which we give here, we will prove it in Section D.4. We state that with a
high probability, we could identify the pseudo-states (up to permutation), which means that after an
iteration, we could know whether the states visited in this iteration were visited before. We use the
closeness testing algorithm to test whether two observation sequences were generated from the same
state.
                                                               √
Lemma D.2 (Closeness testing guarantee). When k = O(( O/α2 + O2/3 /α4/3 ) log 1/δ), with
probability 1 − δ the following holds: Throughout the execution of Algorithm 2, we have that there
exists a permutation π : S → S, such that pseudo-states are up to permutation of true states (we
could identify each state).

After identifying the pseudo-states (up to permutation), we can think that we have information about
the state after each iteration, as we said in Section 3.
On the success event of closeness testing, states are indeed correct. Therefore we can invoke (5) to
obtain the sample complexity
                                                                        √               !!
                                                            SO SA O SAO2/3

                       6    SO SAk                      6
         T kH = O H ·
                 e              + 2           =O H ·
                                                  e              + 2 2 + 2 4/3
                             ε2      ε                       ε2       ε α       ε α


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 √
by taking k = O(( Oα2 + O2/3 /α4/3 ) log 1/δ) to the bound of Theorem D.1, which finish the
proof.

D.4 C LOSENESS T ESTING
In this section, we prove the theoretical guarantee for closeness testing.

Proof of Lemma D.2. Let’s assume X ∼ Poi(λ). We have tail bound for X: for any x > 0,
                                                                   x
                                 P(X > λ + x) ≤ ex−(λ+x) ln(1+ λ ) .
Employing this tail bound, we conclude that Algorithm 4 will not return a fail with a probability of
1 − O(δ). Our subsequent analysis is contingent upon this event.
                                                                 √
Based on Proposition 3 in Chan et al. (2013), given k = O(( Oα2 + O2/3 /α4/3 ) log 1/δ), we
                                                                                  t,(1:k)      t′ ,(1:k)
can infer that for any j ∈ [M ]: Z (j) = 1 with a probability of at least 2/3 if oh       and oh
generated from the same state, Z (j) = 0 with a probability of at least 2/3 if they are
                                                                                        produced by
different states. Utilizing standard repeating techniques, we find that with O log 1δ iterations, we
can attain an error probability of at most δ.
                                  t,(1:k)     t′ ,(1:k)
Thus, we’ve established that if oh        and oh       are generated from the same state, Algorithm 4
will return an accept with a probability of 1 − δ. Conversely, if they are generated from different
states, the algorithm 4 will return a reject with a probability of 1 − δ.


Algorithm 5 Closeness Testing 2 closeness_test2([o[i] ]i∈[k] )
Input: [o[i] ]i∈[k]
 1: Sample N1 , · · · , NM ∼ Poi(k/M ), where M = O(log(1/δ)).
 2: return fail if N1 + · · · + NM > k.
 3: for j ∈ [M ] do
 4:   Bj = {N1 + · · · + Nj−1 + 1, · · · , N1 + · · · + Nj }.
         (j)     P
 5:   No = i∈Bj 1{oi = o}.
 6:   A(j) = {o : o ≥ α/(50O)}.
                             (j)              (j)
      C (j) = o∈A(j) ((No − Nj qo )2 − No )/Nj qo ).
                P
 7:
 8:   z (j) = 1{C (j) ≤ Nj α2 /10}.
 9: return accept if j∈[M ] z (j) ≥ M/2, else reject
                        P


Lemma D.3. Suppose P is an α-distinguishable POMDP, then we can construct tests Zs =
{Zs (o1:k )}o1:k ∈Ok for each s ∈ S, such that Zs = 0 with probability at least 1 − δ under Oh (·|s),
and Zs = 1 with probability at least 1 − δ under Oh (·|s′ ) for any s′ ̸= s.

Proof. We construct Zs by using the closeness testing technique.
First, we give to consider a problem: Given samples from an unknown distribution p, is it possible to
distinguish whether p equal to O versus p being α-far from every O?
                                                                     √
Chan et al. (2013) proposes an algorithm to achieve its lower bound O/α2 . We improve their
algorithm by repeating log(1/δ) times to attain an error probability of at most δ. We denote
qo = O(o | s). The algorithm is listed in Algorithm 5.
Finally,
√        we apply the repeating technique to Theorem 2 in Chan et al. (2013). Then we set k =
  O/α2 log 1/δ and set Zs (o1:k ) = 1{closeness_test2(o1:k ) = accept}. Hence we can identify
whether an observation sequence o1:k is generated from state s with probability 1 − δ. Therefore, we
complete the proof of Lemma D.3.


                                                   19
