Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IRECTLY F INE -T UNING D IFFUSION M ODELS ON D IF -
FERENTIABLE R EWARDS

   Kevin Clark∗ , Paul Vicol∗ , Kevin Swersky, David J. Fleet
   Google DeepMind ∗ Equal contribution
   {kevclark, paulvicol, kswersky, davidfleet}@google.com



                                                                                          A BSTRACT
                                   We present Direct Reward Fine-Tuning (DRaFT), a simple and effective method
                                   for fine-tuning diffusion models to maximize differentiable reward functions, such
                                   as scores from human preference models. We first show that it is possible to back-
                                   propagate the reward function gradient through the full sampling procedure, and
                                   that doing so achieves strong performance on a variety of rewards, outperforming
                                   reinforcement learning-based approaches. We then propose more efficient variants
                                   of DRaFT: DRaFT-K, which truncates backpropagation to only the last K steps of
                                   sampling, and DRaFT-LV, which obtains lower-variance gradient estimates for the
                                   case when K = 1. We show that our methods work well for a variety of reward
                                   functions and can be used to substantially improve the aesthetic quality of images
                                   generated by Stable Diffusion 1.4. Finally, we draw connections between our
                                   approach and prior work, providing a unifying perspective on the design space of
                                   gradient-based fine-tuning algorithms.


1                           I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021b; Kingma et al., 2021) have revolutionized generative modeling for continuous data, achieving
impressive results across modalities including images, videos, and audio. However, for many use
cases, modeling the training data distribution exactly (e.g. diverse images from the web) does not align
with the model’s desired behavior (e.g. generating aesthetically pleasing images). To overcome this
mismatch, text-to-image diffusion models commonly employ methods like classifier-free guidance
(Ho & Salimans, 2021) to improve image-text alignment, and are fine-tuned on curated datasets such
as LAION Aesthetics (Schuhmann & Beaumont, 2022) to improve image quality.
Within the language modeling community, aligning model behavior with human preferences is widely
accomplished through fine-tuning with reinforcement learning (RL), such as with RL from human
feedback (RLHF; Ziegler et al. 2019; Stiennon et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022a).
Inspired by RLHF, supervised and reinforcement learning methods have been developed to train

                            A stunning beautiful oil                                                                                A ﬂuﬀy owl sits atop a
                            painting of a lion,          Highly detailed                               Ultra realistic photo of a   stack of antique books    Impressionist painting of
                            cinematic lighting, golden   photograph of a meal   A racoon washing       single light bulb,           in a detailed and moody   a cat, textured,
                            hour light.                  with many dishes.      dishes.                dramatic lighting.           illustration.             hypermodern
      Stable Diﬀusion 1.4
 After Reward
  Fine-Tuning


Figure 1: DRaFT fine-tuning for human preference reward models yields more detailed and stylized images
than baseline Stable Diffusion. See Figure 37 in Appendix E for more samples.


                                                                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


diffusion models on human preference models or other rewards (Lee et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b;
Dong et al., 2023; Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023). While showing some success at improving
text alignment or image aesthetics on narrow domains, these approaches are sample inefficient and
have not been scaled up to the level of generally improving generation style across diverse prompts.
We propose a simple and efficient approach for gradient-based reward fine-tuning based on differ-
entiating through the diffusion sampling process. We first introduce Direct Reward Fine-Tuning
(DRaFT), a conceptually straightforward method that backpropagates the reward through the full
sampling chain. To keep memory and compute costs low, we use gradient checkpointing (Chen et al.,
2016) and optimize LoRA weights (Hu et al., 2022) rather than the full set of model parameters.
Then, we introduce modifications to DRaFT that further improve its efficiency and performance.
First, we propose DRaFT-K, a variant that backpropagates through only the last K steps of sampling
to compute the gradient. We show empirically that full backpropagation can result in exploding
gradients, and that using the truncated gradient performs substantially better given the same number of
training steps. Then, we further improve efficiency by introducing DRaFT-LV, a variant of DRaFT-1
that computes lower-variance gradient estimates by averaging over multiple noise samples.
We apply DRaFT to Stable Diffusion 1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) and evaluate it on a variety of reward
functions and prompt sets. As our methods leverage gradients, they are substantially more efficient
than RL-based fine-tuning baselines, for example maximizing scores from the LAION Aesthetics
Classifier (Schuhmann & Beaumont, 2022) > 200× faster than the RL algorithms from Black et al.
(2023). DRaFT-LV is particularly efficient, learning roughly 2× faster than ReFL (Xu et al., 2023), a
previous gradient-based fine-tuning method. We scale up DRaFT to train on hundreds of thousands of
prompts and show that it improves Stable Diffusion on human preference rewards such as PickScore
(Kirstain et al., 2023) and Human Preference Score v2 (Wu et al., 2023a). We further show that we
can interpolate between the pre-trained and fine-tuned models by scaling the LoRA weights, and we
can combine the effects of multiple rewards by linearly combining fine-tuned LoRA weights. Finally,
we showcase how DRaFT can be applied to diverse reward functions including image compressibility
and incompressibility, object detection and removal, and generating adversarial examples.

2   R ELATED W ORK
We provide an extended discussion of related work in Appendix D.
Learning human preferences. Human preference learning trains models on judgements of which
behaviors people prefer, rather than on human demonstrations directly (Knox & Stone, 2009; Akrour
et al., 2011). This training is commonly done by learning a reward model reflecting human preferences
and then learning a policy that maximizes the reward (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018). We
apply DRaFT to optimize scores from existing preference models, such as PickScore (Kirstain et al.,
2023) and Human Preference Score v2 (Wu et al., 2023a), which are trained on human judgements
between pairs of images generated by diffusion models for the same prompt.
Guidance (Song et al., 2021b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) steers sampling towards images that satisfy
a desired objective by adding an auxiliary term to the score function. Various pre-trained models
can be used to provide guidance signals, including classifiers, facial recognition models, and object
detectors (Bansal et al., 2023). Noisy examples obtained during sampling may be out-of-distribution
for the guidance model. Two approaches to mitigate this are: (1) training the guidance model on
noisy data (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and (2) applying a guidance model to predicted clean images
from one-step denoising (Li et al., 2022). However, (1) precludes the use of off-the-shelf pre-trained
guidance functions and (2) applies guidance to out-of-distribution blurry images for high noise levels.
DRaFT avoids these issues by only applying the reward function to the final generated image.
Backpropagation through diffusion sampling. Watson et al. (2022) differentiate through sam-
pling to learn sampler hyperparameters (rather than model parameters) in order to reduce inference
cost while maintaining perceptual image quality. Fan & Lee (2023) also propose an approach to
speed up sampling: they consider doing this by backpropagating through diffusion sampling, but
focus on an RL-based approach due to memory and exploding/vanishing gradient concerns. Both Fan
& Lee (2023) and Watson et al. (2022) aim to improve sampling speed, rather than optimize arbitrary
differentiable rewards, which is our focus. Like DRaFT, Direct Optimization of Diffusion Latents
(DOODL; Wallace et al. 2023) backpropagates through sampling to optimize differentiable rewards;
however DOODL optimizes the initial noise sample xT rather than the model parameters. While
this does not require a training phase, it is much slower at inference time because the optimization


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


must be redone for each prompt and metric. Outside of image generation, Wang et al. (2023a) train
diffusion model policies for reinforcement learning by backpropagating through sampling.
Reward Fine-Tuning with Supervised Learning. Lee et al. (2023) and Wu et al. (2023b) use
supervised approaches to fine-tune diffusion models on rewards. These methods generate images
with the pre-trained model and then fine-tune on the images while weighting examples according to
the reward function or discarding low-reward examples. Unlike DRaFT or RL methods, the model is
not trained online on examples generated by the current policy. However, Dong et al. (2023) use an
online version of this approach where examples are re-generated over multiple rounds of training,
which can be viewed as a simple kind of reinforcement learning.
Reward Fine-Tuning with Reinforcement Learning. Fan & Lee (2023) interpret the denoising
process as a multi-step decision-making task and use policy gradient algorithms to fine-tune diffusion
samplers. Building on it, Black et al. (2023) and Fan et al. (2023) use policy gradient algorithms
to fine-tune diffusion models for arbitrary black-box objectives. Rather than optimizing model
parameters, Hao et al. (2022) apply RL to improve the input prompts. RL approaches are flexible
because they do not require differentiable rewards. However, in practice many reward functions are
differentiable, or can be implemented or approximated in a differentiable way, and thus analytic
gradients are often available. In such cases, using reinforcement learning discards useful information.
Reward Feedback Learning (ReFL). ReFL (Xu et al., 2023) uses reward function gradients to
fine-tune a diffusion model. It evaluates the reward on the one-step predicted clean image, r(x̂0 , c)
from a randomly-chosen step t along the denoising trajectory rather than on the final image, as
DRaFT does. While ReFL performs similarly to DRaFT-1, DRaFT-LV is substantially more efficient,
training approximately 2× faster. We further discuss how ReFL relates to DRaFT in Section 4.

3       BACKGROUND ON D IFFUSION M ODELS
Diffusion Models. Diffusion models are latent variable models based on the principle of iterative
denoising: samples are generated starting from pure noise xT ∼ N (0, I) via a sequence of applica-
tions of a learned denoising function  θ that gradually removes noise over T timesteps. Diffusion
models often learn the denoiser  θ by minimizing the following re-weighted variational lower bound
of the marginal likelihood (Ho et al., 2020):
                LSimple (θ) = Et∼U (0,T ),x0 ∼pdata , ∼N (0,I) k  −  θ (αt x0 + σt  , t) k2

                                                                                                      (1)
             p
where σt = 1 − αt2 is an increasing noise schedule.1 Here,  θ is trained to predict the noise   added
to the clean datapoint x0 . For image data,  θ is typically parameterized by a UNet (Ronneberger
et al., 2015). We use conditional diffusion models, which include a context c such as a text prompt
passed to the denoising function  θ (xt , c, t). For inference (i.e., sampling), one draws a noise sample
xT , and then iteratively uses  θ to estimate the noise and compute the next latent sample xt−1 .
Classifier-Free Guidance. Classifier-free guidance (CFG) uses a linear combination of the condi-
tional and unconditional score estimates, denoising according to (1+w(t)) (xt , c, t)−w(t) (xt , ∅, t)
where w(t) is the guidance weight and ∅ indicates an empty conditioning signal. It requires that c is
replaced with ∅ part of the time during training so that the unconditional score function is learned.

4       M ETHOD
We propose a simple approach for fine-tuning diffusion models for differentiable reward functions.
Our goal is to fine-tune the parameters θ of a pre-trained diffusion model such that images generated
by the sampling process maximize a differentiable reward function r:
                             J(θ) = Ec∼pc ,xT ∼N (0,I) [r(sample(θ, c, xT ), c)]                                  (2)
where sample(θ, c, xT ) denotes the sampling process from time t = T → 0 with context c.
DRaFT. First, we consider solving Eq. 2 by computing ∇θ r(sample(θ, c, xT ), c) and using gradi-
ent ascent. Computing this gradient requires backpropagation through multiple diffusion model calls
in the sampling chain, similar to backpropagation through time in a recurrent neural network. We
use two approaches to reduce the memory cost of DRaFT: 1) low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al.,
2022); and 2) gradient checkpointing (Chen et al., 2016).
    1                                                                        √
        We use VDM notation (Kingma et al., 2021), where αt corresponds to       ᾱt in the Ho et al. (2020) notation.


                                                       3
                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            DRaFT-LV
                          Prompt                                                          Reward
                          “majestic
                            lion”


                                                                                       Aesthetic Score
                                                                                       PickScore                                      Forward
                                                                                       Compressibility                                Backward
                                                           DRaFT                       Object Detection
                                                                          DRaFT-K
                      Figure 2: DRaFT backpropagates reward gradients through the sampling process into LoRA weights. DRaFT-K
Iterative Denoising   truncates the backward pass, differentiating through only the last K steps of sampling. DRaFT-LV improves the
                      efficiency of DRaFT-1 by generating multiple examples in the last step to reduce variance.

                      LoRA. Rather than fine-tuning the full set of model parameters, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu
                      et al., 2022) freezes the weights of the pre-trained model, and injects new low-rank weight matrices
                      alongside the original model weights, whose contributions are summed to produce the adapted model
                      outputs. Mathematically, for a layer with base parameters W0 whose forward pass yields h = W0 x,
                      the LoRA adapted layer is h = W0 x + BAx, where BA is a low-rank matrix. LoRA dramatically
                      reduces the number of parameters that need to be optimized, which reduces the memory requirements
                      of fine-tuning. Another benefit is that, because the information learned by the fine-tuned model is
                      contained within the LoRA parameters, we can conveniently combine fine-tuned models by taking
                      linear combinations of the LoRA parameters (Figure 5, right) and interpolate between the original
                      and fine-tuned model by re-scaling the LoRA parameters (Figure 7).
                                                                             Gradient Checkpointing. Gradient check-
                      Algorithm 1 DRaFT (with DDIM sampling)                 pointing (Gruslys et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016)
                         Inputs: pre-trained diffusion model weights θ, reduces the memory cost of storing activations
                         reward r, prompt dataset pc                         for use during backprop at the cost of increased
                         while not converged do                              compute, by storing only a subset of activations
                                           
                                            randint(1,  m)    if ReFL       in memory and re-computing the others on the
                                           
                                           
                                             T                 if DRaFT      fly. Specifically, we only store the input latent
                              ttruncate =                                    for each denoising step, and re-materialize
                                                                                                                     Objective  the
                                             K                 if DRaFT-K    UNet activations
                                                                                          OWL during backprop. Implementing
                                           
                                                                                                                        Sum of
                                           
                                           
                                             1                 if DRaFT-LV checkpointing   ViTin JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018)
                                                                                                                        Scores is
                              c ∼ pc , xT ∼ N (0, I)                         as simple as adding @jax.checkpoint            to the
                                                                                                                      (+ Bounding
                                                                                                                       Box Areas)
                              for t = T, . . . , 1 do                        body
                                                                          Queries  of the sampling  loop.
                                   if t = ttruncate then
                                        xt = stop_grad(xt )                  DRaFT-K. While gradient checkpointing
                                                                          “person”
                                   x̂0 = (xt − σt  θ (xt , c, t))/αt         makes it possible to backpropagate through
                                   if t = ttruncate and ReFL then            the full sampling chain, we found that opti-
                                        x0 ≈ x̂0                             mization speed
                                                                          Differentiable JPEGand   overall performance
                                                                                                Compression               can be
                                                                                                             & Decompression
                                        break                                substantially  improved   by truncating backprop
                                   xt−1 = αt−1 x̂0 + σt−1  θ (xt , c, t)     through only the last K sampling steps. We call
                                                                             the resulting approach DRaFT-K, illustrated
                              g = ∇θ r(x0 , c)                               in Figure 2. Truncating backprop reduces
                              if DRaFT-LV then                               the compute needed per step by decreasing
                                   for i = 1, . . . , n do                   the number of backward passes through the
                                          ∼ N (0, I)                         UNet. Surprisingly, it also improves training
                                        x1 = α1 stop_grad(x0 ) + σ1          efficiency per-step, which we investigate further
                                        x̂0 = (x1 − σ1  θ (x1 , c, 1))/α1    in Section 5.2. For small K (e.g., K = 1), the
                                        g = g + ∇θ r(x̂0 , c)                memory cost of unrolling is small, and we do not
                              θ ← θ − ηg                                     need gradient checkpointing.
                         return θ
                                                                             DRaFT-LV. Empirically, we found that simply
                      setting K = 1 (i.e., only differentiating through the last sampling step) results in the best reward vs.
                      compute tradeoff. Here, we propose a method for improving the efficiency of DRaFT-1 further by
                      reducing the variance of the gradient estimate. We call this low-variance estimator DRaFT-LV. The
                      key idea is to use the forward diffusion process to produce additional examples to train on without
                      re-generating new images. Specifically, we noise the generated image n times, and use the summed


                                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reward gradient over these examples. Although DRaFT-LV adds n additional forward and backward
passes through the UNet and reward model, in practice this is fairly little overhead compared to the T
UNet calls already needed for sampling. We found that using n = 2 is around 2× more efficient than
DRaFT-1 while adding around 10% compute overhead for our reward functions.
General Reward Fine-Tuning Algorithm. Algorithm 1 presents a unified framework encompass-
ing several gradient-based approaches for diffusion fine-tuning. In particular, it includes as special
cases DRaFT, DRaFT-K, DRaFT-LV, and ReFL (Xu et al., 2023), which differ in how the gradient is
computed. DRaFT-K inserts a stop-gradient operation xt = stop_grad(xt ) at sampling iteration
K, to ensure that the gradient is only computed through the last K steps (as the gradient does not
flow through stop_grad); vanilla DRaFT can be obtained by setting K = T . ReFL inserts a
stop gradient and breaks out of the sampling loop early, returning a one-step predicted clean image.
Additionally, it does so at a random timestep towards the end of sampling (we use m = 20 for
50-step sampling). In this unifying framework, ReFL with m = 1 is equivalent to DRaFT-1. Lastly,
DRaFT-LV averages the last-step gradient over multiple examples with different noises to reduce
variance. Note that in practice we use Adam and LoRA, not shown in the algorithm for simplicity.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we show that DRaFT can be applied to a wide range of reward functions, and that it
substantially outperforms prior reward fine-tuning methods. We used Stable Diffusion 1.4 as the base
diffusion model. As it is a latent diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022), applying DRaFT involves
backpropagating through both the sampling process that produces the final latent representation and
the decoder used to obtain the image. DRaFT is applicable to any differentiable sampler; in our
experiments, we used DDIM (Song et al., 2021a), but we found that ancestral sampling performs
similarly. We used 50 sampling steps, so DRaFT-50 corresponds to backpropagating through the
full sampling chain (i.e., vanilla DRaFT). We used classifier-free guidance weight 7.5. Experimental
details, hyperparameters, and additional results are provided in Appendices A and B.
5.1   F INE -T UNING FOR A ESTHETIC Q UALITY
                                                                                 Reward=5.4                            Reward=11
                                                                                                 Reward=7   Reward=9
                                                                               (no ﬁne-tuning)                         (collapsed)


                         11

                         10
                                                 DRaFT-LV
       Aesthetic Score


                         9                       DRaFT-1
                                                 DRaFT-50
                                                 ReFL
                         8                       DDPO
                                                 Prompt engineering
                                                 Stable Diffusion 1.4
                         7

                         6


                              0   1000    2000      3000      4000      5000
                                         Reward Queries
Figure 3: Left: Sample efficiency of methods when maximizing scores from the LAION Aesthetic Classifier.
DDPO (Black et al., 2023) results were obtained from correspondence with the authors, as the results in the
original paper use a buggy implementation; DDPO achieves a reward of 7.4 after 50k reward queries. Right:
Qualitative comparison of generations as training progresses.

First, we compared fine-tuning methods to improve aesthetic quality scores given by the LAION
aesthetic predictor, which is trained to rate images on a scale of 1 through 10. We used the simple set
of 45 prompts from Black et al. (2023), where each prompt is the name of a common animal. We
compared against the DDPO (Black et al., 2023) RL method, ReFL (Xu et al., 2023), and a prompt
engineering baseline (see Appendix A.3 for more details). Results are shown in Figure 3. Because it
does not make use of gradients, reinforcement learning is much less sample-efficient than DRaFT.
Interestingly, truncating DRaFT to a single backwards step substantially improves sample efficiency;
we analyze this phenomenon further in Section 5.2. Thanks to its lower-variance gradient estimate,
DRaFT-LV further improves training efficiency. We observed that the methods initially produced
improved images, but eventually collapsed to producing very similar high-reward images.

                                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                                                              0.354
                               0.35                                                                              0.343 0.343                   0.343
                                                                                                                                                       0.350 0.347                    0.347


   Human Preference Score v2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.333                            0.335

                                                                                                                                       0.312
                                                                                                                               0.303
                                0.3
                                      0.236                                                                                                                          0.287                            0.287
                                                                                                         0.282


                                              DRaFT-LV, PickScore
                                                                          0.277 0.279


                                              DRaFT-LV, Pick-a-Pic
                                                                                                 0.276


                                              DRaFT-LV, 5k Steps
                                              DRaFT-1, PickScore
                                              DRaFT-1, Pick-a-Pic
                                                      0.270 0.272 0.273                  0.271
                                              0.264


                                              ReFL+Guidance
                                              SD 1.4, Best/16
                                              SDXL Base 0.9
                                              Dreamlike 2.0
                                              DeepFloyd-XL
                               0.25
                                              VQGAN+CLIP


                                              DRaFT-50
                                              DRaFT-30
                                              DRaFT-10


                                              DRaFT-LV
                                              DALL-E 2


                                              DRaFT-5
                                              DRaFT-1
                                              DOODL
                                              SD 2.0


                                              SD 1.4



                                              ReFL
                                0.2
Figure 4: Comparison of the HPSv2 rewards achieved by a variety of baselines (denoted by gray bars), ReFL,
DRaFT-K, and DRaFT-LV on the HPDv2 test set. All baselines except for DOODL and best of 16 are taken
from Wu et al. (2023a). Unless indicated otherwise, models are Stable Diffusion 1.4 fine-tuned for 10k steps.

Reward Hacking. In Figure 3 (Right), we observe an instance of reward hacking, where the fine-
tuned model loses diversity and collapses to generate a certain high-reward image. Reward hacking
points to deficiencies in existing rewards; efficiently finding gaps between the desired behavior
and the behavior implicitly captured by the reward is a crucial step in fixing the reward. Improved
techniques for fine-tuning, such as DRaFT, can aid the development of new rewards. We discuss
reward hacking further in Appendix B.8.
5.2                    F INE -T UNING ON H UMAN P REFERENCES

Next, we applied DRaFT to two reward functions trained on human preference data: Human
Preference Score v2 (HPSv2; Wu et al. 2023a) and PickScore (Beaumont et al., 2022).
Qualitative comparison of reward functions. First, we trained DRaFT models using the aesthetic,
PickScore, and HPSv2 rewards on the same set of 45 animal prompts. As the reward models behave
differently for photographs and paintings, we trained two versions of each model. Qualitatively, we
found that the different reward functions led to quite different generated images (see Figure 5, Left).
HPSv2 generally encourages more colorful but less photorealistic generations.
                                              Prompt: A photo of a deer                          Prompt: A painting of a deer                                  Prompt: A painting of a deer
                               No ﬁne-tuning              Aesthetic reward           No ﬁne-tuning                 Aesthetic reward                    Aesthetic + HPSv2       Aesthetic + PickScore


                               HPSv2 reward               PickScore reward           HPSv2 reward                  PickScore reward                    HPSv2 + PickScore        All


Figure 5: Left: Comparison of generations (using the same random seed) from DRaFT models fine-tuned using
the LAION Aesthetic Classifier, Human Preference Score v2, and PickScore reward functions. Right: Outputs
     Generalization
of DRaFT               (Human
         models combined   by mixingPreference     Score
                                     the LoRA weights       v2 Reward)
                                                       for different reward functions.


   a painting of an old man                            a painting of a racoon           a painting of a tree         a painting of a city skyline a painting of a spaceship               an abstract modern
                                                          washing dishes                                                                                                                       painting

Figure 6: A DRaFT model trained on a simple prompt set of 45 animals generalizes well to other image subjects
while preserving the learned style (Human Preference Score v2 reward).
Human Preference Score Comparison. Next, we compared DRaFT-finetuned models to several
baselines on the Human Preference Score v2 benchmark (Wu et al., 2023a). We used DRaFT to
       portrait of an old man                                             painting of a spaceship                                 painting of a city skyline                             abstract modern painting

                                                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


fine-tune for HPSv2, using the Human Preference Dataset v2 (HPDv2) traning set prompts. In
Figure 4, we report the mean performance over the four test set categories; Table 2 in Appendix B.2
provides a detailed breakdown of results by category. We compared DRaFT to a selected set of
baselines from Wu et al. (2023a), as well as to DOODL (Wallace et al., 2023) and ReFL (Xu et al.,
2023). As ReFL does not use guidance during training, we also experimented with adding guidance to
it. Interestingly, the model with guidance performs similarly; possibly fine-tuning compensates for the
lack of guidance similarly to how guided diffusion models can be distilled into unguided ones (Meng
et al., 2023). DRaFT-1 slightly outperforms ReFL, while being simpler to implement. DRaFT-LV
achieves the best reward value, learning approximately 2× faster than DRaFT-1 (see the “DRaFT-LV,
5k steps” bar). Figure 4 also provides an ablation comparing DRaFT-K for K ∈ {1, 5, 10, 30, 50}.
We found that using smaller K was beneficial, both in terms of training time and final performance.
Evaluating Generalization. Next, we investigated several types of generalization: 1) prompt
generalization, where we fine-tuned for HPSv2 on one prompt dataset (Pick-a-Pic) and evaluated
performance on another prompt dataset (HPDv2)—these results are shown by the “DRaFT, Pick-a-
Pic” bars in Figure 4; and 2) reward generalization, where we fine-tuned using a different reward
(PickScore) than we used for evaluation (HPSv2)—these results are shown by the “DRaFT, PickScore”
bars. DRaFT-1 and DRaFT-LV transfer well across prompt sets and fairly well across reward functions.
We also show qualitative prompt generalization results in Figure 6: we found that a model fine-tuned
using only 45 animal prompts learns a style that generalizes well to other prompts.
Large-Scale Multi-Reward Model. We pushed the scale of DRaFT-LV further by performing
a 2× longer training run on the larger HPDv2 dataset, optimizing for a weighted combination of
rewards, PickScore = 10, HPSv2 = 2, Aesthetic = 0.05.2 Images generated by the model are shown
in Figure 1. Overall, the fine-tuned model produces more detailed and stylized images than baseline
Stable Diffusion. In some cases, fine-tuning improves the model’s image-text alignment as well as
aesthetics, because the PickScore and HPSv2 rewards measure the similarity between the prompt and
image embeddings. For example, the fine-tuned model almost always generates images faithful to the
prompt “a raccoon washing dishes,” while baseline Stable Diffusion does so less than half the time.
However, we also found that the model sometimes overgeneralizes the reward function, generating
detailed images even when the prompt calls for a simpler style (see Figure B.1 in Appendix B).
                                                                                          = 1.0
                                                                   Human Preference Score v2
HPSv2


                                                                                          = 0.75
PickScore


                                                                                          = 0.5


                                                                                                                            = 0.0
                                                                                          = 0.0
Combined


                                                                                                   = 0.0   = 0.5   = 0.75           = 1.0
                                                                                                            PickScore
Figure 7: Interpolating LoRA parameters. Left: Generations from DRaFT models with different scalar
multipliers applied to the LoRA weights. Scaling LoRA parameters yields semantic interpolations between the
pre-trained and fine-tuned models. Right: Combining LoRA parameters that have been fine-tuned independently
for two different rewards—PickScore and HPSv2—allows for fine-grained control over style without additional
                                                                     PickScore     HPSv2
training. For a fixed noise sample, we show images generated using αθLoRA      + βθLoRA  .

Scaling and Mixing LoRA Weights. It is possible to control the strength of the fine-tuning simply
by scaling the LoRA parameters: multiplying them by a scalar α < 1 moves the adapted parameters
closer to the original, pre-trained model. Figure 7 (Left) shows that this method smoothly interpolates
between the pre-trained and DRaFT models. The LoRA scale could become a useful hyperparameter
for controlling generations from DRaFT models similarly to how guidance strength is currently used.
   2
     The gradients of the different rewards have substantially different norms, leading to the wide range of
coefficients. The particular values were chosen based on sample quality after experimenting with a few settings.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While we experimented with KL regulariztaion and early stopping as alternative ways of reducing
reward overfitting (see Figure 29 in Appendix B.8), we found LoRA scaling to work best.
We also probed the compositional properties of LoRA weights adapted for different rewards. One
can combine the effects of multiple reward functions by interpolating the LoRA weights of the
respective DRaFT models (Figure 5, Right). In Figure 7 (Right), we show images generated using
linear combinations of LoRA parameters trained separately for the PickScore and HPSv2 rewards,
using scaling coefficients α and β. The resulting images mix the semantics of HPSv2 and PickScore,
and are simultaneously more saturated and detailed than the pre-trained model outputs. While it
would also be possible to instead directly sum the score functions of the models (similar to Liu et al.
2022), this would increase generation time proportionally to the number of combined models.
Understanding the Impact of K. Interestingly, we found that trun-              101


                                                                                                Gradient Norm
cated backpropagation improves sample efficiency as well as compute
efficiency. Our analysis suggests that gradients explode as K increases,       100
which may lead to optimization difficulties for large K (see Figure 8). We
found that gradient clipping somewhat alleviates this issue (see Figure 28    10 1
in Appendix B.7), but does not fully close the gap. In Figure 9, we show
                                                                                   0 10 20 30 40 50
an ablation over K for aesthetic fine-tuning: performance degrades as                     K
K increases for K > 10. In Figure 10, we show that although DRaFT-1
                                                                           Figure 8: Gradient norms
only computes gradients through the final generation step, it generalizes
across time and affects the whole sampling chain. We compare samples generated with different
LoRA start iterations M , where we applied the LoRA-adapted diffusion parameters for the last M
steps of the sampling chain, while in the first T − M steps we used the pre-trained Stable Diffusion
parameters without LoRA adaptation. We observe that adaptation does not happen only at the end of
sampling (also see Figure 26 in App. B.7). We also investigated the opposite scenario, where the
LoRA-adapted parameters are used in the first M steps, after which LoRA is “turned off” and we use
only the original pre-trained parameters for the remaining T − M steps (see Figure 27 App. B.7),
which shows that it is also important to apply the LoRA parameters early in sampling.

                        DRaFT-K Aesthetic Ablation                                 50         30                  10     2
                   11
                                                             K=1
                   10                                        K=2
 Aesthetic Score


                    9                                        K=5
                    8                                        K=10
                                                             K=20
                    7                                        K=30
                    6                                        K=40
                                                             K=50
                        0 200 400 600 800 10001200
                           Fine-Tuning Iteration
      Figure 9: Ablation over K for aesthetic reward fine-                      Figure 10: Images generated with differ-
      tuning.                                                                   ent LoRA start steps M ∈ {50, 30, 10, 2}.

5.3                OTHER R EWARD F UNCTIONS                            Ocelot         Moose                     Snake   Octopus   Kangaroo   Lion
                                                     Compress.


Compressibility and Incompressibility.
Inspired by Black et al. (2023), we also
fine-tuned a diffusion model to generate
easily-compressible images. While the
JPEG compression and decompression al-
                                                     Incompress.


gorithms available in common libraries
are not differentiable by default, they can
be implemented in a differentiable man-
ner using deep learning libraries like Py-
Torch (Paszke et al., 2019) or JAX (Brad-            Figure 11: Top: Images generated by a diffusion model
bury et al., 2018). Given a prompt c, we             fine-tuned for JPEG compressibility, with reward r(x0 ) =
pass the output of the diffusion model,              −kx0 − d(c(x0 ))k22 where x0 = sample(θ, c, xT ). Bottom:
x0 = sample(θ, c, xT ) through differen-             Using the negation of the compressibility loss yields images
tiable compression and decompression al-             that are difficult to compress.


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


gorithms to obtain d(c(x0 )), and minimize the Euclidean distance between the original and recon-
structed images. This encourages the diffusion model to produce simple images. The results using
DRaFT to fine-tune for JPEG compressibility are shown in Figure 11 (Top): these images have simple,
uniform-color backgrounds and low-frequency foregrounds. In addition, negating the compressibility
loss yields incompressible images, shown in Figure 11 (Bottom), that have complex, high-frequency
foregrounds and backgrounds. Additional details are provided in Appendix B.3.
                   Object Removal: Farmer’s Market - People   Object Addition: Fruit Bowl + Strawberries


        Before
     Fine-Tuning



        After
     Fine-Tuning


Figure 12: Fine-tuning for object removal or addition using the OWL-ViT object detector. Left:
The prompt to the diffusion model is a farmer market and the queries for OWL-ViT are Q =
{a person, people}. Before fine-tuning, most of the generated images contain people in the background;
after finetuning, all images contain only vegetables. Right: Adding strawberries to a fruit bowl.

Object Detection and Removal. Here, we explore the use of a pre-trained object detection model
to bias a diffusion model’s generations to include or exclude a certain object class. We use OWL-
ViT (Minderer et al., 2022), an open-world localization model that takes arbitrary text queries and
returns bounding boxes with scores for the corresponding objects in the image. We pass images
generated by the diffusion model through a pre-trained OWL-ViT model, together with a set of
queries Q that we wish to exclude from the generated images (see Figure 22 in Appendix B.6 for
details). As the reward, we use the sum of scores for the localized objects corresponding to all
queries q ∈ Q, as well as the areas of their bounding boxes. In Figure 12 (Left), we show the results
of fine-tuning to minimize detection of people. Similarly, we can maximize the sum of scores for
localized objects to encourage generations to include a certain class: in Figure 12 (Right), we use the
prompt “a bowl of fruit” and queries Q = {strawberry}.
Adversarial Examples. Our framework also provides
an avenue to study the inductive biases of both diffusion
models and pre-trained classifiers: we can fine-tune a diffu-
                                                                 Fine-Tuning Progress


sion model such that images generated based on a prompt
for a class y (e.g., “mouse”) are classified as a different
class y 0 (e.g., “cat”) by a ResNet-50 pretrained on Ima-
geNet. As the fine-tuning reward, we use the negative
cross-entropy to the target class. From the qualitative re-
sults shown in Figure 13, we observe that this classifier is
texture-biased (Geirhos et al., 2019), as the images gener-
ated by the fine-tuned model incorporate cat-like textures
while keeping the animal shapes mostly unchanged.
6    C ONCLUSION                                                 Figure 13: Diffusion adversarial examples
                                                                 for prompts bear, dog, mouse with tar-
We introduced an efficient framework for fine-tuning dif- get class cat.
fusion models on differentiable rewards by leveraging
reward gradients. Our first method, Direct Reward Fine-Tuning (DRaFT), backpropagates through
the full sampling procedure, and achieves strong performance on a variety of reward functions. We
then propose DRaFT-K and DRaFT-LV, variants which improve efficiency via truncated backpropa-
gation through time. In addition, we draw connections between our approach and prior work such
as ReFL (Xu et al., 2023), to provide a unifying perspective on the design space of gradient-based
reward fine-tuning algorithms. We show that various methods can be obtained as special cases of a
more general algorithm, depending on the whether—and where—stop_gradient operations are
included. We hope that our work will inspire the development of improved techniques for reward
fine-tuning; just as RLHF has become crucial for deploying large language models, we believe that
reward fine-tuning may become a key step for improving image generation models.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Daniel Watson, Jason Baldridge, Hartwig Adam, Robert Geirhos, and the anonymous
reviewers for their thoughtful comments and suggestions. We thank Xiaoshi Wu for help with the
HPSv2 dataset, Jiazheng Xu for answering our questions about ReFL, and Kevin Black for answering
our questions about DDPO and re-running their aesthetic reward experiments.

R EFERENCES
Riad Akrour, Marc Schoenauer, and Michele Sebag. Preference-based policy learning. In Machine
  Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, pp. 12–27, 2011.

Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 843–852, 2023.

Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Phil Wang, Boris Dayma, Mitchell Wortsman, Blinkdl, Cristoph
  Schuhmann, Jenia Jitsev, Schmidt Ludwig, Mehdi Cherti, and Emad Mostaque. Large scale
  OpenCLIP: L/14, H/14 and G/14 trained on LAION-2B. laion.ai, 2022.

Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.

Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
  memory cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06174, 2016.

Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, et al. PaLi: A jointly-scaled multilingual
  language-image model. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
  C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO captions: Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1504.00325, 2015.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and
  Tong Zhang. RAFT: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ying Fan and Kangwook Lee. Optimizing DDPM Sampling with Shortcut Fine-Tuning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. DPOK: Reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Tr˛ebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth
 Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of dialogue
 agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Audrunas Gruslys, Rémi Munos, Ivo Danihelka, Marc Lanctot, and Alex Graves. Memory-efficient
  backpropagation through time. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Jiatao Gu, Alex Trevithick, Kai-En Lin, Joshua M Susskind, Christian Theobalt, Lingjie Liu, and
   Ravi Ramamoorthi. NerfDiff: Single-image view synthesis with NeRF-guided distillation from
   3d-aware diffusion. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11808–11826, 2023.
Yaru Hao, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Optimizing prompts for text-to-image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09611, 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. NeurIPS Workshop on Deep
  Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in Atari. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023.
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Interactively shaping agents via human reinforcement: The tamer
 framework. In Proceedings of the fifth international Conference on Knowledge capture, pp. 9–16,
 2009.
Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.
Wei Li, Xue Xu, Xinyan Xiao, Jiachen Liu, Hu Yang, Guohao Li, Zhanpeng Wang, Zhifan Feng,
 Qiaoqiao She, Yajuan Lyu, et al. UPainting: Unified text-to-image diffusion generation with
 cross-modal guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16031, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D
  Plumbley. AudioLDM: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439, 2022.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019.

Chenlin Meng, Robin Rombach, Ruiqi Gao, Diederik Kingma, Stefano Ermon, Jonathan Ho, and
  Tim Salimans. On distillation of guided diffusion models. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 14297–14306, 2023.

Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey
 Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen, et al. Simple
 open-vocabulary object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 728–755,
 2022.

Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.

Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention
  International Conference, pp. 234–241, 2015.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Christoph Schuhmann and Romain Beaumont. LAION-aesthetics. laion.ai, 2022.

David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  387–395, 2014.

Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2256–2265, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.

Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, Stefano Ermon, and Nikhil Naik. End-to-end diffusion latent optimiza-
  tion improves classifier guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13703, 2023.

Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy
  class for offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023a.

Zijie J Wang, Evan Montoya, David Munechika, Haoyang Yang, Benjamin Hoover, and Duen Horng
  Chau. Diffusiondb: A large-scale prompt gallery dataset for text-to-image generative models. In
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023b.

Daniel Watson, William Chan, Jonathan Ho, and Mohammad Norouzi. Learning fast samplers
  for diffusion models by differentiating through sample quality. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256, 1992.

Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, et al. Robust
 fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7959–7971, 2022.

Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Christiano.
   Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862, 2021.

Xiaoshi Wu, Yiming Hao, Keqiang Sun, Yixiong Chen, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341, 2023a.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Better aligning text-to-image
  models with human preference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14420, 2023b.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2304.05977, 2023.
Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten
  Kreis. LION: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

This appendix is structured as follows:

      • In Appendix A, we provide more details of our experimental setup, including hyperparame-
        ters and baselines.
      • In Appendix B, we provide additional results and analysis.
      • In Appendix C, we discuss two other methods we explored that did not achieve as strong
        results as DRaFT-LV: a single-reward version of DRaFT-LV and applying Deterministic
        Policy Gradient.
      • In Appendix D, we provide an extended discussion of related work.
      • In Appendix E, we provide uncurated samples from models fine-tuned for various re-
        ward functions, including HPSv2, PickScore, and a combined reward weighting HPSv2,
        PickScore, and Aesthetic score.


A     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

A.1   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

Here we expand on training details and provide hyperparameters. We used the same hyperparameters
for ReFL and our DRaFT variants.
Optimization. We use the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999, and a weight decay of 0.1. As we use LoRA, the weight decay regularizes fine-tuning by
pushing parameters towards the pre-trained weights. For the longer training runs (10k steps on human
preference reward functions), we use a square root learning rate decay, scaling the learning rate by
min (10 · step−0.5 , 1). Weight decay and learning rate decay slightly improve results, but are not
critical to the method. During training, we convert the pre-trained Stable Diffusion parameters to
bfloat16 to reduce the memory footprint, but use float32 for the LoRA parameters being trained.
LoRA. We apply LoRA to the feedforward layers as well as the cross-attention layers in the UNet,
which we found to produce slightly better results. We apply LoRA only to the UNet parameters, not
to the CLIP text encoder or VAE decoder mapping latents to images, as these did not improve results
in initial experiments.
Sampling. We use 50 steps of DDIM sampling (where no noise is added during sampling beyond
the initial sampled noise). We found the results using ancestral/DDPM sampling to be similar. We
employ classifier-free guidance with a guidance weight of 7.5 both at train-time and test-time.
Hyperparameters. We apply DRaFT in two settings: large-scale (human preference reward func-
tions using the HPSv2 or PickScore prompt sets) and small-scale (the other experiments). Hyper-
parameters are listed in Table 1. Small-scale training runs take around 1.5 hours on 4 TPUv4s.
Large-scale training runs take around 8 hours on 16 TPUv4s.

           Hyperparameter             Small-Scale Experiments   Large-scale Experiments
           Learning rate                        4e-4                      2e-4
           Batch size                             4                        16
           Train steps                           2k                       10k
           LoRA inner dimension                   8                        32
           Weight decay                         0.1                       0.1
           DDIM steps                           50                        50
           Guidance weight                      7.5                       7.5
           DRaFT-LV inner loops n                2                         2
           ReFL max timestep m                  20                        20
                                  Table 1: Training hyperparameters.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2        R EWARD F UNCTION D ETAILS
The LAION aesthetic predictor is trained to rate images on a scale of 1 through 10. The predictor
consists of a feedforward neural network on top of a CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image encoder
pre-trained on a variety of human-labeled sources.
Human Preference Score v2 (HPSv2; Wu et al. 2023a) is trained on prompts from DiffusionDB
(Wang et al., 2023b) and COCO Captions (Chen et al., 2015). Images are generated from each using
a wide range of generative models. Human annotators then rate which of two images is preferred for
a prompt. The reward model is OpenCLIP-H (Beaumont et al., 2022) fine-tuned on the preference
judgements. Unlike the aesthetic reward, HPSv2 takes into account the prompt as well as the image.
PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2023) also uses OpenCLIP-H fine-tuned on preference data. However, the
data is collected in a more organic way through a web app, where users can generate and then rate
pairs of images generated from different diffusion models with different sampler hyperparameters.

A.3        BASELINES
Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization (DDPO; Black et al. 2023) essentially applies the RE-
INFORCE policy gradient algorithm (Williams, 1992) to diffusion model generation. The method
trains the model to increase the likelihoods of actions (i.e. sampling steps) that produce high-reward
samples. DDPO employs additional tricks such as importance weight clipping, reward normalization,
and classifier-free guidance-aware training to improve results. We show results from DDPO-IS,
which extends DDPO to use an importance sampling estimator for learning on examples generated
from a stale policy, enabling multiple optimization updates per reward query. Empirically, DDPO
was found to outperform previous supervised approaches like reward weighted regression (Lee et al.,
2023). Rather than using the results in Figure 4 of the original paper, we obtained results from direct
correspondence with the authors, as their original aesthetic reward implementation had a bug.3
Prompt Engineering. Users often improve the aesthetic quality of generated images through
prompt engineering. We perform semi-automated prompt search with access to the reward func-
tion, trying out various prompts and selecting the one with the best aesthetic score. The best-
scoring prompt we found is A stunning beautiful oil painting of a {:}, cinematic
lighting, golden hour light.

Re-ranking (Best of 16). This simple baseline generates 16 images for each caption with the
pre-trained Stable Diffusion model and selects the one with the highest reward.
Direct Optimization of Diffusion Latents (DOODL). DOODL (Wallace et al., 2023) backprop-
agates through diffusion sampling to update the initial noise xT so that the resulting generation
produces a high reward. Rather than using an invertible diffusion algorithm to reduce memory costs
as in Wallace et al. (2023), we simply use gradient checkpointing as with DRaFT. We optimize xT
with Adam (which worked slightly better for us than momentum only) over 20 steps, which makes
generation approximately 60× slower than standard sampling. Following Wallace et al. (2023), we
renormalize the latent at every step after the Adam update.

B         A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1        OVER - GENERALIZATION
           Reward overfitting: model learns to make realistic, complex, highly detailed images, but that isn’t always
           what we may want
Here we show examples of overgeneralization, where fine-tuning on preferences trains the
model to generate detailed images, even when the prompt asks for a simple drawing.
           Pop art painting of Albert Einstein.                        Minimalist line drawing of an eagle.             Stick ﬁgure drawing of a person playing soccer.


    Stable Diﬀusion 1.4                 DRaFT                   Stable Diﬀusion 1.4                  DRaFT              Stable Diﬀusion 1.4              DRaFT



     3
         See https://github.com/kvablack/ddpo-pytorch/issues/3#issuecomment-1634723127


                                                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2    F ULL Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
In Table 2, we provide quantitative results comparing DRaFT to several baselines on the Human
Preference Score v2 benchmark from Wu et al. (2023a).

         Model                           Animation   Concept Art    Painting     Photo    Averaged
         GLIDE 1.4                        0.2334        0.2308       0.2327     0.2450       0.2355
         VQGAN + CLIP                     0.2644        0.2653       0.2647     0.2612       0.2639
         DALL-E 2                         0.2734        0.2654       0.2668     0.2724       0.2695
         SD 2.0                           0.2748        0.2689       0.2686     0.2746       0.2717
         DeepFloyd-XL                     0.2764        0.2683       0.2686     0.2775       0.2727
         SDXL Base 0.9                    0.2842        0.2763       0.2760     0.2729       0.2773
         Dreamlike Photoreal 2.0          0.2824        0.2760       0.2759     0.2799       0.2786
         Stable Diffusion (SD 1.4)        0.2726        0.2661       0.2666     0.2727       0.2695
         ReFL                             0.3446        0.3442       0.3447     0.3374       0.3427
         DRaFT-50                         0.3078        0.3021       0.3019     0.3013       0.3033
         DRaFT-30                         0.3148        0.3112       0.3109     0.3096       0.3116
         DRaFT-10                         0.3456        0.3447       0.3452     0.3369       0.3431
         DRaFT-5                          0.3521        0.3520       0.3526     0.3431       0.3500
         DRaFT-1                          0.3494        0.3488       0.3485     0.3400       0.3467
         DRaFT-1, PickScore               0.2907        0.2848       0.2861     0.2882       0.2875
         DRaFT-1, Pick-a-Pic              0.3399        0.3358       0.3385     0.3188       0.3332
         DRaFT-LV                         0.3551        0.3552       0.3560     0.3480       0.3536
         DRaFT-LV, PickScore              0.2880        0.2833       0.2846     0.2923       0.2870
         DRaFT-LV, Pick-a-Pic             0.3409        0.3371       0.3408     0.3210       0.3349
Table 2: Following Wu et al. (2023a), we used the HPDv2 training set to fine-tune our models, and we evaluated
performance on four benchmark datasets: Animation, Concept Art, Paintings, and Photos. We report the average
score achieved for each benchmark, as well as the aggregated performance across all datasets. The results above
the separator are taken from Wu et al. (2023a); the results below were obtained from our implementations and
experiments.



B.3    C OMPRESSIBILITY AND I NCOMPRESSIBILITY D ETAILS
Figure 14 illustrates the setup we used to fine-tune for JPEG compressibility and incompressibility.
Given a prompt c, we take the image generated by the diffusion model, x0 = sample(θ, c, xT ) and
pass it through JPEG compression and decompression functions, denoted by c and d, respectively.
As the reward, we use the negative Euclidean distance between the original sample x0 and its
reconstruction r(x0 ) = −kx0 − d(c(x0 ))k2 . While the JPEG implementations found in common
libraries are not directly differentiable, the JPEG algorithm can be re-implemented in a differentiable
way using autodiff frameworks; we re-implemented JPEG compression and decompression in
JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). Figures 15 and 16 show additional samples generated by diffusion
models fine-tuned for compressibility and incompressibility, respectively, and Figure 17 shows the
results of overoptimization for incompressibility. In our experiments, we used a fixed compression
ratio of 4×.

                                           Differentiable JPEG Compression & Decompression

                             Diffusion
                  Prompt

                  “a cat”


Figure 14: Fine-tuning for JPEG compressibility, using differentiable JPEG compression and decompression
algorithms.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Crab                  Lion                  Frog              Kangaroo


           Figure 15: Images generated by a diffusion model fine-tuned for JPEG compressibility.

                      Crab                  Lion                 Gecko              Kangaroo


Figure 16: Images generated by a diffusion model fine-tuned using the negation of the JPEG compressibility re-
ward, which yields images that are difficult to compress. We observe high-frequency foreground and background
information.


                     Ocelot                Snake                 Gecko                 Moose


                      Crab                  Lion                Octopus              Kangaroo


Figure 17: Over-optimization for JPEG incompressibility can lead to images with strong high-frequency texture
and a loss of semantic information. Interestingly, here the octopus is generated with more than eight arms.

B.4    A DVERSARIAL E XAMPLE D ETAILS
The setup for our diffusion adversarial example experiments is illustrated in Figure 18. We used a
ResNet-50 model pre-trained on ImageNet-1k to classify images generated by Stable Diffusion; as
the reward for fine-tuning, we used the negative cross-entropy to a fixed target class.

                                        (Fixed) Pre-Trained ImageNet Classifier

                           Diffusion                                     Logits
              Prompt
                                                                                      Cross-Entropy
              “mouse”
                                                                                       Target: “cat”



Figure 18: Generating “diffusion adversarial examples” that are conditioned on a text prompt (e.g., “mouse”)
but must be classified by a pre-trained ImageNet classifier as a different class (e.g., “cat”).



                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5     L O RA S CALING AND I NTERPOLATION

Here, we provide additional results for scaling and interpolating LoRA parameters. Figures 19 and 20
show the effect of scaling LoRA parameters to control the strength of reward adaptation for the
Human Preference Score v2 and PickScore rewards, respectively, and Figure 21 shows additional
interpolations using linear combinations of LoRA weights trained separately for each of these rewards.


                          = 0.0       = 0.7         = 0.8         = 0.9        = 0.95           = 1.0
      A modern hotel
      bathroom with
      double sinks
      and a deep
      bath

      A portrait of
      Caleb, a
      character from
      the Critical Role
      series.


      Image depicted
      is titled "the
      final circle of
      paradise."

      A man sits on a
      couch in a
      sitting room
      with coffee
      table with an
      open laptop on
      it.
Figure 19: Scaling LoRA parameters (here adapted for Human Preference Score v2 (Wu et al., 2023a)) yields
semantic interpolations between the original Stable Diffusion model and the fine-tuned model.


                          = 0.0       = 0.7         = 0.8         = 0.9        = 0.95           = 1.0
      A modern hotel
      bathroom with
      double sinks
      and a deep
      bath

      A portrait of
      Caleb, a
      character from
      the Critical Role
      series.


      Image depicted
      is titled "the
      final circle of
      paradise."

      A man sits on a
      couch in a
      sitting room
      with coffee
      table with an
      open laptop on
      it.
Figure 20: Scaling LoRA parameters (here adapted for PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2023)) yields semantic
interpolations between the original Stable Diffusion model and the fine-tuned model.


                                                     19
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       = 1.0


                                                                                                        = 1.0
Human Preference Score v2


                                                                                 Human Preference Score v2
                       = 0.75


                                                                                                        = 0.75
                       = 0.5


                                                                                                        = 0.5
                                                                 = 0.0                                                                                           = 0.0
                       = 0.0


                                                                                                        = 0.0
                                  = 0.0       = 0.5    = 0.75            = 1.0                                      = 0.0                  = 0.5   = 0.75                = 1.0
                                               PickScore                                                                                    PickScore
       Figure 21: Additional results using linear combinations of LoRA parameters adapted for different rewards.
                                                                               PickScore     HPSv2
       In each subplot, we show images generated using LoRA parameters αθLoRA            + βθLoRA  for coefficients
       α, β ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0}. We found that interpolating between LoRA weights can yield smooth transitions
       between different styles.


        B.6                     O BJECT D ETECTION

                                                                                                      Object Scores & Bounding Boxes
                                                Diffusion                                            Detector
                                    Prompt                                                                                                         Objective
                                    “farmer                                                                  OWL                                    Sum of
                                    market”                                                                   ViT                                   Scores
                                                                                                                                                   (+ Bounding
                                                                                                                                                    Box Areas)

                                                                Queries
                                                                “person”


                     Figure 22: Fine-tuning for object detection using a pre-trained OWL-ViT model (Minderer et al., 2022).

       Our setup for object detection is illustrated in Figure 22.
       We feed the generated images into a pre-trained Open-
       World Localization Vision Transformer (OWL-ViT) (Min-
       derer et al., 2022) model, along with a list of text queries
                                                                                                                    Fine-Tuning Progress


       that we wish to localize in the image. OWL-ViT outputs
       bounding boxes and scores for the localized objects; we
       experimented with reward functions based on the sum
       of scores, as well as based on the areas of the bounding
       boxes, and found that both worked well. Figure 23 shows
       the fine-tuning progress for the diffusion prompt “a bowl
       of fruit” with OWL-ViT query “strawberries.”

        B.7                     U NDERSTANDING THE I MPACT OF K
       We investigated the impact of K on the behavior of mod- Figure 23: Maximizing the object detector
       els fine-tuned with DRaFT-K via ablations designed to score for the query “strawberry” yields fruit
       answer the following questions: 1) Does adaptation occur bowls that contain progressively more straw-
       only in the last K steps (e.g., does the initial segment of berries over the course of fine-tuning.
       the sampling chain behave similarly to the original pre-trained model, with a sudden jump occurring
       at the end)? and 2) Is it necessary to apply the LoRA parameters throughout the full sampling
       chain? What is the impact of applying the LoRA parameters to only the initial or final portions of the
       trajectory?


                                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            LoRA Start Step                                             LoRA End Step
      t=5     t=4      t=3     t=2    t=1    t=0          t=5     t=4       t=3   t=2    t=1      t=0


       Pre-Trained            LoRA-Adapted                    LoRA-Adapted            Pre-Trained
     Parameters Only           Parameters                      Parameters           Parameters Only

             Figure 24: Illustration of sampling with different LoRA start steps and end steps.

To answer these questions, we applied the LoRA-adapted dif-
fusion parameters for the last M steps of the sampling chain,     90
while in the first T − M steps we used the pre-trained Stable
Diffusion parameters without LoRA adaptation (see Figure 24).     60


                                                                    Angle
Figure 26 compares samples generated with different LoRA
start iterations M ; interestingly, although the LoRA param-
eters are fine-tuned using truncated backpropagation through
                                                                  30
only the last K steps of sampling, adaptation does not happen
only in the last K steps; rather, the LoRA parameters need to      0 0 10 20 30 40 50
be applied for at least 10-20 steps to yield substantial changes                     K
in the generated images. Similarly, we also investigated the Figure 25: Angles between the
opposite scenario, where the LoRA-adapted parameters are DRaFT-1 gradient and DRaFT-K gra-
only applied in the first M steps of the sampling chain, after dients for K ∈ {1, . . . , 50}.
which LoRA is “turned off” and we use only the original pre-
trained parameters for the remaining T − M steps. The generated images for a range of end LoRA
steps M ∈ {2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50} are shown in Figure 27. These results further demonstrate the
importance of applying LoRA parameters in the early part of the sampling chain.
In Figure 25, we show the angle between the DRaFT-1 gradient and DRaFT-K gradients for various
K; the gradients become nearly orthogonal for K > 30.

                                                Generated Images

                Start: 2



                       5



                       10



                       20



                       30



                       40



                       50


Figure 26: Images generated with different LoRA start steps. Here, the first T − M steps of the diffusion
sampling chain use the pre-trained diffusion model parameters, while the last M steps use the LoRA-adapted
parameters. The LoRA start step M increases from top to bottom, M ∈ {2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50}. We observe
that, although the LoRA parameters are trained via truncated backpropagation through the last few steps of
sampling, they affect the entire sampling chain—the images improve qualitatively when the LoRA-adapted
parameters are used for many steps (e.g., M > 10).


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Generated Images

                End: 2



                        5



                      10



                      20



                      30



                      40



                      50


Figure 27: Images generated with different LoRA end steps. Here, the first M steps of the diffusion
sampling chain use the LoRA-adapted diffusion parameters, while the last T − M steps use the un-adapted pre-
trained model parameters. The LoRA end step M increases from top to bottom, M ∈ {2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50}.
Interestingly, we observe that it is beneficial to apply the LoRA parameters early in sampling.


Gradient Clipping. We used gradient clipping throughout all of our experiments. In Figure 28, we
show an ablation over the gradient clipping norm hyperparameter, which we denote c. We compared
the reward values achieved over the course of fine-tuning for PickScore on the HPD-v2 prompt
dataset, with gradient clipping norms c ∈ {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0, 1000.0}. We found
that, when using DRaFT-50, smaller gradient clipping norms (c = 0.001) improved optimization
substantially, while large clipping norms (c = 1000) impeded training. This further supports the
observation that backpropagating through long diffusion sampling chains can lead to exploding
gradients. We performed a similar ablation for DRaFT-1, and found that the fine-tuning performance
was nearly identical for all gradient clipping coefficients (c = 0.001 to c = 1000.0).



                                      Gradient Clipping Ablation
                                                                         K = 50
                               0.25                                      K=1
                               0.24                                      c=0.001
                   PickScore


                                                                         c=0.01
                               0.23                                      c=0.1
                               0.22                                      c=1.0
                                                                         c=10.0
                               0.21                                      c=100.0
                                      0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000         c=1000.0
                                         Fine-Tuning Iteration
Figure 28: Ablation over the gradient clipping norm c using DRaFT-K, fine-tuning to maximize PickScore on
the HPD-v2 prompt dataset. DRaFT-50 experiments are shown in red, and DRaFT-1 experiments are shown in
green. In both cases, darker colors denote smaller gradient clipping norms.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.8    “OVER -O PTIMIZATION ” AND R EWARD H ACKING

Improving Cross-Reward Generalization. DRaFT can cause models to overfit to the reward func-
tion, leading to high-reward but subjectively lower-quality images. Here, we explore regularization
methods to reduce reward overfitting.
As an approximate quantitative measure for over-optimization, we trained models on one reward
function (HPSv2) and evaluated their generalization to another reward (PickScore). We considered
three strategies to mitigate reward overfitting:

       • LoRA Scaling: multiplying the LoRA weights by a constant < 1 (see Section 5.2), which
         interpolates between the pre-trained model and fine-tuned model, similarly to Wortsman
         et al. (2022).
       • Early stopping: evaluating various checkpoints across the training run instead of only the
         last one; early ones will achieve lower train reward but hopefully generalize better.
       • KL Regularization: similarly to Fan et al. (2023), we add a loss term to the model that
         penalizes the KL divergence between the pre-trained and fine-tuned model distributions.
         This amounts to a squared error term between the pre-trained and fine-tuned predicted  .
         We trained several separate models, each with a different weight on the KL loss, which is a
         disadvantage over the previous methods that can be applied to a single training run.

All models used DRaFT-LV with the large-scale hyperparameters (see Table 1). The results are
shown in Figure 29. Both early stopping and KL regularization are commonly used to reduce reward
overfitting in large language model preference tuning, but we found LoRA scaling to be more effective
than the other approaches.


                                    Generalization of HPSv2 DRaFT Models to PickScore
                           0.224       LoRA Scaling
                                       KL Regularization
                           0.222       Early Stopping
                           0.220
                           0.218
               PickScore


                           0.216
                           0.214
                           0.212
                           0.210
                                   0.27 0.28 0.29 0.30 0.31 0.32 0.33 0.34 0.35
                                                       HPSv2
Figure 29: Generalization from HPSv2 to PickScore for various regularization methods used to prevent reward
overfitting.


Attempts to Increase Diversity. A common result of reward hacking is a collapse to a single,
high-reward image. Here, we describe two of our attempts to address this lack of diversity. First, we
tried adding dropout to the reward function (in this case, the aesthetic classifier); however, we found
that even large dropout rates such as 0.95 led to diversity collapse, as shown in Figure 30 (Left). Next,
we tried adding a term to the reward that measures the dissimilarity between images generated in
the same minibatch—this encourages the model to generate different images for different prompts
and noise samples. Ideally,   one would take the mean dissimilarity over all pairs of examples in a
minibatch, yielding B2 combinations where B is the minibatch size. However, for computational

tractability, we used a simpler approach, where we formed pairs by reversing the elements of a
minibatch and computing elementwise dissimilarities, giving us B/2 pairs. We tried two measures
of dissimilarity: 1) the Euclidean distance, and 2) the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
(LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018). Neither was satisfactory to increase diversity: in Figure 30 (Right), we


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


show images generated using a large weight on the LPIPS diversity term, which increased inner-batch
diversity at the expense of the aesthetic score.

  Original Image     Reward ≈ 6               Reward ≈ 9.5           Original Image   Iteration 160   Iteration 440


Figure 30: Reward hacking still occurs when we use large dropout rate in the Aesthetic classifier (Left).
Incorporating a reward term to encourage diversity can lead to overly stylized images (Right).


B.9    ROTATIONAL A NTI -C ORRELATION R EWARD

We also explored fine-tuning for symmetry or anti-symmetry
                                                     Before
properties. Here, we optimize for rotational anti-correlation,
which encourages the diffusion model to generate  Fine-Tuning
                                                       images
that are dissimilar to their rotations at {90, 180, 270} de-
                                                            ◦
grees. Given an image x and rotation operator Rot(x,h   90 ),
we formulate the objective as: Ec∼pc ,x∼sample(θ,c) 13 kx −
                                                      After i
Rot(x, 90◦ )k2 +kx−Rot(x, 180◦ )k2 +kx−Rot(x, Fine-Tuning
                                                   270◦ )k2 .
The results are shown in Figure 31: this objective leads to in-
teresting black-and-white, stylized images.                     Figure 31: Rotational anti-correlation.

B.10     CLIP R EWARD

We briefly explored using r(x0 , c) = CLIP-Similarity(x0 , c) as a reward to improve image-text
alignment. We found that optimization was succesful in that CLIP scores improved, but that image
quality degraded after many steps of training (see Figure 32).


                    step 0        step 200          step 500


                   step 1000      step 1500         step 3000


Figure 32: Qualitative examples (left) and training curve (right) for fine-tuning on CLIP reward using DRaFT
for the prompt “a raccoon washing dishes".


Both HPSv2 and ImageReward are fine-tuned CLIP models, and for HPSv2 the annotators were
specifically instructed to consider alignment to the prompt in their preference judgements. Therefore,


                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


they already capture some aspects of image alignment, and qualitatively we did observe alignment to
increase in some cases when using these rewards (e.g. in the “a raccoon washing dishes" example in
Figure 1). However, we think improving text alignment using a powerful image captioning model
such as PaLI (Chen et al., 2023) as the reward would be an interesting future direction.

B.11    F INE -T UNING FOR S AFETY

The datasets on which large diffusion models are trained often contain NSFW content, which poses
challenges for the deployment of safe models. Safety measures can be implemented at various stages
of the text-to-image pipeline: 1) at the text prompt level (e.g., refusing NSFW words); 2) during the
generative process (e.g., encouraging the model to output safe images); and 3) post-hoc elimination
of NSFW images that have been generated. These approaches are complementary, and in practice we
imagine that all three would be used in concert. Here, we focus on stage (2), by fine-tuning diffusion
models using feedback from a pre-trained NSFW classifier. This approach is particularly useful for
ambiguous prompts that may lead to either SFW or NSFW generations; for example, the prompt
“swimsuit” can refer to images of people wearing swimsuits, or to just the article of clothing itself
(the latter being more safe-for-work). We found that, before fine-tuning, the model mostly generated
images of people wearing swimsuits, while after fine-tuning, the model instead generated images of
lay-flat swimsuits.

B.12    L EARNING S AMPLER H YPERPARAMETERS
                       Learned sampling hyperparameters
As DRaFT (without truncated    backprop
                      ● Guidance   weights through time) com-
putes gradients through the denoising process end-to-end, we
can use DRaFT to optimize sampler hyperparameters as well
as model weights.     ● “Learned negative prompt” by optimizing
                            the “control” text embeddings for
                           guidance is similar in spirit to Wat-
Learning sampler hyperparameters
                            ○ Small NN converts the prompt embeddings
son et al. (2022), except we   obtain    gradients
                               into negative          from a reward
                                             prompt embeddings
model rather than using kernel inception distance. We explored
learning two inputs to the sampler—the guidance weights and
negative prompt embeddings—although it would be possible to
                                                                      Figure 33: Guidance schedule learned
extend this method to other hyperparameters such as the time by DRaFT
schedule. In particular, we investigated:

       • Guidance weights: We learn a separate guidance weight w(t) for each step of DDIM
         sampling. The learned schedule can be applied to samplers with different number of steps
         through linearly interpolating the schedule to stretch or compress it. We use a 50x larger
         learning rate for training guidance than the LoRA parameters because guidance weights
         have a large magnitude. An example learned guidance schedule is shown in Figure 33.
       • Negative prompt: We learn prompt-dependent text embeddings passed into the uncondi-
         tional UNet used for classifier-free guidance. In particular, we parameterize the embedding
         as MLP(Multi-Headed-Self-Attention(e)) where e is the text embeddings produced by the
         diffusion model’s text encoder.

However, in practice, we found that this did not improve results much at large scale.

C     M ETHOD EXTENSIONS
Here we briefly discuss two gradient-based reward fine-tuning methods we explored, but which we
found did not achieve strong results compared to DRaFT-1 and DRaFT-LV.

C.1    S INGLE -R EWARD DR A FT-LV

A downside of DRaFT-LV is that it requires computing the reward function gradient an additional
n times. While this is relatively little overhead for the reward functions we used compared to the
cost of image sampling, larger reward models could make this costly. We therefore experimented


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       0.36


                       0.34
        HPSv2 Reward
                       0.32


                       0.30
                                                                                                DRaFT-LV
                                                                                                DRaFT-1
                       0.28                                                                     ReFL
                                                                                                DRaFT
                                                                                                DPG
                              0           2000          4000                   6000   8000        10000
                                                               Training Step

                        Figure 34: Training efficiency of reward fine-tuning methods on the HPSv2 reward.


with a version of DRaFT-LV that only computes the reward gradient with respect to the input pixels
∇x r(x0 , c) once. Then it updates the gradient in the inner loop as g = g + ∇x r(x0 , c)∇θ x̂0 .
Unfortunately, we found this method to be unstable and ultimately not learn effectively, possibly
because it relies on the assumption that ∇x r(x0 , c) ≈ ∇x r(x̂0 , c), which may not be true in practice.

C.2   D ETERMINISTIC P OLICY G RADIENT

Previous approaches applying RL to reward learning do not make use of sampling gradients. Here
we discuss how Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG; Silver et al. 2014; Lillicrap et al. 2016) offers a
way of employing reward gradients within the RL framework.
Similarly to Black et al. (2023), we can view DDIM sampling as applying a deterministic policy to a
deterministic Markov decision process:
      • A state st consists of the current latent, timestep, and prompt (xt , t, c).
      • The initial state s0 draws xT ∼ N (0, I), c ∼ pc , and sets t = T .
      • The policy is the learned denoiser: at = µθ (st ) =  θ (xt , c, t)
      • The transition function performs a DDIM sampling step:
        f (st , at ) = ( ααt−1
                            t
                               (xt − σt at ) + σt−1 at , t − 1, c)
      • The reward R(st , at ) is r(x0 , c) if t = 0 and 0 if otherwise.
DPG trains a critic Qφ (st , at ) and learns θ with the gradient update ∇a Qφ (st , at )∇θ µθ (st ) over
sampled trajectories. The critic is trained to minimize the squared error between its prediction and
the final return (in our case r(x0 , c)).
Many of our rewards make use of neural networks with pre-trained parameters ξ, which we denote
by writing rξ . We suggest applying LoRA to ξ parameterize the critic; we denote the LoRA-adapted
parameters as adapt(ξ, φ). We then apply the critic by (1) executing the action at on st , (2) 1-step
denoising the result to get a predicted clean image, and (3) applying the adapted reward model
radapt(ξ,φ) to the result. The reason for step (2) is to make the training of φ more efficient: we believe
it is easier to adapt the reward model parameters to produce good expected return estimates for
one-step-denoised inputs than it is for noisy inputs. Formally, we use the critic:
                 Qφ (st , at ) = radapt(ξ,φ) ((f (st , at ) − σt  θ (f (st , at ), c, t − 1))/αt , c)  (3)

When computing gradients through Q, we do not backpropagate through step (2) into θ, to prevent it
from interfering with the policy training.

Results. The training efficiency of DPG compared with other methods is shown in Figure 34 (using
the same experimental settings as in Figure 4). DPG outperforms vanilla DRaFT, but not our more-
efficient variants. One challenge is that Q produces poor return estimates for large timesteps, which


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


could perhaps be alleviated with a ReFL-style version that skips or rarely samples high timesteps
for training the policy. There are many variants of DPG to explore, so we think that improving the
performance of DPG for reward fine-tuning could be an interesting direction for future research; DPG
is appealing because like vanilla DRaFT (but unlike ReFL and our DRaFT variants), it optimizes the
full sampling process in an unbiased way.

D    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
Diffusion Models. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs; Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015;
Song & Ermon 2019; Song et al. 2021b; Ho et al. 2020) are a class of generative models that have
become the de-facto standard for most continuous data modalities, including images (Ramesh et al.,
2021), videos (Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2023), audio (Liu et al., 2023), and 3D models (Zeng
et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2023). Text-to-image diffusion models, which generate
images conditioned on text prompts, have become prominent tools with the advent of models such
as GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022; Ho
et al., 2022), and Latent Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). In this paper we focus on fine-tuning
text-to-image models, but DRaFT is general and could be applied to other diffusion models or
fine-tuning tasks, and to different domains such as audio or video.
Learning human preferences. Human preference learning trains models on judgements of which
behaviors people prefer, rather than on human demonstrations directly (Knox & Stone, 2009; Akrour
et al., 2011). This training is commonly done by learning a reward model reflecting human preferences
and then learning a policy that maximizes the reward (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018).
Preference learning methods such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) have
become widely used for fine-tuning large language models so they improve at summarization
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021), instruction following (Ouyang et al., 2022), or general
dialogue (Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a; Glaese et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b). We apply
DRaFT to optimize scores from existing preference models, such as PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2023)
and Human Preference Score v2 (Wu et al., 2023a), which are trained on human judgements between
pairs of images generated by diffusion models for the same prompt.
Guidance. Guidance steers the sampling process towards images that satisfy a desired objective by
adding an auxiliary term to the score function. The canonical example is classifier guidance (Song
et al., 2021b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which can turn an unconditional diffusion model into a class-
conditional model by biasing the denoising process using gradients from a pre-trained classifier. Many
other pre-trained models can also be used to provide guidance signals, including segmentation models,
facial recognition models, and object detectors (Bansal et al., 2023). However, care must be taken
when computing the guidance signal; naïvely, noisy examples obtained during the iterative refinement
process may be out-of-distribution for the guidance model, leading to inaccurate gradients. Two
approaches for mitigating this are (1) training a guidance model from scratch on noisy data (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021) and (2) applying a pre-trained guidance model (which has seen only non-noisy
data) to the one-step-denoised images obtained by removing the predicted noise at time t (Li et al.,
2022). However, both approaches have downsides: (1) precludes the use of off-the-shelf pre-trained
guidance functions and (2) means the guidance is applied to out-of-distribution blurry images for
high noise levels. DRaFT avoids these issues by backpropagating through sampling so the reward
function is only applied to the fully denoised image.
Backpropagation through diffusion sampling. Similarly to our method, Watson et al. (2022)
backpropagate through sampling using the reparameterization trick and gradient checkpointing. They
learn parametric few-step samplers that aim to reduce the inference cost while maintaining perceptual
image quality, using a differentiable image quality score. Fan & Lee (2023) also propose an approach
to speed up sampling: they consider doing this using gradients by backpropagating through diffusion
sampling, but due to memory and exploding/vanishing gradient concerns, they focus on an RL-based
approach. Both Fan & Lee (2023) and Watson et al. (2022) aim to improve sampling speed, rather
than optimize arbitrary differentiable rewards, which is our focus. Like DRaFT, Direct Optimization
of Diffusion Latents (DOODL; Wallace et al. 2023) uses backpropagation through sampling to
improve image generation with respect to differentiable objectives. Rather than optimizing model
parameters, DOODL optimizes the initial noise sample xT . Although DOODL does not require a
training phase, it is much slower at inference time because the optimization must be redone for each
prompt and metric. In contrast, after finetuning with DRaFT, sampling has the same cost as a standard


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


diffusion model. Furthermore, the latent optimization methods do not support the compositionality
and interpolation properties that we can achieve with different sets of LoRA parameters tuned for
different objectives.
Outside of image generation, Wang et al. (2023a) train diffusion model policies for reinforcement
learning by backpropagating the Q-value function through sampling.
Reward fine-tuning with supervised learning. Lee et al. (2023) and Wu et al. (2023b) use super-
vised approaches to fine-tune diffusion models on rewards. These methods generate images with
the pre-trained model and then fine-tune on the images while weighting examples according to the
reward function or discarding low-reward examples. Unlike DRaFT or RL methods, the model is
not trained online on examples generated by the current policy. However, Dong et al. (2023) use an
online version of this approach where examples are re-generated over multiple rounds of training,
which can be viewed as a simple kind of reinforcement learning.
Reward fine-tuning with reinforcement learning. Fan & Lee (2023) interpret the denoising
process as a multi-step decision-making task and use policy gradient algorithms to fine-tune diffusion
samplers. Building on it, Black et al. (2023) and Fan et al. (2023) use policy gradient algorithms
to fine-tune diffusion models for arbitrary black-box objectives. Rather than optimizing model
parameters, Hao et al. (2022) apply RL to improve the input prompts. RL approaches are flexible
because they do not require differentiable rewards. However, in practice many reward functions
are differentiable, or can be re-implemented in a differentiable way, and thus analytic gradients are
often available. In such cases, using reinforcement learning discards useful information, leading to
inefficient optimization.
ReFL. Reward Feedback Learning (ReFL; Xu et al. 2023) evaluates the reward on the one-step
predicted clean image, r(x̂0 , c) from a randomly-chosen step t along the denoising trajectory, and
backpropagates through the one-step prediction w.r.t. the diffusion model parameters. DRaFT-K is
conceptually simpler than ReFL, as it only differentiates through the last few steps (e.g., K = 1) of
sampling, where K is deterministic; in (Xu et al., 2023), the authors randomly choose an iteration
between a min and max step of the sampling chain (which incurs more hyperparameters) from which
to predict the clean image. Also, because DRaFT runs the full sampling chain, our reward functions
are always evaluated on final generations. In contrast, ReFL applies the rewards to one-step denoised
latents in the sampling trajectory, similar to the use of one-step denoising in guidance. Furthermore,
DRaFT-LV is substantially more efficient than ReFL, speeding up training by approximately 2× by
reducing the variance of the single-denoising-step gradient estimates.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    U NCURATED S AMPLES


Here, we show uncurated samples from models fine-tuned with DRaFT for different reward functions:
Human Preference Score v2 (Figure 35), PickScore (Figure 36), and a combined reward (Figure 37).
The first two are overfit to the reward functions, which decreases diversity and photorealism. In the
third, we mitigate overfitting through LoRA scaling.


Figure 35: Uncurated samples from Stable Diffusion fine-tuned using DRaFT-1 for the HPSv2
reward (Wu et al., 2023a).


Figure 36: Uncurated samples from Stable Diffusion fine-tuned using DRaFT-1 for the PickScore
reward (Kirstain et al., 2023).


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 37: Uncurated samples from pre-trained Stable Diffusion 1.4 compared with DRaFT fine-tuned Stable
Diffusion. We use DRaFT-LV on a combined reward of PickScore = 10, HPSv2 = 2, Aesthetic = 0.05. After
training, LoRA weights are scaled down by a factor of 0.75 to reduce reward overfitting. Prompts are from the
HPSv2 benchmark.

                                                     30
