Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B EYOND IID WEIGHTS : SPARSE AND LOW- RANK DEEP
N EURAL N ETWORKS ARE ALSO G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES
 Thiziri Nait Saada, Alireza Naderi & Jared Tanner
 Mathematical Institute
 University of Oxford
 {naitsaadat, naderi, tanner}@maths.ox.ac.uk



                                             A BSTRACT

         The infinitely wide neural network has proven a useful and manageable math-
         ematical model that enables the understanding of many phenomena appearing
         in deep learning. One example is the convergence of random deep networks to
         Gaussian Processes that allows a rigorous analysis of the way the choice of acti-
         vation function and network weights impacts the training dynamics. In this paper,
         we extend the seminal proof of Matthews et al. (2018) to a larger class of initial
         weight distributions (which we call P SEUDO - IID), including the established cases
         of IID and orthogonal weights, as well as the emerging low-rank and structured
         sparse settings celebrated for their computational speed-up benefits. We show that
         fully connected and convolutional networks initialized with P SEUDO - IID distri-
         butions are all effectively equivalent up to their variance. Using our results, one
         can identify the Edge-of-Chaos for a broader class of neural networks and tune
         them at criticality in order to enhance their training. Moreover, they enable the
         posterior distribution of Bayesian Neural Networks to be tractable across these
         various initialization schemes.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks are often studied at random initialization, where in the limit of infinite width,
they have been shown to generate intermediate entries which approach Gaussian Processes. Seemingly
this was first studied for one-layer networks in Neal (1996) when the weight matrices have identically
and independently distributed (IID) Gaussian entries, and became a popular model for deep networks
following the seminal results for deep fully connected networks in Lee et al. (2017) and Matthews
et al. (2018). Specifically, the latter formulated a proof strategy that quickly became a cornerstone
in the field, paving the way for various extensions of the Gaussian Process limit (see Section 1.1).
The resulting Gaussian Process has proven to be of practical interest for at least two reasons. First, it
emerges as a mathematically motivated choice of prior in the context of Bayesian Neural Networks.
Secondly, it helps the analysis of exploding and vanishing gradient phenomena as done in Schoenholz
et al. (2017) and Pennington et al. (2018), amongst other network properties.
In this paper, we extend the proof of the Gaussian Process from Matthews et al. (2018) to a larger
class of initial weight distributions (which we call P SEUDO - IID). P SEUDO - IID distributions include
the already well-known cases of IID and orthogonal weights. Moreover, we explore other important
settings that conform to our more general conditions (e.g. structured sparse and low-rank), yet for
which the Gaussian Process limit could not be derived previously due to their violation of the IID
assumption.

Why studying low-rank and structured sparse networks at initialization? In recent years, deep
learning models have significantly increased in size, while concurrently smaller AI chips have been
preferred. The most widely studied approaches for bridging the gap between these two aims are to
reduce the number of parameters by either pruning the network to be sparse or using low-rank factors.
The lottery ticket hypothesis Frankle & Carbin (2019) has given empirical evidence of the existence
of pruned sub-networks (i.e. winning tickets) achieving test accuracy that is comparable and even
superior to their original network. Unfortunately most pruning methods produce sparsity patterns


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that are unstructured, thereby limiting potential hardware accelerations (see Hoefler et al. (2021)).
Remarkably, Chen et al. (2022) revealed some winning tickets with structured sparsity, that can be
exploited by efficient hardware accelerators on GPUs and FPGAs to reduce greatly their in-memory
access, storage, and computational burden (Zhu et al. (2020)). Likewise, the emergence of low-rank
structures within deep networks during training is observed where the low-rank factors are aligned
with learned classes Han et al. (2022). These factors are shown to improve the efficiency and accuracy
of networks, similarly to the lottery ticket hypothesis Osawa et al. (2017); Yang et al. (2020a;b); Tai
et al. (2022); Price & Tanner (2023); Karimi Mahabadi et al. (2021); Berlyand et al. (2023). If such
computationally efficient winning tickets exist, why would one want to train a dense (or full-rank)
network at a high computational price only to later reduce it to be sparse (or low-rank)? This question
has given rise to single-shot approaches, often referred to as Pruning at Initialization (PaI) such as
SNIP Lee et al. (2019), SynFlow Tanaka et al. (2020), GraSP Wang et al. (2020a), NTT Liu & Zenke
(2020). Consequently, the present work delves into the properties of such parsimonious networks at
initialization, within the larger framework of P SEUDO - IID regimes.


1.1   R ELATED WORK

To the best of our knowledge, the Gaussian Process behaviour in the infinite width regime was first
established by Neal (1996) in the case of one-layer fully connected networks when the weights
are IID sampled from standard distributions. The result has then been extended in Matthews et al.
(2018) to deep fully connected networks, where the depth is fixed, the weights are distributed as IID
Gaussians and the widths of the hidden layers grow jointly to infinity. Jointly scaling the network
width substantially distinguishes their method of proof from the approach taken in Lee et al. (2017),
where the authors considered a sequential limit analysis through layers. Indeed, analyzing the limiting
distribution at one layer when the previous ones have already converged Lee et al. (2017) significantly
differs from examining it when the preceding layers are jointly converging to their limits Matthews
et al. (2018). The latter approach now serves as a foundational machinery in the infinite width analysis
from which numerous subsequent works followed. This paper is one of them.
Since this Gaussian Process behaviour has been established, two main themes of research have further
been developed. The first consists of the extension of such results for more general and complex
architectures such as convolutional networks with many channels Novak et al. (2020), Garriga-Alonso
et al. (2019) or any modern architectures composed of fully connected, convolutional or residual
connections, as summarized in Yang (2021), using the Tensor Program terminology. The second
line of work concerns the generalization of this Gaussian Process behaviour to other possible weight
distributions, such as orthogonal weights in Huang et al. (2021) or, alternatively, any IID weights
with finite moments as derived in Hanin (2021). Note that the orthogonal case does not fit into the
latter as entries are exchangeable but not independent. Our contribution fits into this line of research,
where we relax the independence requirement of the weight matrix entries and instead consider
P SEUDO - IID distributions made of uncorrelated and exchangeable random variables. This broader
class of distributions, Definition 2, enables us to present a unified proof that strictly generalizes the
approaches taken so far and encompasses all of them, for two types of architectures, namely, fully
connected and convolutional networks.


1.2   O RGANIZATION OF THE PAPER

In Section 2, we focus on fully connected neural networks, formally stating the P SEUDO - IID regime
and its associated Gaussian Process (GP) in Theorem 1, whose rigorous proof is provided in Appendix
A. Our P SEUDO - IID regime unifies the previously studied settings of IID and orthogonal weights,
while also allowing for novel initialization schemes conform to the Gaussian Process limit, such
as low-rank and structured sparse weights. We expand the definition of P SEUDO - IID distributions
to convolutional kernels and extend the resulting Gaussian Process limit to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in Section 2.2. In Section 3, we provide examples of P SEUDO - IID distributions in
practice, supporting our theoretical results with numerical simulations. Moreover, we allude to two
important consequences of the GP limit in 3.3, namely the analysis of stable initialization of deep
networks on the so-called Edge-of-Chaos (EoC), as well as tractability for the posterior distribution
of Bayesian Neural Networks, in our more expansive P SEUDO - IID regime. Lastly, in Section 4, we
review our main contributions and put forward some further research directions.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    G AUSSIAN P ROCESS BEHAVIOUR IN THE P SEUDO - IID REGIME

We consider an untrained fully connected neural network with width Nℓ at layer ℓ ∈ {1, · · · , L + 1}.
Its weights W (ℓ) ∈ RNℓ ×Nℓ−1 and biases b(ℓ) ∈ RNℓ at layer ℓ are sampled from centered probability
                             (ℓ)     (ℓ)
distributions, respectively µW and µb . Starting with such a network, with nonlinear activation
ϕ : R → R, the propagation of any input data vector z (0) := x ∈ X ⊆ RN0 through the network is
given by the following equations,
                                    Nℓ−1
                      (ℓ)                    (ℓ) (ℓ−1)           (ℓ)     (ℓ)             (ℓ)
                                    X
                     hi (x) =              Wij zj        (x) + bi ,    zj (x) = ϕ(hj (x)),                     (1)
                                    j=1

where h(ℓ) (x) ∈ RNℓ is referred to as the preactivation vector at layer ℓ, or feature maps.
In this work, we consider all biases to be drawn IID from N (0, σb2 ) in both fully-connected and
convolutional cases. Gaussian biases are in fact needed to ensure the gaussianity of the feature maps.
Our focus will thus be restricted to the weight matrices and tensors that result in a Gaussian Process.
P SEUDO - IID distributions (formally introduced in Def. 2) only need to meet some moment conditions
along with an exchangeability requirement that we define below.
Definition 1 (Exchangeability). Let X1 , · · · , Xn be scalar, vector or matrix-valued random variables.
We say (Xi )ni=1 are exchangeable if their joint distribution is invariant under permutations, i.e.
                 d
(X1 , · · · , Xn ) = (Xσ(1) , · · · , Xσ(n) ) for all permutations σ : [n] → [n]. A random matrix is called
row- (column-) exchangeable if its rows (columns) are exchangeable random vectors, respectively.

A row-exchangeable and column-exchangeable weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n is not in general entry-
wise exchangeable, which means its distribution is not typically invariant under arbitrary permutations
of its entries; particularly, out of (mn)! possible permutations of the entries, W only needs to be
invariant under m!n! of them — an exponentially smaller number. We can now define the family of
P SEUDO - IID distributions.
Definition 2 (P SEUDO - IID). Let m, n be two integers and a ∈ Rn be any fixed vector. We will say
that the random matrix W = (Wij ) ∈ Rm×n is in the P SEUDO - IID distribution with parameter σ 2 if

      (i) the matrix is row-exchangeable and column-exchangeable,
                                                                                        2
     (ii) its entries are centered, uncorrelated, with variance E(Wij2 ) = σn ,
              Pn                8
    (iii) E     j=1 aj Wij          = K∥a∥82 n−4 for some constant K,
                            2
    (iv) and limn→∞ nσ4 E(Wia ,j Wib ,j Wic ,j ′ Wid ,j ′ ) = δia ,ib δic ,id , for all j ̸= j ′ .

When W (1) has IID Gaussian entries and the other weight matrices W (ℓ) , 2 ≤ ℓ ≤ L + 1, of a neural
network (see equation 1) are drawn from a P SEUDO - IID distribution, we will say that the network is
under the P SEUDO - IID regime.

The P SEUDO - IID conditions (i)-(iv) are included to serve the following purposes: Conditions (i) and
(ii) allow for non-IID initializations such as orthogonal weights while being sufficient for a CLT-type
argument to hold. The variance scaling prevents the preactivations in equation 2 from blowing up as
the network’s size grows. Condition (iii) requires the moments of the possibly dependent weights to
behave like independent ones, while condition (iv) constrains their cross-correlations to vanish fast
enough. Together they maintain that in the limit, these variables interact as if they were independent,
and this is all our proof needs. The importance of condition (iii) is expanded upon in Appendix G. It
is worth noting that because the first layer’s weight matrix has only one dimension scaling up with
n, the tension between the entries’ dependencies and the network size cannot be resolved, thus we
take these weights to be IID 1 . Whether some of the conditions are redundant still remains an open
question.
    1
      In fact, it is enough for W (1) to have IID rows. We assume Gaussian IID entries for simplicity, yet this can
be further relaxed at the cost of a more complicated formula for the first covariance kernel (see equation 21).


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Throughout this paper, we consider a specific set of activation functions that satisfy the so-called
linear envelope property, Definition 3, satisfied by most activation functions used in practice (ReLu,
Softmax, Tanh, HTanh, etc.).
Definition 3. (Linear envelope property) A function ϕ : R → R is said to satisfy the linear envelope
property if there exist c, M ≥ 0 such that, for any x ∈ R,
                                                       |ϕ(x)| ≤ c + M |x|.

2.1     T HE P SEUDO - IID REGIME FOR FULLY CONNECTED NETWORKS

Our proofs of P SEUDO - IID networks converging to Gaussian Processes are done in the more so-
phisticated simultaneous width growth limit as pioneered by Matthews et al. (2018). For a review
of the literature on deep networks with sequential vs. simultaneous scaling, see Section 1.1. One
way of characterizing such a simultaneous convergence over all layers is to consider that all widths
Nℓ are increasing functions of one parameter, let us say n, such that, as n grows, all layers’ widths
increase: ∀ℓ ∈ {1, · · · , L}, Nℓ := Nℓ [n]. We emphasize this dependence on n by appending an index
X[n] to the random variables X when n is finite and denote by X[∗] its limiting random variable,
corresponding to n → ∞. The input dimension N0 and the final output layer dimension NL+1 are
finite thus they do not scale with n. Moreover, the input data are assumed to come from a countably
infinite input space X (see A.1). Equation 1 can thus be rewritten, for any x ∈ X , as
                                Nℓ−1 [n]
            (ℓ)                                (ℓ) (ℓ−1)              (ℓ)     (ℓ)              (ℓ)
                                    X
           hi (x)[n] =                      Wij zj         (x)[n] + bi ,     zj (x)[n] = ϕ(hj (x)[n]),   (2)
                                    j=1

and the associated Gaussian Process limit is given in Theorem 1, which we can now state.
Theorem 1 (GP limit for fully connected P SEUDO - IID networks). Suppose a fully connected neural
                                                                               2
network as in equation 2 is under the P SEUDO - IID regime with parameter σW      and the activation
satisfies the linear envelope property Def. 3. Let X be a countably-infinite set of inputs. Then, for
                                                                                     (ℓ)
every layer 2 ≤ ℓ ≤ L + 1, the sequence of random fields (i, x) ∈ [Nℓ ] × X 7→ hi (x)[n] ∈ RNℓ
                                                                                     (ℓ)
converges in distribution to a centered Gaussian Process (i, x) ∈ [Nℓ ] × X 7→ hi (x)[∗] ∈ RNℓ ,
whose covariance function is given by
                              h                      i
                                (ℓ)         (ℓ)
                            E hi (x)[∗] · hj (x′ )[∗] = δi,j K (ℓ) (x, x′ ),                      (3)

where                                     (
                      (ℓ)       ′
                                           σb2 + σW
                                                  2
                                                    E(u,v)∼N (0,K (ℓ−1) (x,x′ )) [ϕ(u)ϕ(v)],   ℓ ≥ 2,
                  K         (x, x ) =             σ2                                                     (4)
                                            σb2 + NW0 ⟨x, x′ ⟩,                                ℓ = 1.

2.2     T HE P SEUDO - IID REGIME FOR C ONVOLUTION N EURAL N ETWORKS

We consider a CNN with Cℓ number of channels at layer ℓ ∈ {1, · · · , L + 1} and two-dimensional
                           (ℓ)
convolutional filters Ui,j ∈ Rk×k mapping the input channel j ∈ {1, · · · , Cℓ−1 } to the output
channel i ∈ {1, · · · , Cℓ }. The input signal X (also two-dimensional) has C0 channels x1 , · · · , xC0
and its propagation through the network is given by
                                C0
                 
                      (1)            (1)
                              X
                    b 1+          Ui,j ⋆ xj ,            ℓ = 1,
                  i
                 
                 
                 
   (ℓ)                         j=1                                     (ℓ)             (ℓ)
  hi (X)[n] =                  Cℓ−1
                                                                     zi (X)[n] = ϕ(hi (X))[n].
                 
                      (ℓ)
                              X (ℓ)        (ℓ−1)
                  bi 1 +           Ui,j ⋆ zj     (X)[n], ℓ ≥ 2,
                 
                 
                 
                                     j=1
                                                                                                         (5)
In equation 5, the symbol 1 should be understood as having the same size as the convolution output,
the non-linearity ϕ(·) is applied entry-wise, and we emphasize on the simultaneous scaling with n by
                                       (ℓ)
appending [n] to the feature maps hi (X)[n]. We denote spatial (multi-) indices by boldface Greek
letters µ, ν, etc., that are ordered pairs of integers taking values in the range of the size of the array.


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For example, if X is an RGB (C0 = 3) image of H × D pixels, i = 2, and µ = (α, β), then Xi,µ
returns the green intensity of the (α, β) pixel. Moreover, we define JµK to be the patch centered at the
pixel µ covered by the filter, e.g. if µ = (α, β) and the filter covers k × k = (2k0 + 1) × (2k0 + 1)
pixels, then JµK = {(α′ , β ′ ) | α − k0 ≤ α′ ≤ α + k0 , β − k0 ≤ β ′ ≤ β + k0 }, with the usual
convention of zero-padding for the out-of-range indices. Sufficient conditions for P SEUDO - IID CNNs
to converge to a Gaussian Process in the simultaneous scaling limit are given in Definition 4.
                                                                                                                (ℓ)
Definition 4 (P SEUDO - IID for CNNs). Consider a CNN with random filters and biases {Ui,j } and
    (ℓ)
{bi } as in equation 5. It is said to be in the P SEUDO - IID regime with parameter σ 2 if U(1) has IID
      σ2
N (0, C 0
          ) entries and, for 2 ≤ ℓ ≤ L + 1, such that for any fixed vector a := (aj,ν )j,ν ,

          (i) the convolutional kernel U(ℓ) ∈ RCℓ ×Cℓ−1 ×k×k is row-exchangeable and column-
              exchangeable, that is its distribution is invariant under permutations of the first and second
              indices,
                                                                                           (ℓ)
      (ii) the filters’ entries are centered, uncorrelated, with variance E[(Ui,j,µ )2 ] = σ 2 /Cℓ−1 ,
                PCℓ−1 P            (ℓ) 8
      (iii) E      j=1     ν aj,ν Ui,j,ν = K∥a∥82 (Cℓ−1 )−4 for some constant K,
                                   2
                                           (ℓ)       (ℓ)       (ℓ)       (ℓ)
      (iv) and limn→∞ Cℓ−1    [n]
                            σ4    E Uia ,j,µa Uib ,j,µb Uic ,j ′ ,µc Uid ,j ′ ,µd       = δia ,ib δic ,id δµa ,µb δµc ,µd ,
                         ′
           for all j ̸= j .

Similar to the fully connected case, the filters’ entries can now exhibit some interdependencies as
long as their cross-correlations vanish at a fast enough rate dictated by conditions (iii)-(iv).
Theorem 2 (GP limit for CNN P SEUDO - IID networks). Suppose a CNN as in equation 5 is under the
                                      2
P SEUDO - IID regime with parameter σW    and the activation satisfies the linear envelope property Def.
3. Let X be a countably-infinite set of inputs and µ ∈ I denote a spatial (multi-) index. Then, for
                                                                                              (ℓ)
every layer 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L + 1, the sequence of random fields (i, X, µ) ∈ [Cℓ ] × X × I 7→ hi,µ (X)[n]
                                                                                                              (ℓ)
converges in distribution to a centered Gaussian Process (i, X, µ) ∈ [Cℓ ] × X × I 7→ hi,µ (X)[∗],
whose covariance function is given by
              h                           i
                 (ℓ)          (ℓ)
                                                               X
            E hi,µ (X)[∗] · hj,µ′ (X′ )[∗] = δi,j σb2 + σW
                                                         2
                                                                      Kν(ℓ) (X, X′ ) ,        (6)
                                                                      ν∈JµK∩Jµ′ K

where                                    (
                                          E(u,v)∼N (0,K (ℓ−1) (X,X′ )) [ϕ(u)ϕ(v)], ℓ ≥ 2,
                      Kν(ℓ) (X, X′ ) =     1
                                              PC0       ν
                                                           ′
                                                                                                                      (7)
                                           C0   i=1 X i,ν Xi,ν ,                   ℓ = 1.

These equations resemble those derived in the fully connected case, apart from the introduction of
additional terms accounting for pixels within patch µ. These terms vanish when the filter kernel size
is reduced to k = 1. Our proof of Theorem 2 can be found in Appendix B.

3         P SEUDO - IID IN PRACTICE
In this section, we illustrate some important P SEUDO - IID distributions through examples. We further
show that the Gaussian behaviour can serve, among others, two purposes of practical significance
(see section 3.3). First, we elucidate the analysis of signal propagation in neural networks. Secondly,
this Gaussian Process limit simplifies the initially complicated task of choosing a prior over a large
set of distributions a Bayesian Neural Network could realize at initialization.

3.1        E XAMPLES OF P SEUDO - IID DISTRIBUTIONS

We elaborate here on some typical initialization schemes and their belonging to the P SEUDO - IID class.
To the best of our knowledge, rigorous proofs of the Gaussian Process convergence in the literature
are restricted to the IID cases only (see Section 1.1). An important non-IID case that also results in
a Gaussian Process is the random orthogonal initialization, partially derived in Huang et al. (2021)


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for fully connected networks. Nonetheless, we regret the authors remained elusive on the treatment
of the first layer, an aspect which we have since then enhanced. Our proposed P SEUDO - IID regime
encompasses both IID and orthogonal cases (see Appendix D) but also allows for a broader class of
weight distributions such as random low-rank or structured sparse matrices, for which the Gaussian
Process limit has not been established before, despite their practical significance (see Section 1).

Low-rank weights. Low-rank structures are widely recognized for speeding up matrix multiplica-
tions and can be used to reduce memory requirements, see 1. Whilst such structures inevitably impose
dependencies between the weight matrix entries A ∈ Rm×n , thus breaking the IID assumption,
Nait Saada & Tanner (2023) introduced a low-rank framework that falls within our P SEUDO - IID
regime. Let C := [C1 , · · · , Cr ] ∈ Rm×r be a uniformly drawn orthonormal basis for a random
                                                                               iid
r-dimensional subspace. Suppose P = (Pij ) ∈ Rr×n has IID entries Pij ∼ D. Setting A := CP ,
the columns of A are spanned by those of C. The row and column exchangeability of A follows
immediately from that of C and P , and the moment conditions (iii) and (iv) are controlled by the
choice of distribution D. Direct computation of the four-cross product that appears in condition (iv)
gives us                                                  h                            i
                                                      X
                 E(Aia ,1 Aib ,1 Aic ,2 Aid ,2 ) = s2   E Cia ,k Cib ,k Cic ,k′ Cid ,k′ ,
                                                  1≤k,k′ ≤r
                2
where s := E(P1,1 ). Using the expression in Lemma 3 of Huang et al. (2021) we can calculate the
above expectation and deduce condition (iv) when r is linearly proportional to m.

Structured sparse weights. Block-wise pruned networks have recently been under extensive study
for their efficient hardware implementation Dao et al. (2022b;a). Once the sparsifying mask is fixed,
we may apply random row and column permutations on the weight matrices without compromising
                                                                                               iid
the accuracy or the computational benefit. Let A = (Aij ) ∈ Rm×n have IID entries Aij ∼ D
and B ∈ Rm×n be the binary block-sparse mask. Let Ã = Pm (A ⊙ B)Pn , where Pm and Pn are
random permutation matrices of size m × m and n × n respectively, and ⊙ represents entry-wise
multiplication. Then, by construction, Ã is row- and column-exchangeable and, for suitable choices
of underlying distribution D, it satisfies the moment conditions of Definition 2. Appendix H contains
some illustrations for reference.

Orthogonal CNN filters. Unlike the fully connected case, it is not obvious how to define the
orthogonality of a convolutional layer and, once defined, how to randomly generate such layers for
initialization. Xiao et al. (2018) defines an orthogonal convolutional kernel U ∈ Rcout ×cin ×k×k
made of cout filters of size k × k through the energy preserving property ∥U ⋆ X∥2 = ∥X∥2 , for any
signal X with cin input channels. Wang et al. (2020b) requires the matricized version of the kernel to
be orthogonal, while Qi et al. (2020) gives a more stringent definition imposing isometry, i.e.
                                 cX
                                                        δ, j = j ′ ,
                                  out
                                      Ui,j ⋆ Ui,j ′ =
                                                        0, otherwise,
                                 i=1

where δ is 1 at (0, 0), and 0 elsewhere. Another definition in Huang et al. (2021) calls for orthogonality
of “spatial” slices Uµ ∈ Rcout ×cin , for all positions µ.
We take a different approach than Wang et al. (2020b) for matricizing the tensor convolution operator,
                                                                                                   2
setting the stride to 1 and padding to 0: reshape the kernel U into a matrix Ũ ∈ Rcout ×k cin and
                                     2
unfold the signal X into X̃ ∈ Rk cin ×d , where d is the number of patches depending on the sizes of
the signal and the filter. This allows Ũ to be an arbitrary unstructured matrix rather than the doubly
block-Toeplitz matrix considered in Wang et al. (2020b), as shown in Figure 1. Matricizing the tensor
convolution operator imposes the structure on the signal X̃ rather than the filter Ũ. Orthogonal (i.e.
energy-preserving) kernels Ũ can then be drawn uniformly random with orthogonal columns, such
that
                                                          1
                                                Ũ⊤ Ũ = 2 I                                            (8)
                                                          k
and then reshaped into the original tensor kernel U. Note that this construction is only possible when
Ũ is a tall matrix with trivial null space, that is when cout ≥ k 2 cin , otherwise the transpose might be


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Filter Signal                                     Filter Signal
            U=34 X= A
               1 2      B                                     U= 3 4 X= A
                                                                 1  2     B
                      CD                                                CD

                     4            A             U⋆X                 1 2 3 4          AB CD
                     3 4          B                                                 AB CD
                       3          C                                               AB CD
                     2 4          D                                              AB CD
                     1 2 3 4           =                       =
                       1 3                                              Ũ                X̃
              Ũ         2        X̃
                         1 2
                           1

Figure 1: There are various ways to compute convolutions U ⋆ X between a tensor filter U and
a 2D signal X (in the middle) from matrix multiplications. We illustrate the approach taken in
Garriga-Alonso et al. (2019) on the left, where the reshaping procedure is applied to the filter, whilst
the method we followed, shown on the right, consists of reshaping the signal instead in order to define
special structures on the CNN filters such as orthogonality, sparsity and low-rank.


considered. We emphasize that equation 8 is a sufficient (and not necessary) condition for U to be
                                                                                             2
energy-preserving, since X̃, by construction, belongs to a very specific structure set T ⊆ Rk cin ×d ,
and, therefore, Ũ needs to preserve norm only on T (so not everywhere). Therefore, we do not claim
the generated orthogonal convolutional kernel U is “uniformly distributed” over the set of all such
kernels.
Now let us check that what we defined to be orthogonal filters in the previous section verify the
                                                                            2
conditions of Definition 4. Each filter Ui,j is flattened as Ũi,j ∈ R1×k and forms part of a row of
Ũ as shown below:
                                                          ···
                                                                             
                                   Ũ1,1         Ũ1,2            Ũ1,cin
                                                                             
                       Ũ = 
                             
                                  Ũ  2,1       Ũ  2,2  ·  · ·  Ũ 2,c in
                                                                              
                                                                              .                 (9)
                                     .
                                      ..            .
                                                    ..     . ..       .
                                                                      ..
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                 Ũcout ,1      Ũcout ,2 · · · Ũcout ,cin
Applying permutations on the indices i and j translates to permuting rows and “column blocks” of the
orthogonal matrix Ũ, which does not affect the joint distribution of its entries. Hence, the kernel’s dis-
tribution is unaffected, and therefore U is row- and column-exchangeable. The moment conditions are
both straightforward to check as Ui,j,µ = Ũi,(j−1)k2 +µ , µ ∈ {1, · · · , k 2 }, where µ is the counting
                                                                          (ℓ)         (ℓ)         (ℓ)        (ℓ)
number of the pixel µ. To check condition (iv), note that E Uia ,1,µa Uib ,1,µb Uic ,2,µc Uid ,2,µd =

E Ũia ,µa Ũib ,µb Ũic ,k2 +µc Ũid ,k2 +µd , that is a four-cross product of the entries of an orthogonal
                                                                   Cℓ +1
matrix, whose expectation is explicitly known to be (Cℓ −1)C          ℓ (Cℓ +2)
                                                                                δia ,ib δic ,id δµa ,µb δµc ,µd (Huang
et al., 2021, Lemma 3).

3.2    S IMULATIONS OF THE G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES IN T HEOREM 1 FOR FULLY CONNECTED
       NETWORKS WITH P SEUDO - IID WEIGHTS

Theorem 1 establishes that random fully connected P SEUDO - IID networks converge to Gaussian
Processes in the infinite width limit. Here we conduct numerical simulations which validate this
for modest dimensions of width Nℓ = n for n = 3, 30, and 300. Figure 2 shows histograms of the
empirical distribution of the preactivations when the weights are drawn from various P SEUDO - IID
distributions.2 Even at n = 30 there is excellent agreement of the histograms with the limiting
   2
     Experiments conducted for Figures 2-5 used a fully connected network with activation ϕ(x) = tanh(x),
weight variance σw = 2 and without bias. Dropout used probability 1/2 of setting an entry to zero, low-rank
used rank ⌈n/2⌉, and block-sparsity used randomly permuted block-diagonal matrices with block-size ⌈n/5⌉.
The code to reproduce all these figures can be found at https://shorturl.at/gNOQ0.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      width = 3          width = 30        width = 300

                IID Uniform


                IID Gaussian
                with dropout


                P SEUDO - IID
                Gaussian low-
                rank

                P SEUDO - IID
                Gaussian struc-
                tured sparse

Figure 2: For different instances of the P SEUDO - IID regime, in the limit, the preactivation given in
the first neuron at the fifth layer tends to a Gausssian whose moments are given by Theorem 1. The
experiments were conducted 10000 times on a random 7-layer deep fully connected network with
input data sampled from S8 .


variance predicted by our Theorem 1. These histograms in Figure 2 are further quantified with Q-Q
plots in Appendix E.
Figure 3 illustrates the rate with which two independent inputs xa and xb generate feature maps
corresponding to uncorrelated Gaussian Processes, when passing through a network initialized
with P SEUDO - IID weights. The experiment is done by examining the joint empirical distribution
    (ℓ)               (ℓ)
of hi (xa )[n] and hi (xb )[n] at the same neuron index i and layer ℓ through the same network.
The level curves depict the theoretical joint Gaussian distribution given by the covariance kernel
in Theorem 1. Interestingly, we observe the fastest convergence to the Gaussian Process in the
orthogonal initialization. The other P SEUDO - IID distributions considered exhibit good agreement
at n = 30 which improves at n = 300. Some more experiments for fully connected networks and
CNNs initialized with orthogonal filters can be found in respectively, Appendix E and F.


3.3   I MPLICATIONS OF THE G AUSSIAN P ROCESS L IMIT

Bayesian Neural Network and Gaussian Process. As opposed to frequentist approaches, Bayesian
inference aims at finding a predictive distribution that serves to quantify the model’s predictions
uncertainty and prevent overfitting. Starting from a prior, this posterior distribution is updated once the
data is observed. Considering Bayesian neural networks, these priors are to be defined on the weights
and biases if adopting a parametric perspective, or, alternatively, directly on the input-output function
represented by the model. Note how one can jump from one view to the other given that random
initialization of the parameters of a neural network induces a distribution on the input-output function
h(L+1) (x) of the network. Nonetheless, finding a meaningful prior over the space of functions is in
general a delicate task.
In the large width limit, when the weights are drawn P SEUDO - IID in a L-layer deep network, Theorem
1 secures that the function represented by the network is exactly a Gaussian Process with known
covariance kernel K (L+1) , which only depends on the variances σb , σW and the activation function.
Therefore, the exact posterior distribution can be computed, yielding the Neural Network Gaussian
Process (NNGP) equivalence described in Novak et al. (2020). Since the covariance kernel obtained
in our less restrictive setting recovers the one in Novak et al. (2020), Matthews et al. (2018) and
Garriga-Alonso et al. (2019), their experiments still hold in our case and we refer to these works for
practical considerations on how to compute the posterior distribution. Specifically, NNGP yields


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           width = 3                                                                   width = 30                                                                  width = 300
                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6

                                           4                                                                               4                                                                               4



                IID  Uniform               2                                                                               2                                                                               2


                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 h15(xb)
                                           0                                                                               0                                                                               0


               with dropout                2                                                                               2                                                                               2

                                           4                                                                               4                                                                               4

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6

                                                   6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6
                                                                           h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6

                                           4                                                                               4                                                                               4



               P SEUDO - IID               2                                                                               2                                                                               2


                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 h15(xb)
                                           0                                                                               0                                                                               0


               Orthogonal                  2                                                                               2                                                                               2

                                           4                                                                               4                                                                               4

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6

                                                   6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6
                                                                           h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6



               P SEUDO - IID               4

                                           2
                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


               Gaussian low-
                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 h15(xb)
                                           0                                                                               0                                                                               0

                                           2                                                                               2                                                                               2


               rank                        4                                                                               4                                                                               4

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6

                                                   6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6                         6       4       2         0           2       4       6
                                                                           h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)
                                           8                                                                               8                                                                               8

                                           6                                                                               6                                                                               6


               P SEUDO - IID               4

                                           2
                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


               Gaussian struc-
                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                 h15(xb)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 h15(xb)
                                           0                                                                               0                                                                               0

                                           2                                                                               2                                                                               2


               tured sparse                4

                                           6
                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                                                                                                           6

                                           8                                                                               8                                                                               8
                                               8       6       4       2     0       2       4       6       8                 8       6       4       2     0       2       4       6       8                 8       6       4       2     0       2       4       6       8
                                                                           h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)                                                                         h15(xa)


Figure 3: The empirical joint distribution of the preactivations generated by two distinct inputs
flowing through the network. The large width limiting distribution as defined in Theorem 1 is
included as level curves. The input data xa , xb are drawn IID from S9 and 10000 experiments were
conducted on a 7-layer fully connected network. The horizontal and vertical axes in each subplot are
              (5)           (5)
respectively h1 (xa ) and h1 (xb ).


better accuracy compared to finite point-estimate neural networks Lee et al. (2017) and approximates
finite Bayesian networks very well (Matthews et al., 2018, Section 5).

Edge of Chaos (EoC). Random initialization of deep neural networks plays an important role in
their trainability by regulating how quantities like the variance of preactivations and the pairwise
correlation between input signals propagate through layers. An inappropriate initialization causes
the network to collapse to a constant function or become a chaotic mapping oversensitive to input
perturbations. The Edge of Chaos (EoC) initialization strategy rectifies these issues, additionally
causing the network to have gradients of consistent magnitude across layers. Calculation of the
EoC requires integration with respect to the distribution of preactivations in intermediary layers,
which, in general, is intractable. However, the Gaussian Process limit simplifies the EoC analysis
as carried out in Poole et al. (2016) and Xiao et al. (2018). Moreover, under the same distributional
assumption, Schoenholz et al. (2017); Pennington et al. (2018) show that initialization on the EoC
achieves dynamical isometry, making backpropagation of errors stable. Our main contributions
of Theorems 1 and 2 allow similar calculations to be made for P SEUDO - IID networks such as the
examples of low-rank, structured sparse, and orthogonal CNN as shown in Section 3.1. The EoC
for low-rank networks has been calculated in Nait Saada & Tanner (2023) under the assumption of
Theorems 1 and 2 which was at that time unproven. Interestingly, in terms of signal propagation,
structured sparse or low-rank initializations are equivalent to their dense and full-rank counterparts
up to a rescaling of the variance by a fractional factor of sparsity or rank.


4    C ONCLUSION

We proved in this paper a new Gaussian Process limit for deep neural networks initialized with
possibly inter-dependent entries. Examples include orthogonal, low-rank and structured sparse
networks which are particularly of interest due to their efficient implementation and their empirically
observed enhanced accuracy. Our result makes possible exact Bayesian inference as well as tractable
Edge of Chaos analysis, for a broader class of either fully connected or convolutional networks. We
expect the present work paves the way for a better understanding of the training dynamics of the
emerging deep neural networks with parsimonious representations.


                                                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Juba Nait Saada for insightful discussion and feedback on the manuscript, as well as Alex
Cliffe for valuable comments and help in drawing Figure 1. Thiziri Nait Saada is supported by the
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) through the grant EP/W523781/1.
Jared Tanner is supported by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (InnoHK
Project CIMDA).


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Leonid Berlyand, Etienne Sandier, Yitzchak Shmalo, and Lei Zhang. Enhancing accuracy in deep
  learning using random matrix theory, 2023.
Patrick Billingsley. Convergence of probability measures; 2nd ed. Wiley series in probability and
  statistics. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1999. URL https://cds.cern.ch/record/1254129.
Julius R. Blum and Murray Rosenblatt. A class of stationary processes and a central limit theorem.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 42 7:412–3,
  1956.
Tianlong Chen, Xuxi Chen, Xiaolong Ma, Yanzhi Wang, and Zhangyang Wang. Coarsening the
  granularity: Towards structurally sparse lottery tickets, 2022.
Benoit Collins, Sho Matsumoto, and Jonathan Novak. The weingarten calculus, 2021.
H. Cramér and H. Wold. Some theorems on distribution functions. Journal of the Lon-
  don Mathematical Society, s1-11(4):290–294, 1936. doi: https://doi.org/10.1112/jlms/s1-11.
  4.290. URL https://londmathsoc.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
  1112/jlms/s1-11.4.290.
Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Kaizhao Liang, Jiaming Yang, Zhao Song, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
  Pixelated butterfly: Simple and efficient sparse training for neural network models, 2022a.
Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Nimit Sohoni, Arjun Desai, Michael Poli, Jessica Grogan, Alexander Liu,
  Aniruddh Rao, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Monarch: Expressive structured matrices for
  efficient and accurate training, 2022b.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks, 2019.
Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Carl Edward Rasmussen, and Laurence Aitchison. Deep convolutional
  networks as shallow gaussian processes, 2019.
X.Y. Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L. Donoho. Neural collapse under MSE loss: Proximity to and
  dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=w1UbdvWH_R3.
Boris Hanin. Random neural networks in the infinite width limit as gaussian processes, 2021.
Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in deep
  learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. The Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):10882–11005, 2021.
Wei Huang, Weitao Du, and Richard Yi Da Xu. On the neural tangent kernel of deep networks with
 orthogonal initialization, 2021.
Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, James Henderson, and Sebastian Ruder. Compacter: Efficient low-rank
  hypercomplex adapter layers. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wort-
  man Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1022–
  1035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2021/file/081be9fdff07f3bc808f935906ef70c0-Paper.pdf.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes, 2017. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1711.00165.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip H. S. Torr. Snip: Single-shot network pruning
  based on connection sensitivity, 2019.
Tianlin Liu and Friedemann Zenke. Finding trainable sparse networks through neural tangent transfer,
  2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander G. de G. Matthews, Mark Rowland, Jiri Hron, Richard E. Turner, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
  Gaussian process behaviour in wide deep neural networks, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1804.11271.
Thiziri Nait Saada and Jared Tanner. On the initialisation of wide low-rank feedforward neural
  networks, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13710.
R. M. Neal. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, Vol. 118 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. Springer-
  Verlag, 1996.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Greg Yang, Jiri Hron, Daniel A. Abolafia,
  Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Bayesian deep convolutional networks with many
  channels are gaussian processes, 2020.
Kazuki Osawa, Akira Sekiya, Hiroki Naganuma, and Rio Yokota. Accelerating matrix multiplication
  in deep learning by using low-rank approximation. In 2017 International Conference on High
  Performance Computing & Simulation (HPCS), pp. 186–192, 2017. doi: 10.1109/HPCS.2017.37.
Jeffrey Pennington, Samuel Schoenholz, and Surya Ganguli. The emergence of spectral universality in
   deep networks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1924–1932.
   PMLR, 2018.
Ben Poole, Subhaneil Lahiri, Maithra Raghu, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Exponential
  expressivity in deep neural networks through transient chaos, 2016. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1606.05340.
Ilan Price and Jared Tanner. Improved projection learning for lower dimensional feature maps. In
   ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
   (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Haozhi Qi, Chong You, Xiaolong Wang, Yi Ma, and Jitendra Malik. Deep isometric learning for
  visual recognition. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7824–7835. PMLR, 2020.
Samuel S. Schoenholz, Justin Gilmer, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information
  propagation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1W1UN9gg.
Yu-Shan Tai, Chieh-Fang Teng, Cheng-Yang Chang, and An-Yeu Andy Wu. Compression-aware
  projection with greedy dimension reduction for convolutional neural network activations. In
  ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 56–60, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746451.
Hidenori Tanaka, Daniel Kunin, Daniel L. K. Yamins, and Surya Ganguli. Pruning neural networks
  without any data by iteratively conserving synaptic flow, 2020.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by
  preserving gradient flow, 2020a.
Jiayun Wang, Yubei Chen, Rudrasis Chakraborty, and Stella X Yu. Orthogonal convolutional neural
   networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 11505–11515, 2020b.
Lechao Xiao, Yasaman Bahri, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Samuel Schoenholz, and Jeffrey Pennington.
  Dynamical isometry and a mean field theory of CNNs: How to train 10,000-layer vanilla con-
  volutional neural networks. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 5393–5402. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/xiao18a.html.
Greg Yang. Tensor programs i: Wide feedforward or recurrent neural networks of any architecture
  are gaussian processes, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Huanrui Yang, Minxue Tang, Wei Wen, Feng Yan, Daniel Hu, Ang Li, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen.
  Learning low-rank deep neural networks via singular vector orthogonality regularization and
  singular value sparsification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, June 2020a.
Huanrui Yang, Minxue Tang, Wei Wen, Feng Yan, Daniel Hu, Ang Li, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen.
  Learning low-rank deep neural networks via singular vector orthogonality regularization and
  singular value sparsification, 2020b.
Chaoyang Zhu, Kejie Huang, Shuyuan Yang, Ziqi Zhu, Hejia Zhang, and Haibin Shen. An efficient
  hardware accelerator for structured sparse convolutional neural networks on fpgas, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1: G AUSSIAN P ROCESS BEHAVIOUR IN F ULLY
         C ONNECTED N ETWORKS IN THE P SEUDO - IID REGIME

A.1       S TEP 1: R EDUCTION OF THE PROBLEM FROM COUNTABLY- INFINITE TO FINITE
          DIMENSIONAL

Firstly, we must clarify in what sense a sequence of stochastic Processes hi [n], i ∈ N converges
in distribution to its limit hi [∗]. For a sequence of real-valued random variables, we can define
convergence in distribution Xn → d X by the following condition: Ef (X ) → Ef (X) for all continuous
                                                                        n
functions f : R → R. Similarly, we can define weak convergence for random objects taking values
in RN (countably-indexed stochastic Processes), provided that we equip RN with a “good” topology3
that maintains a sufficiently rich class of continuous functions. The metric ρ on the space of real
sequences RN defined by
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                  ρ(h, h′ ) :=   2−i min(1, |hi − h′i |)                         (10)
                                                     i=1

is one example. Thus, we can speak of the weak convergence hi [n]→        d h [∗] in the sense that
                                                                             i
Ef (hi [n]) → Ef (hi [∗]) for all f : R → R continuous with respect to the metric ρ.
                                       N

Fortunately, to prove the weak convergence of infinite-dimensional distributions, it is sufficient to
show the convergence of their finite-dimensional marginals Billingsley (1999).

A.2       S TEP 2: R EDUCTION OF THE PROBLEM FROM MULTIDIMENSIONAL TO
          ONE - DIMENSIONAL

Let L = {(i1 , x1 ), · · · , (iP , xP )} be a finite subset of the index set [Nℓ ] × X . We need to show that
             (ℓ)                                                      (ℓ)
the vector hip (xp )[n] ∈ RP converges in distribution to hip (xp )[∗] ∈ RP . By the Cramér-Wold
theorem (Cramér & Wold (1936)), we may equivalently show the weak convergence of an arbitrary
linear projection

                                                                (ℓ)           (ℓ)
                                                X
                          T (ℓ) (α, L)[n] =            α(i,x) hi (x)[n] − bi                             (11)
                                                 (i,x)∈L
                                                           Nℓ−1 [n]
                                                                                  (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                                                  X          X
                                             =                        α(i,x) Wij zj           (x)[n]    (12)
                                                 (i,x)∈L     j=1
                                                                   Nℓ−1 [n]
                                                      1              X          (ℓ)
                                             =p                                γj (α, L)[n],            (13)
                                                    Nℓ−1 [n]         j=1

where
                                 (ℓ)                                           (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                                                            X
                               γj (α, L)[n] := σW                    α(i,x) ϵij zj         (x)[n],      (14)
                                                           (i,x)∈L

         (ℓ)                                         (ℓ)                   2
and ϵij is centered and normalized, i.e. Eϵij = 0, Eϵ(ℓ) ij = 1. We will be using a suitable version
of Central Limit Theorem (CLT) to prove the weak convergence of the series in equation 13 to a
Gaussian random variable.

A.3       S TEP 3: U SE OF AN EXCHANGEABLE C ENTRAL L IMIT T HEOREM

The classical Central Limit Theorem (CLT) establishes that for a sequence of IID random variables,
the properly scaled sample mean converges to a Gaussian random variable in distribution. Here we
recall an extension of the Central Limit Theorem introduced in Blum & Rosenblatt (1956), where the
independence assumption on the summands is relaxed and replaced by an exchangeability condition.
The following statement is an adapted version derived in Matthews et al. (2018), which is more suited
to our case.
    3
        In fact, it needs to be a Polish space, i.e. a complete separable metric space.


                                                              14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3 (Matthews et al. (2018), Lemma 10). For each positive integer n, let (Xn,j ; j ∈ N∗ )
be an infinitely exchangeable Process with mean zero, finite variance σn2 , and finite absolute third
moment. Suppose also that the variance has a limit limn→∞ σn2 = σ∗2 . Define
                                                     N [n]
                                                1    X
                                        Sn := p            Xn,j ,                                           (15)
                                               N [n] j=1

where N : N → N is a strictly increasing function. If

     (a) E[Xn,1 Xn,2 ] = 0,
                   2    2
     (b) limn→∞ E[Xn,1 Xn,2 ] = σ∗4 ,
                              p
     (c) E[|Xn,1 |3 ] = on→∞ ( N [n]),

then Sn converges in distribution to N (0, σ∗2 ).

                                                                                          (ℓ)
Comparing equation 13 with equation 15, we need to check if the summands Xn,j := γj (α, L)[n]
satisfy the conditions of Theorem 3. We will carefully verify each condition in the following sections.
At each step, we make a note in italics whenever loosening the assumption on the first layer’s weights
from being IID Gaussian to row-IID introduces a slight variation in the proof.

A.3.1    E XCHANGEABILITY OF THE SUMMANDS
                                                                              (ℓ)
To apply Theorem 3, we must first prove that the random variables γj (α, L)[n] are exchangeable.
                                      (ℓ)
Let us expand the expression for γj (α, L)[n] further and write it in terms of the preactivations of
layer ℓ − 2, i.e.
           (ℓ)                              (ℓ)   (ℓ−1)
                               X
          γj (α, L)[n] = σW         α(i,x) ϵij ϕ(hj     (x)[n])
                                  (i,x)∈L

                                                             Nℓ−2
                                                              X[n]
                                                   (ℓ)                (ℓ−1) (ℓ−2)           (ℓ−1)
                                   X
                           = σW             α(i,x) ϵij ϕ             Wjk   zk     (x)[n] + bj           .
                                  (i,x)∈L                     k=1


If we apply a random permutation on the index j, let us say σ : {1, · · · , Nℓ−1 } → {1, · · · , Nℓ−1 },
then the row-exchangeability and column-exchangeability of the P SEUDO - IID weights ensure that
   (ℓ)                                  (ℓ)            (ℓ−1)                             (ℓ−1)
Wiσ(j) has same distribution as Wij and that Wσ(j)k has same distribution as Wjk , for any
i ∈ {1, · · · , Nℓ }, k ∈ {1, · · · , Nℓ−2 }. Note that this extends easily to the normalized versions
                    (ℓ)
of the weights ϵij . Additionally, as the biases are set to be IID Gaussians, they are a fortiori
exchangeable and their distributions remain unchanged when considering random permutations of
                        (ℓ)                      (ℓ)
indices. Therefore, γj (α, L)[n] is equal to γσ(j) (α, L)[n] in distribution, hence exchangeability.
                                      (1)
For ℓ = 2, when the weights Wjk are row-IID only, they are also row-exchangeable and the
                     (2)
exchangeability of γj (α, L)[n] follows.

A.3.2    M OMENT CONDITIONS

We mean by moment conditions the existence of a limiting variance σ∗2 , as well as the conditions
(a)–(c) in Theorem 3. We will prove the moment conditions by induction on the layer number ℓ.

Existence of the limiting variance of the summands. To show the existence of the limiting
                                                                                             (ℓ)
variance of the summands, let us first write down such a variance at a finite width. Since γj ’s are
exchangeable (see A.3.1), their distribution is identical and we may simply calculate the variance of


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (ℓ)
γ1 as follows.


                                        2  h                              i2
                            (ℓ)                          (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                                               X
  (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[n] := E γ1 (α, L)[n] = E σW   α(i,x) ϵi,1 z1    (x)[n]
                                                                    (i,x)∈L
                                                                       h             i h                                 i
                                                                         (ℓ) (ℓ)         (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
                                     X
                              2
                           = σW                 α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) E ϵia ,1 ϵib ,1 E z1     (xa )[n] · z1     (xb )[n]
                                  (ia ,xa )∈L
                                  (ib ,xb )∈L
                                                                               h                                 i
                                                                                 (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
                                     X
                              2
                           = σW                 α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) δia ,ib E z1     (xa )[n] · z1     (xb )[n] ,      (16)
                                  (ia ,xa )∈L
                                  (ib ,xb )∈L



where we first considered the independence between the normalized weights at layer ℓ and the
activations at layer ℓ − 1; then used the fact that the normalized weights are uncorrelated in the
P SEUDO - IID regime.
The convergence of the second moment of the summands is thus dictated by the convergence of
the covariance of the activations of the last layer. By the induction hypothesis, the feature maps
  (ℓ−1)
hj      (x)[n] converge in distribution, so the continuous mapping theorem guarantees the existence
                                                             (ℓ−1)                    (ℓ−1)
of a limiting distribution for the activations z1        (xa )[n] and z1       (xb )[n] as n tends to infinity.
Note that this result holds even if the activation function has a set of discontinuity points of Lebesgue
measure zero, e.g. the step function. Thus, the product inside the expectation in equation 16 converges
                                                  (ℓ−1)           (ℓ−1)
in distribution to a limiting random variable z1        (xa )[∗]z1      (xb )[∗].
From Billingsley (1999), one knows that if a sequence weakly converges to a limiting distribution
and is uniformly integrable, then we can swap the order of taking the limit and the expectation. Thus,
by Proposition 1, we have


       (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[∗] := lim (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[n]
                             n→∞
                                                                            h                                 i
                                                                              (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
                                   X
                              2
                           = σW              α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) δia ,ib E z1     (xa )[∗] · z1     (xb )[∗] .         (17)
                                    (ia ,xa )∈L
                                    (ib ,xb )∈L


                                  (1)                                           (1)             (1)
For ℓ = 2, the activation z1 (xb ) does not scale with n, i.e. z1 (xb ) := z1 (xb )[∗], thus swapping
expectation and limit is trivial.


                                                                                                (ℓ)
Condition (a). At a given layer ℓ, we need to show that Xn,1 := γ1 (α, L)[n] and Xn,2 :=
 (ℓ)
γ2 (α, L)[n] are uncorrelated. We have

                 h                                                               i
                               (ℓ) (ℓ−1)                       (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                     X                               X
  E Xn,1 Xn,2 = E σW   α(i,x) ϵi,1 z1    (x)[n] · σW   α(i,x) ϵi,2 z2    (x)[n]
                                    (i,x)∈L                                           (i,x)∈L
                                                                   h             i h                                 i
                                                                     (ℓ) (ℓ)         (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
                                  X
                         2
                      = σW                  α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) E ϵia ,1 ϵib ,2 E z1     (xa )[n] · z2     (xb )[n]
                              (ia ,xa )∈L
                              (ib ,xb )∈L

                      = 0,


          (ℓ)        (ℓ)
since ϵia ,1 and ϵib ,2 are uncorrelated by the P SEUDO - IID assumption, for ℓ ≥ 2.


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Condition (b).
  h         i     h                              2                               2 i
                                (ℓ) (ℓ−1)                       (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                      X                               X
    2    2
E Xn,1 Xn,2    = E σW   α(i,x) ϵi,1 z1    (x)[n] · σW   α(i,x) ϵi,2 z2    (x)[n]
                           (i,x)∈L                                                 (i,x)∈L
                         X                  Y
                  4
               = σW                                    α(it ,xt )
                       (it ,xt )∈L       t∈{a,b,c,d}
                      t∈{a,b,c,d}
                                           h  Y                        Y                      i
                                                 (ℓ) (ℓ−1)                (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
                                          E     ϵit ,1 z1  (xt )[n] ·    ϵit ,2 z2  (xt )[n]
                                                   t∈{a,b}                                  t∈{c,d}
                         X                  Y
                  4
               = σW                                    α(it ,xt ) Fn (ia , ib , ic , id )
                       (it ,xt )∈L       t∈{a,b,c,d}
                      t∈{a,b,c,d}                                                                               (18)
                                           h  Y                    Y                 i
                                                 (ℓ−1)                (ℓ−1)
                                          E     z1     (xt )[n] ·    z2     (xt )[n] ,
                                                   t∈{a,b}                           t∈{c,d}

where
                                                             (ℓ) (ℓ) (ℓ) (ℓ)
                               Fn (ia , ib , ic , id ) := E ϵia ,1 ϵib ,1 ϵic ,2 ϵid ,2 .                       (19)
We justify the convergence in distribution of the random variable inside the expectation in the exact
same way as in the previous section, referring to the continuous mapping theorem and the induction
hypothesis. By Proposition 1, as n → ∞, the above expectation converges to the expectation of the
limiting Gaussian Process, i.e.
                  h  Y                          Y                       i
                              (ℓ−1)                     (ℓ−1)
            lim E            z1     (xt )[n] ·         z2     (xt )[n]
           n→∞
                     t∈{a,b}                                 t∈{c,d}
                                       h  Y                    Y                 i
                                             (ℓ−1)                (ℓ−1)
                                     =E     z1     (xt )[∗] ·    z2     (xt )[∗] .
                                                  t∈{a,b}                          t∈{c,d}


Moreover, condition (iv) of Definition 2 implies that

                                     lim Fn (ia , ib , ic , id ) = δia ,ib δic ,id .
                                    n→∞


Substituting the two limits back in the equation 18 and using the independence of the activations at
layer ℓ − 1 given by the induction hypothesis, we get
          h           i           X   Y
              2    2        4
   lim E Xn,1    Xn,2   = σW                         α(it ,xt ) δia ,ib δic ,id
  n→∞
                                 (it ,xt )∈L        t∈{a,b,c,d}
                                t∈{a,b,c,d}
                                            h  Y                    Y                 i
                                                  (ℓ−1)                (ℓ−1)
                                           E     z1     (xt )[∗] ·    z2     (xt )[∗]
                                                   t∈{a,b}                           t∈{c,d}
                                                    Y                              h Y                i
                                                                                        (ℓ−1)
                                       X
                          4
                       = σW                                    α(it ,xt ) δia ,ib E    z1     (xt )[∗]
                                    (it ,xt )∈L     t∈{a,b}                         t∈{a,b}
                                     t∈{a,b}
                                                               Y                             h Y                i
                                                                                                  (ℓ−1)
                                                   X
                                                                         α(it ,xt ) δic ,id E    z1     (xt )[∗]
                                               (it ,xt )∈L     t∈{c,d}                         t∈{c,d}
                                                t∈{c,d}
                          4
                       = σW (σ (ℓ) )4 (α, L)[∗].

                             (1)                               (1)         (1)
For ℓ = 2, the activations z1 (xt ) do not scale with n, i.e. z1 (xt ) := z1 (xt )[∗], thus swapping
expectation and limit is trivial once again. The independence between the activations at different
neurons boils down to the independence between the rows of W (ℓ) .


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         (ℓ)
Condition
p          (c). To show that the third absolute moment of the γ1 (α, L)[n] grows slower than
  Nℓ−1 [n] as n → ∞, it is sufficient to bound it by a constant. Applying Hölder’s inequality on
       (ℓ)        3
X = γ1 (α, L)[n] , Y = 1, p = 4/3, q = 4, we obtain
                            (ℓ)           3         (ℓ)          4  1
                      E( γ1 (α, L)[n] ) ≤ E γ1 (α, L)[n] 4 × 1.

                                                                                       (ℓ)                 4
Therefore, condition (c) boils down to showing that limn→∞ E γ1 (α, L)[n] is finite, for which
we will once again make use of the uniform integrability of the feature maps derived in C. Define

                            Gn (ia , ib , ic , id ) := E ϵia ,1 ϵib ,1 ϵic ,1 ϵid ,1 ,         (20)
and observe that
                          h                               4 i
    (ℓ)            4          X         (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
E γ1 (α, L)[n]         = E σW   α(i,x) ϵi,1 z1    (x)[n]
                                    (i,x)∈L
                                                                                                  h                                   i
                                                                                                                      (ℓ−1)
                                  X                 Y                                                      Y
                          4
                       = σW                                    α(it ,xt ) Gn (ia , ib , ic , id )E                   z1       (xt )[n] .
                               (it ,xt )∈L       t∈{a,b,c,d}                                           t∈{a,b,c,d}
                              t∈{a,b,c,d}


Using Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we can bound Gn by the fourth moment of the normalized weights,
i.e.
                  q
            Gn ≤ Var(ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 ϵ(ℓ) ib ,1 )Var(ϵ(ℓ) ic ,1 ϵ(ℓ) id ,1 ) = Var(ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 ϵ(ℓ) ib ,1 )
                     2              2                2              4
                = E ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 ϵ(ℓ) ib ,1 ≤ Var(ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 ) = E ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 − 1.
Then, we use condition (iii) of the Definition 2 for a = (1, 0, · · · , 0)⊤ combined with Hölder’s
inequality 1 for p = 2 to bound the fourth moment:
                              4   n2
                           E ϵ(ℓ) ia ,1 = 4 E Wi4a ,1

                                         σ
                                         n2               K4
                                        = 4 K4 ∥a∥42 n−2 = 4 = on (1).
                                         σ                σ
Furthermore, the induction hypothesis gives the convergence in distribution of the feature maps
from the last layer, and combined with the continuous mapping theorem we get the convergence in
distribution of the above product inside expectation. Using Lemma 1, the uniform integrability of
the activations follows, and Billingsley’s theorem (Lemma 2) enables us to swap the limit and the
expectation. Thus,

                            h                                    i   h                                       i
                                                 (ℓ−1)                                       (ℓ−1)
                                   Y                                           Y
                       lim E                  z1         (xt )[n] = E                    z1          (xt )[∗] .
                   n→∞
                                t∈{a,b,c,d}                                t∈{a,b,c,d}

                                  (1)                                            (1)                 (1)
For ℓ = 2, the activations z1 (xt ) do not scale with n, i.e. z1 (xt ) := z1 (xt )[∗], thus swapping
expectation and limit is trivial once again.
To bound the product of four different random variables on R, it is sufficient to bound the fourth
order moment of each (see Lemma 3). We can do so using the linear envelope property (Definition 3)
satisfied by the activation function to get, for any (i, x) ∈ L,

                           h              i        h                        i
                             (ℓ−1)                            (ℓ−1)       4
                          E z1     (x)[∗]4 ≤ 24−1 E c4 + M 4 h1     (x)[∗] .

                                                     (ℓ−1)
The induction hypothesis indicates that h1  (x)[∗] follows a Gaussian distribution, whose fourth
moment is bounded. Using the fact that we chose the set L to be finite, we can take the supremum
over all x. Therefore, we have
               h                 i            h                            i
                  (ℓ−1)                                     (ℓ−1)        4
              E z1      (xt )[∗]4 ≤ 24−1 sup E c4 + M 4 h1        (x)[∗]     = on (1).
                                                    (i,x)∈L


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining the above bounds, we then have
                                                    (ℓ)              4
                                      lim E γ1 (α, L)[n]                 < ∞.
                                      n→∞


                                (1)           PN0     (1)      (1)
For ℓ = 2, the preactivation h1 (x) =            j=1 W1j xj + b1 have a finite fourth moment provided
        (1)
that W1j does, which we assume in the row-IID case.

A.3.3    C ONCLUSION FROM THE EXCHANGEABLE CLT
In the above sections, we showed by induction that at any depth, if the feature maps from previous
layers converge in distribution to IID Gaussian Processes, then the assumptions of Theorem 3 hold and
the one-dimensional projection of the feature maps at the current layer also converges in distribution
to a Gaussian random variable with a specified variance. More precisely, we showed that for any
finite set L and projection vector α, any linear one-dimensional projection of the feature  maps at the
current layer, T (ℓ) (α, L)[n], converges in distribution to a Gaussian N 0, σ (ℓ) (α, L)[∗] as n grows.
This gives the convergence of the feature maps at layer ℓ to Gaussian Processes.
Considering the unbiased quantity
                                                                      (ℓ)                 (ℓ)
                                                    X
                          T (ℓ) (α, L)[∗] :=              α(i,x) hi (x)[∗] − bi                   ,
                                                (i,x)∈L

we can compute its variance:
                        2                                        h                           i
                                                                   (ℓ)            (ℓ)
                               X
      E T (ℓ) (α, L)[∗] =                 α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) E hia (xa )[∗] · hib (xb )[∗] − σb2 δia ,ib .


                            (ia ,xa )∈L
                            (ib ,xb )∈L


As we saw in the previous sections,
                                                                            h                                 i
                                                                              (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
                                X
     (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[∗] = σW
                            2
                                             α(ia ,xa ) α(ib ,xb ) δia ,ib E z1     (xa )[∗] · z1     (xb )[∗] .
                               (ia ,xa )∈L
                               (ib ,xb )∈L


Thus, by identification, and using the inductive hypothesis, one recovers the recursion formula for the
variance as described in Theorem 1: For any ia , ib ∈ N, xa , xb ∈ X ,
         h                        i                h                                 i
            (ℓ)         (ℓ)                    2     (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
       E hia (xa )[∗]hib (xb )[∗] = δia ,ib σW    E z1     (xa )[∗] · z1     (xb )[∗] + σb2

                                               2                              ϕ(u)ϕ(v) + σ 2 .

                                    = δia ,ib σW  E              (ℓ−1)    ′                   b
                                                          (u,v)∼N 0,K             (x,x )


For ℓ = 2, if we denote by D the distribution of the weights at the first layer, we obtain instead
                 h                       i
                   (2)        (2)                     2
                                                             (1)        (1)
                                                        ED z1 (xa )z1 (xb ) + σb2 .

               E hia (xa )[∗]hib (xb )[∗] = δia ,ib σW                                             (21)


A.4     I DENTICAL DISTRIBUTION AND INDEPENDENCE OVER NEURONS
                                              (ℓ)
As we saw, for any n, the feature maps hj (α, L)[n] are exchangeable, and, in particular, identically
                                                                     (ℓ)            (ℓ)
distributed. This still holds after taking the limit, that is hj [∗] and hk [∗] have the same distribution
for any j, k ∈ N.
                                                               (ℓ)          (ℓ)
It still remains to show the independence between hi [∗] and hj [∗] for i ̸= j. As we now know the
limiting distribution is Gaussian, it suffices to analyze their covariance to
                                                                            h conclude about theiri inde-
                                                                              (ℓ)       (ℓ)
pendence. As derived in the previous section, for any x, x′ ∈ X , i ̸= j, E hi (x)[∗]hj (x′ )[∗] = 0,
hence the independence.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2: G AUSSIAN P ROCESS BEHAVIOUR IN
     C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS IN THE P SEUDO - IID REGIME

We apply the same machinery to show the Gaussian Process behaviour in CNNs under the P SEUDO -
IID regime, closely following the steps detailed in the fully connected case. To reduce the problem to
a simpler one, one can proceed as previously by considering a finite subset of the feature maps at
layer ℓ, L = {(i1 , X1 , µ1 ), · · · , (iP , XP , µP )} ⊆ [Cℓ ] × X × I, where I consists of all the spatial
multi-indices. We will follow the same strategy outlined in Sections A.1-A.3. Given a finite set L
and the projection vector α ∈ R|L| , we may form the unbiased one-dimensional projection as

                                                                       (ℓ)                   (ℓ)
                                                X
                         T (ℓ) (α, L)[n] :=               α(i,X,µ) hi,µ (X)[n] − bi                  ,             (22)
                                              (i,X,µ)∈L


which can be rewritten, using equation 5, as the sum

                                                       Cℓ−1 [n]
                                                 1      X (ℓ)
                            T (ℓ) (α, L)[n] = p                 γj (α, L)[n],                                      (23)
                                               Cℓ−1 [n] j=1

where the summands are
                   (ℓ)                                                         (ℓ)     (ℓ−1)
                                               X                     X
                  γj (α, L)[n] := σW                   α(i,X,µ)              Ei,j,ν zj,ν       (X)[n].             (24)
                                           (i,X,µ)∈L                 ν∈JµK


                                                                                                             (ℓ)
As before, we introduced the renormalized version E(ℓ) of the filter U(ℓ) such that Ei,j,ν :=
 −1 √     (ℓ)
σW    Cℓ Ui,j,ν .
We will proceed once again by induction forward through the network’s layer verifying the assump-
tions of the exchangeable CLT (Theorem 3) and using it on T (ℓ) (α, L)[n] to conclude its convergence
in distribution to a Gaussian random variable.


The exchangeability of the summands. Similar to the fully connected case, we employ the row-
and column-exchangeability of the P SEUDO - IID convolutional kernel to show the exchangeability of
 (ℓ)
γj ’s. Let us expand equation 24 and write

     (ℓ)                                                   (ℓ)        (ℓ−1)
                              X                    X
    γj (α, L)[n] = σW                  α(i,X,µ)           Ei,j,ν ϕ(hj,ν       (X)[n])
                           (i,X,µ)∈L              ν∈JµK

                                                                        Cℓ−2
                                                                         X[n] X
                                                               (ℓ)                            (ℓ−1) (ℓ−2)
                              X           X
                  = σW                            α(i,X,µ) Ei,j,ν ϕ                          Uj,k,ξ zk,ξ (X)[n] .
                           (i,X,µ)∈L     ν∈JµK                            k=1        ξ∈JνK


                            (ℓ)  Cℓ−1      (ℓ−1)  Cℓ−1
The joint distributions of Ui,j,ν j=1 and Uj,k,ξ j=1   are invariant under any permutation j 7→
                  (ℓ)
σ(j), therefore γj ’s are exchangeable.


Moment conditions. Condition (a) is straightforward as the filters’ entries are uncorrelated by the
                             (ℓ)                    2
                                    (ℓ)           σW
P SEUDO - IID assumption: E Ui,j,µ Ui′ ,j ′ ,µ′ = Cℓ−1 δi,i′ δj,j ′ δµ,µ′ .
The moment conditions are shown to be satisfied by induction through the network and the proofs
boil down to showing the uniform integrability of the activation vectors to be able to swap limit and
expectation. This uniform integrability in the CNN case under P SEUDO - IID weights is rigorously
demonstrated in Proposition 2. One can compute the variance of one representative of the summands,
let us say the first one, as follows:


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           h                                                                   i2
                           (ℓ)                                                                (ℓ)    (ℓ−1)
                                                                 X                   X
 (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[n] := E γ1 (α, L)[n]2 = E σW

                                                                          α(i,X,µ)           Ei,1,ν z1,ν (X)[n]
                                                              (i,X,µ)∈L              ν∈JµK
                                 X
                       2
                    = σW                      α(ia ,Xa ,µa ) α(ib ,Xb ,µb )
                            (ia ,Xa ,µa )∈L
                            (ib ,Xb ,µb )∈L
                                                      h                   i h                               i
                                                        (ℓ)       (ℓ)         (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)
                                              X
                                                     E Eia ,1,νa Eib ,1,νb E z1,νa (Xa )[n] · z1,νb (Xb )[n]
                                        νa ∈Jµa K
                                        νb ∈Jµb K
                                 X
                       2
                    = σW                      α(ia ,Xa ,µa ) α(ib ,Xb ,µb )
                            (ia ,Xa ,µa )∈L
                            (ib ,Xb ,µb )∈L
                                                      h                   i h                               i
                                                        (ℓ)       (ℓ)         (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)
                                              X
                                                     E Eia ,1,νa Eib ,1,νb E z1,νa (Xa )[n] · z1,νb (Xb )[n]
                                        νa ∈Jµa K
                                        νb ∈Jµb K
                                 X
                       2
                    = σW                      α(ia ,Xa ,µa ) α(ib ,Xb ,µb )
                            (ia ,Xa ,µa )∈L
                            (ib ,Xb ,µb )∈L
                                                                      h                               i
                                                                        (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)
                                              X
                                                     δia ,ib δνa ,νb E z1,νa (Xa )[n] · z1,νb (Xb )[n] .
                                        νa ∈Jµa K
                                        νb ∈Jµb K

Given the uniform integrability of the product the activations in a CNN, we may swap the order of
taking the limit and the expectation to have

     (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[∗] := lim (σ (ℓ) )2 (α, L)[n]
                           n→∞
                                   X
                            2
                         = σW                 α(ia ,Xa ,µa ) α(ib ,Xb ,µb )
                                (ia ,Xa ,µa )∈L
                                (ib ,Xb ,µb )∈L
                                                                             h                               i
                                                                               (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)
                                                   X
                                                            δia ,ib δνa ,νb E z1,νa (Xa )[∗] · z1,νb (Xb )[∗] .
                                                νa ∈Jµa K
                                                νb ∈Jµb K


As in the fully connected case, we conclude that the feature maps at the next layer converge to
Gaussians Processes, whose covariance function is given by

         h                                   i
           (ℓ)                (ℓ)
                                                                                  X
        E hia ,µa (Xa )[∗] · hib ,µb (Xb )[∗] = δia ,ib σb2 + σW
                                                               2
                                                                                              Kν(ℓ) (Xa , Xb ) ,
                                                                              ν∈Jµa K∩Jµb K

where                                 (
                                       E(u,v)∼N (0,K (ℓ−1) (Xa ,X )) [ϕ(u)ϕ(v)],                ℓ≥2
                 Kν(ℓ) (Xa , Xb ) =     1
                                           PC0       ν             b
                                                                                                      .
                                        C0   j=1 (X a )j,ν (X b ) j,ν ,                         ℓ=1


C    L EMMAS USED IN THE PROOF OF T HEOREMS 1 AND 2

We will present in this section the lemmas used in the derivation of our results. The proofs are omitted
in cases where they can easily be found in the literature.
Lemma 1 (Hölder’s inequality). For a probability space (Ω, F, P), let X, Y be two random variables
on Ω and p, q > 1 such that p−1 + q −1 = 1. Then,
                                                     1        1
                                      E|XY | ≤ E|X|p p E|Y |q q .


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2 (Bellingsley’s theorem). Let X[n] be a sequence of random variables, for n ∈ N and
X another random variable. If X[n] is uniformly integrable and the sequence X[n] converges in
distribution to X[∗] = X, then X is integrable and one can swap the limit and the expectation, i.e.
                                       lim EX[n] = EX[∗].
                                         n→∞

We adapt Lemma 18 from Matthews et al. (2018) to our setting and the proof can trivially be obtained
from the proof derived in the cited article.
Lemma 3 (Sufficient condition to uniformly bound the expectation of a four-cross product). Let X1 ,
X2 , X3 , and X4 be random variables on R with the usual Borel σ-algebra. Assume that E|Xi |4 < ∞
for  all i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Then, for any choice of pi ∈ {0, 1, 2} (where i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}), the expectations
     Q4         pi
E      i=1 |Xi |     are uniformly bounded by a polynomial in the eighth moments E|Xi |8 < ∞.
This Lemma can be easily derived from standard Pearson correlation bounds.
We now have the tools to show that all four-cross products of the activations are uniformly integrable
in the P SEUDO - IID setting, which enables us to swap the limit and the expectation in the previous
sections of the appendix.
Proposition 1 (Uniform integrability in the P SEUDO - IID regime – fully connected networks). Con-
sider a fully connected neural network in the P SEUDO - IID regime. Consider the random activations
 (ℓ)           (ℓ)          (ℓ)         (ℓ)
zi (xa )[n], zj (xb )[n], zk (xc )[n], zl (xd )[n] with any i, j, k, l ∈ N, xa , xb , xc , xd ∈ X , neither
necessarily distinct, as in equation 2. Then, the family of random variables
                                (ℓ)         (ℓ)         (ℓ)            (ℓ)
                           zi (xa )[n]zj (xb )[n]zk (xc )[n]zl (xd )[n],
indexed by n is uniformly integrable for any ℓ = 1, · · · L + 1.

Proof. The proof is adapted from Matthews et al. (2018) to the P SEUDO - IID regime in fully connected
neural networks described in equation 2.
If a collection of random variables is uniformly Lp -bounded for p > 1, then it is uniformly integrable.
So, we will show that our family of random variables is uniformly L1+ϵ −bounded for some ϵ > 0,
i.e. there exists K < ∞ independent of n such that,
                                                                                1+ϵ
                          (ℓ)         (ℓ)         (ℓ)            (ℓ)
                      E zi (xa )[n]zj (xb )[n]zk (xc )[n]zl (xd )[n]                  ≤ K,

which is equivalent to
             h                                                           i
                 (ℓ)          (ℓ)            (ℓ)            (ℓ)
            E zi (xa )[n]1+ϵ zj (xb )[n]1+ϵ zk (xc )[n]1+ϵ zl (xd )[n]1+ϵ ≤ K.

To do so, Lemma 3 gives us a sufficient condition: bounding the moment of order 4(1 + ϵ) of each
term in the product by a constant independent of n. For any xt ∈ X and i ∈ N, this moment can be
rewritten in terms of the feature maps using the linear envelope property 3 and the convexity of the
map x 7→ x4(1+ϵ) as
             h                    i              h                                       i
                (ℓ)        4(1+ϵ)                                      (ℓ)        4(1+ϵ)
           E zi (xt )[n]            ≤ 24(1+ϵ)−1 E c4(1+ϵ) + M 4(1+ϵ) hi (xt )[n]           .

                                                                         (ℓ)
Thus it is sufficient to show that the absolute feature maps hi (xt )[n] have a finite moment of
order 4 + ϵ, independent of xt , i, and n, for some ϵ. For the sake of simplicity, we will show this by
induction on ℓ for ϵ = 1.
                                             (1)  PN0        (1)     (1)
Base case. For ℓ = 1, the feature maps hi = j=1           Wi,j xj + bi are identically distributed for
all i ∈ {1, · · · , N1 [n]} from the row-exchangeability of the weights. Moreover, from the moment
condition of Definition 2, there exists p = 8 such that
                                                  N0
                                           p                    p
                                  (1)                      (1)        (1) p
                                                 X
                               E hi (x)[n] ≤ E        xj Wi,j + E bi
                                                   j=1
                                                              −p/2           (1) p
                                             = K∥x∥p2 N0       + E bi    .
The RHS of the above equality is independent of N1 (and n). Therefore, for all n ∈ N and
i ∈ {1, · · · , N1 [n]}, we have found a constant bound for the feature map’s moment of order p = 8.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Inductive step. Let us assume that for any {xt }4t=1 and i ∈ N, the eigth-order moment of
  (ℓ−1)
 hi     (xt )[n] is bounded by a constant independent from n.
We will show that this implies

                                             (ℓ)       8
                                          E hi (xt )[n] < ∞.

                                         (ℓ−1)
Considering the vector of activations ϕ h⊙ (xt ) [n], we have, from the moment condition (iii) of
the P SEUDO - IID regime the following conditional expectation,


  h Nℓ−1
     X[n] (ℓ)                  8              i
                (ℓ−1)                (ℓ−1)               (ℓ−1)                   −8
                      (xt ) [n] | ϕ h⊙ (xt ) [n] = K||ϕ h⊙ (xt ) [n]||82 Nℓ−1 [n] 2 .

 E       Wij ϕ hj
       j=1


Thus using the recursion formulae for the data propagation in such architecture given by equation 2,
the convexity of x 7→ x8 on R+ and taking conditional expectations,


                                               Nℓ−1 [n]
 h
   (ℓ)        8
                i         h
                            (ℓ) 8
                                                X           (ℓ)   (ℓ−1)          8i
E hi (xt )[n]     ≤ 28−1 E bi     +                       Wij ϕ hj        (xt ) [n]                  (25)
                                                 j=1

                               h       i   h Nℓ−1
                                              X[n] (ℓ)                8                i
                                 (ℓ) 8                   (ℓ−1)                (ℓ−1)
                       = 28−1 E bi       +E E     Wij ϕ hj     (xt ) [n] | ϕ h⊙ (xt ) [n]
                                                          j=1
                                  h       i               h                   i
                           8−1      (ℓ) 8              −4      (ℓ−1)
                                            + KNℓ−1 [n] E ||ϕ h⊙ (xt ) [n]||82 .

                       =2        E bi                                                                (26)

As the biases are IID Gaussians, the first expectation involving the bias is trivially finite and does not
depend on i as they are identically distributed. For the second expectation, we compute,


                                      h Nℓ−1
                                         X[n]                    2 i 28
             (ℓ−1)                                 (ℓ−1)
                     (xt ) [n]||82 = E

    E||ϕ h⊙                                     ϕ hj     (xt ) [n]                                   (27)
                                         j=1

                                    h Nℓ−1
                                       X[n]                        2 i 82
                                                     (ℓ−1)
                                  ≤E          c + M hj     (xt ) [n]
                                         j=1

                                    h Nℓ−1
                                       X[n]                       2                       i4
                                                      (ℓ−1)                  (ℓ−1)
                                  =E        c2 + M 2 hj     (xt ) [n] + 2cM hj     (xt ) [n] .
                                         j=1


This last expression can be written as a linear combination of Nℓ−1 [n]4 quantities of the form
             h              p1                 p2               p3                 p4 i
                 (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)              (ℓ−1)
            E hj1 (xt ) [n] hj2 (xt ) [n] hj3 (xt ) [n] hj4 (xt ) [n] ,

and we bound each of them making use of Lemma 3. The factor Nℓ−1 [n]−4 in equation 26 thus
cancels out with the number of terms in the sum equation 27. As the preactivations are exchangeable,
they are identically distributed so the dependence on the neuron index i can be ignored, and taking
the supremum over the finite set of input data {xt } does not affect the uniformity of the bound; which
concludes the proof.


Proposition 2 (Uniform integrability in the P SEUDO - IID regime – CNN.). Consider a convolu-
tional neural network in the P SEUDO - IID regime. Consider a collection of random variables


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (ℓ)            (ℓ)           (ℓ)             (ℓ)
zi (xa )[n], zj (xb )[n], zk (xc )[n], zl (xd )[n] with any i, j, k, l ∈ N, Xa , Xb , Xc , Xd ∈ X , nei-
ther necessarily distinct, obtained by the recursion equation 5. Then, the family of random variables
                               (ℓ)             (ℓ)                (ℓ)                 (ℓ)
                              zi (Xa )[n]zj (Xb )[n]zk (Xc )[n]zl (Xd )[n],

indexed by n is uniformly integrable for any ℓ = {1, · · · L + 1}.

Proof. As previously, this proposition holds some novelty of this paper, extending already known
proofs in the standard Gaussian IID setting to the P SEUDO - IID regime in CNNs. Note that this directly
implies the universality of the Gaussian Process behaviour for CNNs in the IID regime, which has
been established so far only by Yang (2021) to the best of our knowledge. Our result goes beyond.
We recall that the data propagation is described by Equation equation 5.
Once again, we observe it is sufficient to show such that the moment of order 8 of the feature maps is
uniformly bounded. We do this again by induction.

                        (1)               (1)         PC0 P                (1)
Base case. Since hi,µ (X)[n] = bi +                        j=1      ν∈JµK Ui,j,ν xj,ν , and weights and biases are
independent, for some p = 8 we can write
                                                       C0 X
                                          p                                                 p
                              (1)                                                  (1)                      (1) p
                                                       X
                        E hi,µ (X)[n]         ≤E                        xj,ν Ui,j,ν             + E bi
                                                       j=1 ν∈JµK
                                                                            −p/2                (1) p
                                              = Kp ∥XJµK ∥p2 C0                    + E bi               ,
where XJµK is the part of signal around the pixel µ and we have used the condition (iii) of Definition
4 in the last line. Observe that the RHS is independent of i and n.

Inductive step. Let us assume that for any {Xt }4t=1 , µ ∈ I and i ∈ N, there exists ϵ0 ∈ (0, 1)
                                                                           (ℓ−1)
such that the eighth moment of the preactivations from the previous layer hi,µ (Xt )[n] is bounded
by a constant independent from j ∈ N, ν ∈ I, and n, for all Xt ∈ X
Mirroring our proof in the fully connected case, we will show that this propagates to the next layer,


                                                     (ℓ)                8
                                              E hi,µ (Xt )[n]               < ∞.

From the third condition of the P SEUDO - IID regime, we can compute the expectation conditioned on
                             (ℓ−1)
the vector of activations ϕ h⊙,⊙ (Xt ) [n],


   h Cℓ−1
      X[n] X (ℓ)                    8i   h Cℓ−1
                                            X[n] X (ℓ)                    8
                      (ℓ−1)                                 (ℓ−1)
  E         Ui,j,ν ϕ hj,ν (Xt ) [n]    =E E       Ui,j,ν ϕ hj,ν (Xt ) [n]
          j=1   ν∈JµK                                                           j=1      ν∈JµK
                                                                                     (ℓ−1)     i
                                                                               | ϕ h⊙,⊙ (Xt ) [n]
                                                                                 (ℓ−1)
                                                             = KCℓ−1 [n]−4 E∥ϕ h⊙,⊙ (Xt ) [n]K∥82 ,



where the norm of the activations can be computed using the linear envelope property,


                                 h Cℓ−1
                                    X[n] X                                              2 i4
            (ℓ−1)                                                       (ℓ−1)
       E∥ϕ h⊙,⊙ (Xt ) [n]K∥82 ≤ E

                                                                 ϕ hj,ν         (Xt ) [n]
                                          j=1        ν∈JµK

                                      h Cℓ−1
                                         X[n] X                                          i4
                                                          (ℓ−1)                 (ℓ−1)
                                    ≤E          c2 + M 2 hj,ν (Xt )2 [n] + 2cM hj,ν (Xt ) .
                                          j=1        ν∈JµK



                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This last quantity turns out to be the weighted sum of (k × Cℓ−1 [n])4 terms (recall k being the filter
size, which is finite) of the form
                 h
                    (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)             (ℓ−1)
               E hj1 ,ν (Xt )p1 [n]hj2 ,ν (Xt )p2 [n]hj3 ,ν (Xt )p3 [n]hj4 ,ν (Xt )p4 [n] ,



that can be bounded using Lemma 3 combined with our inductive hypothesis. Observe how the
factors Cℓ−1 [n]4 cancel out and lead to a bound independent from n.
Using the recursion formulae for the data propagation in the CNN architecture recalled in equation 5
and the convexity of the map x 7→ x8 on R+ , we have


                                                         Cℓ−1 [n]
               (ℓ)           8
                                         h
                                           (ℓ) 8
                                                          X         X         (ℓ)     (ℓ−1)          8i
           E hi,µ (Xt )[n]       ≤ 28−1 E bi     +                          Ui,j,ν ϕ hj,ν     (Xt ) [n] .
                                                          j=1       ν∈JµK


The first expectation is finite and uniformly bounded as the biases are IID Gaussians in the P SEUDO -
IID regime and we have just shown above the boundedness of the second expectation.

Therefore,

                                                (ℓ−1)          8
                                        E ϕ hj,ν        (Xt ) [n] < ∞,                                        (28)

and taking the supremum over the finite input data set does not change the uniformly bounded
property, which was needed to be shown.



D     IID AND ORTHOGONAL WEIGHTS ARE P SEUDO - IID

                                                                       iid
IID weights.    If A = (Aij ) ∈ Rm×n has IID entries Aij ∼ D, then it is automatically row- and
column-exchangeable, and the entries are uncorrelated. Therefore, as long as the distribution of the
weights D satisfies the moment conditions of Definition 2, the network is in the P SEUDO - IID regime.
A sufficient condition to satisfy (iii) is for Aij to be sub-Gaussian
                                                             Pn       with parameter O(n−1/2 ). Then,
given the independence of entries, the random variable         j=1 aj Aij would be sub-Gaussian with
parameter ∥a∥2 n  −1/2
                       , and its p moment is known to be O(∥a∥p2 n−p/2 ); see Vershynin (2018).
                                  th

Appropriately scaled Gaussian and uniform IID weights, for example, meet the sub-Gaussianity
criterion and therefore fall within the P SEUDO - IID class. Condition (iv) is trivial in this case.

Orthogonal weights. Let A = (Aij ) ∈ Rn×n be drawn from the uniform (Haar) measure on the
group of orthogonal matrices O(n). While the entries are not independent, they are uncorrelated, and
the rows and columns are exchangeable. To verify condition (iii), we may employ the concentration
of the Lipschitz functions on the sphere, since one individual row of A, let P                 us say the ith one
                                                     n−1                                         n
(Ai,1 , · · · , Ai,n ), is drawn uniformly from S        . Let f (Ai,1 , · · · , Ai,n ) :=       j=1 aj Aij , then
f is Lipschitz with constant  Pn   ∥a∥ 2 . By   Theorem   5.1.4  of Vershynin     (2018),    the random  variable
                                                                                              −1/2           −1/2
f (Ai,1 , · · · , Ai,n ) =         a  A
                                    j ij     is sub-Gaussian  with  parameter     ∥f  ∥ Lip n      =  ∥a∥ 2n      ,
                             Pnj=1         p           p −p/2                                                   th
which also implies E           j=1 aj Aij     = O(∥a∥2 n        ). Finally, the exact expressions of the p
moments are known for orthogonal matrices (see Collins et al. (2021) for an introduction to the
calculus of Weingarten functions) and satisfy condition (iv). Note how we simplify the analysis here
by considering square weight matrices from the second layer and onward.

E     F URTHER NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS VALIDATING T HEOREM 1
Fig. 4 shows Q − Q plots for the histograms in Fig. 2 as compared to their infinite with Gaussian
limit. These Q − Q plots show how the P SEUDO - IID networks approach the Gaussian Process at
somewhat different rates, with IID uniform approaching the fastest.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       width = 3                   width = 30                  width = 300


          IID Uniform


          IID Gaussian
          with dropout



          P SEUDO - IID
          Gaussian low-
          rank



          P SEUDO - IID
          Gaussian struc-
          tured sparse


Figure 4: Q-Q plots of the preactivations values in Fig. 2 as an alternative way of showing the
 Figure 4: Q-Q
convergence      plots
            of the     of the preactivations
                   preactivation              values innetwork
                                 of a fully connected    Fig. 2 to
                                                                as aanGaussian
                                                                       alternative  waycharacterized
                                                                               as fully  of showing the
                                                                                                      in
 convergence of the preactivation of a fully connected  network  to a Gaussian
Theorem 1. The settings of the experiment are the same as those in Fig. 2.      as fully characterized in
 Theorem 1. The settings of the experiment are the same as those in Fig. 2.



                                                                     (ℓ)
Fig.
 Fig.55explores
        exploresthe
                  thegrowing
                      growingindependence
                                  independenceof         entriesininhhii (x)[n]
                                                    ofentries              (x)[n]for   differentiiby
                                                                                  fordifferent     byshowing
                                                                                                      showingtheir
                                                                                                                theirjoint
                                                                       (`)
                                                                                                                      joint
distributions for
 distributions for two  distinct
                    two distinct   choices    of i; moreover,      convergence      to the limiting  isotropic
                                    choices of i; moreover, convergence to the limiting isotropic Gaussian     Gaussian
                (ℓ)        (ℓ)
 distribution(h
distribution  (hii (x),         (x))[⇤]),ii̸=6=j,j,isisoverlayed
                     (x),hhj (x))[∗]),                   overlayedininthethesame
                                                                              sameplots.
                                                                                     plots.Uniform        converges the
                 (`)        (`)
                                                                                             UniformIIDIID converges the
quickest,  while  P SEUDOj- IID Gaussian low-rank and structured sparse converge towards an isotropic
 quickest, while P SEUDO - IID Gaussian low-rank and structured sparse converge towards an isotropic
distribution
 distributionsomewhat
              somewhatslower,
                           slower,albeit
                                     albeitalready
                                             already(5) showing
                                                         showinggood        agreementatatnn==30.
                                                                     goodagreement               30.The
                                                                                                      Thehorizontal
                                                                                                           horizontaland
                                                                                                                       and
vertical axes in each   subplot    of Fig. 5   are  h     (x)
                                                        (5)    for  i =  1  and
 vertical axes in each subplot of Fig. 5 are h (x) for i = 1 and 2 respectively.
                                                      i                         2  respectively.
                                                       i


FF NNUMERICAL
     UMERICAL SIMULATIONS  VALIDATING TTHEOREM
               SIMULATIONS VALIDATING   HEOREM 22 FOR
                                                  FOR ORTHOGONAL
                                                      ORTHOGONAL
    CNN FILTERS
   CNN   FILTERS


                                                                           (`)
 Fig.66explores
Fig.     exploresthethegrowing
                        growingindependence
                                   independenceof  ofentries
                                                      entriesin inhh(ℓ)           fordifferent
                                                                           (X)[n]for
                                                                       i,µ(X)[n]
                                                                      i,µ              differentiibybyshowing
                                                                                                       showingtheir
                                                                                                                  their
 joint distributions
joint   distributions for
                       for two
                            two distinct
                                  distinct choices
                                            choices of
                                                     of i;i; moreover,
                                                             moreover, convergence
                                                                            convergence toto the
                                                                                              the limiting
                                                                                                   limiting isotropic
                                                                                                             isotropic
                              (`)            (`)
 Gaussiandistribution
Gaussian                  (h(ℓ)
             distribution(h       (X)[⇤],hh(ℓ)
                              i,µ(X)[∗],
                             i,µ                 (X)[⇤]),ii̸=6=j,j,isisoverlayed
                                             j,µ(X)[∗]),
                                            j,µ                         overlayedininthe
                                                                                      thesame
                                                                                          sameplots.
                                                                                                 plots.
                                                                                 (`)
  Fig.77explores
Fig.      exploresthe
                    theasymptotic
                         asymptoticgaussian
                                        gaussiannature
                                                   natureof     entriesininhh(ℓ)
                                                            ofentries              (X)[n]atatthe
                                                                               i,µ(X)[n]
                                                                              i,µ              thesame
                                                                                                    samechannel
                                                                                                           channelindexindexii
bybyshowing
       showingtheir
                theirjoint
                      jointdistributions
                              distributionsforfortwo
                                                   twodistinct
                                                        distinctinput
                                                                   inputdata.
                                                                          data.For Forthe
                                                                                        thesame
                                                                                            samereasons
                                                                                                   reasonsadvocated
                                                                                                             advocatedby    by
  Garriga-Alonsoetetal.
Garriga-Alonso          al.(2019);
                            (2019);Novak
                                     Novaketetal. al.(2020),
                                                      (2020),thethecomputation
                                                                    computationof     ofthe
                                                                                         thecovariance
                                                                                             covariancekernel
                                                                                                           kernelcomes
                                                                                                                     comesatat
aahigh
    highcomputational
           computationalcost.cost. To
                                    Toovercome
                                        overcomethis,this,we
                                                           wedecided
                                                                 decidedto tofocus
                                                                               focuson onshowing
                                                                                           showingthe thegaussian
                                                                                                          gaussiannaturenature
ofofthe
      thepreactivations
          preactivationsin  inCNNs
                               CNNsinitialized
                                        initializedwith
                                                      withorthogonal
                                                            orthogonalfilters
                                                                            filtersasaswe
                                                                                        wedefined
                                                                                            definedthemtheminin3.1.3.1. To
                                                                                                                         Todo
                                                                                                                            do
  so,we
so,    weused
           usedthe
                theExpectation-Maximization
                    Expectation-Maximizationalgorithm  algorithmtotodisplay
                                                                      displaythe   thelevel
                                                                                       levelcurves
                                                                                             curvesof ofthe
                                                                                                         thebest
                                                                                                             bestgaussian
                                                                                                                     gaussian
  fitto
fit   tothe
         thepoint
             pointclouds.
                    clouds. This
                               Thisgaussian
                                     gaussianturns
                                                 turnsout
                                                        outto tohave
                                                                  havenon
                                                                       nonzero zerocorrelation,
                                                                                      correlation,ininagreement
                                                                                                        agreementwith  with2.2.
                                                                                (`)            (`)
  Moreover,convergence
Moreover,     convergencetotothe thelimiting
                                      limitingGaussian
                                                Gaussiandistribution
                                                             distribution(h  (h(ℓ)
                                                                                i,µ
                                                                               i,µ  (X)[⇤],
                                                                                   (X)[∗],   h
                                                                                             h
                                                                                              (ℓ)
                                                                                               j,µ
                                                                                              j,µ  (X)[⇤]),
                                                                                                  (X)[∗]),   ii̸
                                                                                                               = 6
                                                                                                                 =   j,
                                                                                                                    j,   seems
                                                                                                                        seems
totobebeslower
         slowerthan
                 thanininthe
                          thefully
                               fullyconnected
                                     connectedcase,case,ififcomparing
                                                             comparingthis  thisfigure
                                                                                  figurewith
                                                                                          withFig.
                                                                                                Fig.3.3.


                                                              26
                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       width = 3                                                                               width = 30                                                                          width = 300
                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4



                                   2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2

       IID   Uniform
                         h25(xa)


                                                                                                                 h25(xa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                         h25(xa)
                                   0                                                                                       0                                                                                       0

       with dropout                2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2



                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4

                                           4               2             0               2               4                         4               2             0               2               4                         4               2             0               2               4
                                                                       h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)

                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4



                                   2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2

       Non P SEUDO -
                         h25(xa)


                                                                                                                 h25(xa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                         h25(xa)
                                   0                                                                                       0                                                                                       0

       IID Cauchy
                                   2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2



                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4

                                           4               2             0               2               4                         4               2             0               2               4                         4               2             0               2               4
                                                                       h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)
                                   6                                                                                       6                                                                                       6


                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4


       P SEUDO - IID               2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2


       Gaussian low-
                         h25(xa)


                                                                                                                 h25(xa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                         h25(xa)


                                   0                                                                                       0                                                                                       0



       rank                        2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2


                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4


                                   6                                                                                       6                                                                                       6
                                       6           4           2         0           2           4           6                 6           4           2         0           2           4           6                 6           4           2         0           2           4           6
                                                                       h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)
                                   8                                                                                       8                                                                                       8

                                   6                                                                                       6                                                                                       6

                                   4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4
       P SEUDO - IID               2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2


       Gaussian struc-
                         h25(xa)


                                                                                                                 h25(xa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                         h25(xa)


                                   0                                                                                       0                                                                                       0

                                   2                                                                                       2                                                                                       2
       tured sparse                4                                                                                       4                                                                                       4

                                   6                                                                                       6                                                                                       6

                                   8                                                                                       8                                                                                       8
                                       8       6       4           2     0       2           4       6       8                 8       6       4           2     0       2           4       6       8                 8       6       4           2     0       2           4       6       8
                                                                       h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)                                                                                 h15(xa)


Figure 5: For fully connected networks in the P SEUDO - IID regime, it is shown in Theorem 1 that in
the large width limit, at any layer, two neurons fed with the same input data become independent. We
compare the joint distribution of the preactivations given in the first and second neurons at the fifth
layer with an isotropic Gaussian probability density function. Initializing the weight matrices with
IID Cauchy realisations falls outside of our defined framework, resulting in a poor match. The inputs
were sampled from S8 and 10000 experiments conducted on a 7-layer network.


                                                                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           3 channels             30 channels             300 channels
                                   4                          4                       4


                P SEUDO - IID      2                          2                       2



                Orthogonal         0                          0                       0


                filters            2



                                   4
                                                              2



                                                              4
                                                                                      2



                                                                                      4

                                       4     2   0   2   4        4   2   0   2   4       4   2   0   2   4


Figure 6: The empirical joint distribution of the preactivations generated by one same input flowing
through a 7-layer CNN with 3 × 3 kernels, at two different channel indexes. An isotropic 2D
gaussian is included as level curves, corroborating with the predicted asymptotic independence
between neurons as given in Theorem 2. The input data Xa are drawn from the MNIST dataset and
1000 experiments were conducted. The horizontal and vertical axes in each subplot are respectively
  (4)           (4)
h1,µ (Xa ) and h2,µ (Xa ), where µ is the pixel located at (5,5).

                                           3 channels             30 channels             300 channels
                                   4                          4                       4


                P SEUDO - IID      2                          2                       2



                Orthogonal         0                          0                       0


                filters            2



                                   4
                                                              2



                                                              4
                                                                                      2



                                                                                      4

                                       4     2   0   2   4        4   2   0   2   4       4   2   0   2   4


Figure 7: The empirical joint distribution of the preactivations generated by two distinct inputs
flowing through a 7-layer CNN with 3 × 3 kernels. The large channel limiting distribution as defined
in Theorem 2 involves the computation of a kernel covariance at a high cost. We use instead the
Expectation-Maximization algorithm for each subplot and include as level curves the best gaussian fit.
The input data Xa , Xb are drawn from the MNIST dataset and 1000 experiments were conducted.
The (correlated) gaussian nature of the preactivations is thus empirically verified as the gaussian fit
                                                                                              (4)
goes better and better. The horizontal and vertical axes in each subplot are respectively h1,µ (Xa )
      (4)
and h1,µ (Xb ), where µ is the pixel located at (5,5).


G    E XAMPLES CONCERNING THE BOUNDED MOMENT CONDITION ( III ) OF THE
     P SEUDO - IID DISTRIBUTION
The bounded moment condition (iii) of the P SEUDO - IID distribution in Definition 2 is a key condition
in the distinct proof of IID matrices taken in Hanin (2021) (Lemma 2.9). We show some examples of
distributions in Figure 8 which verify or violate the conditions we identified as sufficient to rigorously
prove the convergence of random neural networks to Gaussian Processes in the large width limit.

H    S TRUCTURED SPARSE WEIGHT MATRICES IN THE FULLY CONNECTED
     SETTING

Fig. 9 shows examples of permuted block-sparse weight matrices used to initialize a fully connected
network in order to produce the plots given in Fig. 2–5.


                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Identical coordinates - non pseudo IID case
                                                   1045         Autoregressive process - non pseudo IID case
                                                                Cauchy IID case
                                                                Normal IID case
                                                   1038         Orthogonal pseudo IID case

                                                   1031
                                     (| Xi|9)      1024
                                             i=1
                                N


                                                   1017
                                                   1010
                                                   103

                                                            0          200               400       600           800   1000
                                                                                          dimension N
                        PN         8
Figure 8: Plots of E       j=1 Xj    against dimension N for different cases where conditions (ii) and
(iii) of the pseudo IID regime are either satisfied or violated. Condition (iii) is considered with
                                            PN        8
a = (1, · · · , 1) such that it becomes E      j=1 Xj   = K, where X = (X1 , · · · , XN ) is regarded
as one row of the weight matrix. The chosen distribution for the vector X impacts whether the
network is in the P SEUDO - IID regime. In the identical coordinates case, X = (X1 , · · · , X1 ) is the
concatenation of the same realisation X1 sampled from a standard normal. Not only the traditional IID
assumption is broken as the coordinates are obviously dependent but also condition (iii) is violated,
thus resulting in an unbounded expectation when growing the dimension N . The autoregressive
Process (X1 , · · · , XN ) shown is obtained by Xi = ϵi + Xi−1 , where ϵi are IID multivariate Gaussian
noises of dimension N . The correlation between the coordinates does not decrease fast enough with
the dimension to get a bound on the computed expectation and condition (iii) is once again violated.
On the contrary, from the plot produced by sampling IID Cauchy distributions, it is not obvious
whether condition (iii) holds. Nonetheless, condition (ii) which ensures the finiteness of the variance
is not, thus a random network initialized with IID Cauchy weights falls outside the scope of our
identified broad class of distributions to ensure a convergence towards a Gaussian Process. The last
cases of samples taken either from scaled multivariate normals in red or uniformly sampled from the
unit sphere in orange (with appropriate scaling such that condition (ii) holds) show that there exists a
bound independent from the dimension on the expectation of interest. The empirical expectations are
taken considering averages over 100000 samples.


                     width = 3                                                           width = 30                                     width = 300
       0.5                                                                      0                                              0

       0.0                                                                      5                                             50

       0.5                                                                      10                                            100

       1.0                                                                      15                                            150

       1.5                                                                      20                                            200

       2.0                                                                      25                                            250

       2.5
             0.5   0.0   0.5   1.0     1.5      2.0   2.5                            0   5   10   15   20   25                      0   50   100   150   200   250


Figure 9: Example of a permuted block-sparse weight matrix at initialization of a fully connected
network with increasing width N . The matrix is initialized with identically and independently
sampled diagonal blocks from a scaled Gaussian. Its rows and columns are then randomly permuted
in order to satisfy the P SEUDO - IID conditions. The block size is set to be ⌈0.2 ∗ N ⌉. Entries in yellow
are zero and entries in black are nonzero.


                                                                                                  29
