Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ENERATIVE AI IN HEALTHCARE : A TRUSTWORTHY
APPROACH

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The recent advancements in self-supervised algorithms like Transformer Architec-
         ture and Diffusion models have expanded the means of applying AI in healthcare
         and life sciences. To achieve real-world adoption, it is important to measure and
         audit the trustworthiness of the AI system as per the legal and compliance require-
         ments for privacy, security, fairness, and safety. In this paper, we focus on the
         method to achieve trustworthiness in an LLM (Large Language Model) based de-
         cision support system for physicians. The stakeholders for this decision support
         system are patients, physicians, regulators, and external auditors. We focus on
         the limitations of large or foundation models and the method to overcome these
         limitations, with the aim of accelerating the adoption of this far-reaching technol-
         ogy in the healthcare sector. It also explores possible guardrails for safety and the
         methods for aligning AI systems to guardrails.


1     O UR S OLUTION A PPROACH
We explore an approach to an AI system that can enhance decision capabilities by using the data
and EHRs (Electronic Health Records) collected over many years for a vast volume of patients. The
longitudinal data consists of clinical details, biomarkers, disease progression indicators, treatment
administered, and patient outcomes. The goal of the system is to assist physicians in identifying
the best treatment option for a given patient context. The LLM-based system will be able to predict
optimal options based on hundreds of similar cases on which it was trained. The paper addresses the
transparency, data integrity, model development, and performance validation of the system. In the
sections below, we explore the various stages of development and deployment of such a system, the
challenges, and the methods to overcome the challenges.

1.1   AUGMENTING H UMANS WITH ACCOUNTABILITY AND T RANSPARENCY

The AI systems, in the near future, will augment human capability rather than replace humans. Con-
formity and ongoing compliance with legal codes and ethical values can be achieved by a human-led
governance mechanism. The usage of AI needs to be based on applicable regulatory guidelines for
critical, serious, and non-serious use cases. As the technology evolves, the guidelines issued by the
regulatory agencies are also evolving. There is no single guideline or protocol that can be considered
comprehensive and complete. Regulatory frameworks like FDA’s SaMD are valuable but additional
guardrails specific to large and multi-models will be necessary as large model-specific challenges
like hallucinations are not addressed.
The AI-based physician decision support solution provides a mechanism to query for diagnosis
and effective treatment as per a patient’s context and delivers insights that are inferred based on
training done on high-volume historical data. The method that we are suggesting is human-led
accountability, where the options are generated via AI but the final decision is taken by a qualified
physician. This solution brings the knowledge within the data generated by the hospital over many
years to each physician’s fingertips and enables them to make the best possible decision.
Large language models cannot determine treatment decisions directly. They can present unbiased in-
formation about knowledge gained from similar cases to clinicians and augment clinicians’ decision-
making capacity. This feature can especially be important in special case scenarios where guidelines
alone cannot direct the decision. For instance, in a co-morbid ascitic patient with nephrotic syn-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: AI-based physician decision support solution. Lifecycle workflow for data evaluation,
model evaluation, inference validation, and monitoring of LLM-based AI model for healthcare ap-
plications


drome and liver disease, how much fluid should be removed by an ascitic tap? Clear guidelines in
such cases are unavailable and the decision mainly lies with the clinician. However, having detailed
information about similar cases on hand will be a helpful guide to the clinician’s decision-making
process.


2   DATA S UFFICIENCY AND I NTEGRITY A SSESSMENT

Completeness, representativeness (fitness for purpose), and accuracy of the data need to be validated
and the validation process should answer the following questions.
Has the defined context of use, such as specific populations, age groups, sex, and comorbidities,
been recorded? Is the data accurate? Has the process followed in collecting and consolidation
been designed as per regulatory guidelines? Does the data represent the context of use? Have the
longitudinal aspects of data, throughout the treatment trajectory and for different contexts, been
captured?
Privacy and security-related questions: Are there protocols and audits in place for the protection
and privacy of data as per legal requirements? For example, is it compliant with HIPPA (Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act)?
Data used from the EHR system must be verified by a clinician before being fed into the system.
Adequate representation to ensure the similarity of the training dataset to the general population
where the system is deployed should be ascertained and verified. Including outpatient data can
prevent berksonian bias.
Data for each case scenario should be captured for all possible contexts. And when providing sug-
gestions contexts of use should be established, and information pertaining to the context of use
should be provided. For instance, a patient with diabetes, hypertension, and coronary heart disease
is being evaluated for CABG. The patient can be evaluated from the context of cardiovascular as
well as endocrine pathology.


3   M ODEL D EVELOPMENT AND F INETUNING

Foundation models are multi-purpose with the same model being used for a range of functions. A
model trained on EHR and disease progression can be used for predicting the best treatment option
as well as for recording the statistics about the patients who followed different treatment regimes.
The same model can be used to classify the disease stage. A foundation model trained with multiple
modalities of data with cross-attention is very suitable for applications in health and life sciences.
The challenges of foundation models and our approach to address them are explained below.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Retrieval-augmented generation & retrieval-augmented confidence score for factuality.
Overall architecture diagram showing components: User query used to retrieve the context, enriches
the Context Window with referable information, method for estimating the factuality of generated
information, evidence presentation, ranking of the answers, and the mechanism for feedback collec-
tion for continuous monitoring and model improvement.



3.1   H ALLUCINATION AND A LIGNMENT

Hallucination (factually incorrect/imaginary answers) is an expected property in large models as
the model’s outcome is more about “the answer/prediction looks like. . . ” rather than “the answer
is. . . ”. The model output is not based on the retrieval of information from a reliable source. It is
based on the best contextual access of represented knowledge by vector/tensor similarity. So, the
LLM/Foundation model occasionally outputs factually incorrect answers.
In healthcare application use cases like the recommendation of a specific treatment for a patient,
getting a dependably accurate answer is critical. Even though there are multiple mechanisms for
alignment, none of the methods are foolproof for application in healthcare use cases. In certain
applications like drug discovery (e.g., designing a protein that doesn’t exist), hallucinations turn out
to be useful, as the answers need to be a novel discovery that is different from the training data.
We ensure factuality/correctness with the following methods:


3.2   R EASONING

Our method proposes a task-level (steps of a larger process) supervision approach instead of end-to-
end outcome supervision for improving the reasoning and overall accuracy. The task-based approach
is done step-by-step. This method rewards the steps (task supervision) instead of the overall outcome
(outcome supervision).
Achieving the overall goal by integrating multiple small tasks is a better approach, as tasks/skills
can be reusable for multiple larger processes. By introducing a chain of thoughts (CoT) approach, it
is possible to make the methodology similar to the “System 2” concept. Such an approach helps in
defining and optimizing the objective functions of the algorithms.
As an additional benefit, reasoning helps in achieving explainability. Each step in the sequence and
the overall outcome contribute to the explanation which is an essential criterion for any healthcare AI
application. EFor example, if a diagnosis of pneumonia is made by the AI solution, an explanation
in the form of EHR inputs and the CT scan findings should be available.
Introducing a chain of thought approach will improve the explainability of the algorithm as the
overall result will be determined by various modalities fed into the system. For instance, in a case of
suspected lung cancer: smoking history, number of pack-years, family history, chest X-ray, CT scan,
biomarkers, etc., all provide essential information. A stepwise approach focusing on each modality
will help the LLM develop better explainability for its decision.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   F INETUNING

Finetuning helps large models to specialize in a specific domain like medicine/life sciences. In-
troducing domain-specific data, domain-specific tokenization, supervised finetuning, and human-
assisted reward modeling helps the LLM to learn and represent domain-specific knowledge. Better
representation of domain-specific knowledge results in better “understanding” and, consequently,
improved accuracy. Optimized mechanisms like PEFT (Parameter Efficient Finetuning) can be used
for cost-efficient finetuning.


4     I NFERENCES AND E VALUATION

4.1   P ROMPTING

Prompting is a method to align LLM/foundation models to the context of use. Prompting is a method
to increase the probability of correctness by providing a sufficient number of in-context examples,
which align with the expected outcome for a given interaction. Model parameters are not changed
during prompting/prompt engineering. Prompting isn’t a measurable optimization and involving
human domain experts will maximize the alignment with end-user preferences and accuracy. An
interface for human experts to experiment and hone the prompt-engineering techniques will help in
achieving the best outcomes. Along with prompting, other methods like “guidance” can be used to
format the results, as per the requirements of the healthcare workflow.

4.2   T OOLS F UNCTION I NTEGRATION

LLMs and foundation models are good at language-understanding and determining the context,
but they are not good at elaborate reasoning skills like science experiments, math, and planning
tasks. This limitation can be addressed by integrating APIs/functions for specialized operations
(calculator)and factuality verification (medical SOP).

4.3   P ROPOSED G UARDRAILS

This checkpoint step consists of alignment with the ground truth and minimization of uncertainty.
One of the methods for alignment is crosschecking the predictions with ground truth case stud-
ies. The hallucinated/imagined predictions are filtered out, aligning the final set of outcomes to the
ground truth. The recommendations are also checked for alignment with the standard operating pro-
cedure (SOP) and against the overall statistics of patient outcomes in different types of treatment.
The factuality check is achieved by augmenting the “memory only” context of the foundation model
with retrieval capabilities for factual correctness. Retrieval-augmented LLMs are much more reli-
able for factuality as now there is a mechanism/orchestration for sampling the right answers from a
set of possible answers.

4.4   E XTRAPOLATION AND C ONFIDENCE L EVEL

It is important for the system to provide reasoning about the prediction done by the algorithm.
Deriving a confidence level for the prediction is challenging in large models as the probability of
getting the right answer decreases with the increase in the length of the predicted tokens. LLMs are
known to make wrong predictions with high confidence levels. So, the probabilistic approach for
deriving the confidence score is not useful. Instead in our proposed solution, we suggest optimization
of inference time objectives as per the workflow/process requirement. Accordingly, the system
informs the user when the context is new, or there is no existing case study in the training data, and
refrains from giving any recommendations/answers.
One additional guardrail for increasing the confidence level would be to make the system cite the
top five studies it considered when analyzing the data and providing recommendations. This would
enable the clinician to independently analyze the sources in case of any discrepancies. An example
of an emerging disease with no prior context would be COVID-19, especially in the initial stages.
Such instances are ripe for misinformation to spread, so the system should have specific guardrails
in place for public health hazards which can be prone to misinformation.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.5   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH HUMAN - MACHINE INTERACTIONS

Post-deployment feedback helps in improving reliability and accuracy. This can be achieved by
designing an effective interface for human-machine interaction where human-provided feedback is
collected together with data on system performance and accuracy. A policy optimization with the
right reward will further improve the system.
To derive the best possible feedback, we propose an interface where physicians can do a relative
ranking of the three top answers rather than an absolute ranking. This will help in generalizing the
score assigned to an answer by different individual experts. The data generated will be used for
Reward Modeling (RM) or Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).

5     M ONITORING AND C ONTROL
Explainability, Performance validation and monitoring:
Explainability: As the mathematical interpretability of the LLMs is still a challenge, it is neces-
sary to have concept-level explainability. Explanation needs to be done at the process and task
level. Process-level explainability is achieved by Chain of Thoughts (CoT). The task/skill level ex-
plainability can be achieved by Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (CAV), which verifies the
prediction based on conceptual matching which is much beyond mere pattern matching.
Safeguarding against data drift and data leaks during test/evaluation time and post-deployment is
very important. Data leak occurs when the test samples are very similar to training samples.
Retrieval-augmented LLMs may also have a mechanism for constantly updating the ground truth
according to the latest available literature since medicine is a constantly evolving field. A workflow
similar to the medical encyclopedia UpToDate could be employed, with relevant field clinicians
being charged with updating the knowledge base on a timely basis. These instructions apply to
everyone, regardless of the formatter being used.

6     C ONCLUSION
Generative AI has great potential if used carefully, with necessary data governance and factuality
validation of the generated output for the context of use. A completely deterministic system is not
possible with transformer-based architecture, but the probabilistic solution is powerful in providing
dependable information to physicians/clinicians. A contextual and conversational approach further
enhances the utility of the solution. Privacy, fairness, and safety-related guardrails are important
aspects of the application of generative AI in healthcare. These aspects can be achieved in the
solution by applying the proposed approach in the paper. We propose a close collaboration between
AI experts and healthcare domain experts for an optimal outcome. Further progress in understanding
the LLM/Foundation model will help in improving the factuality of generative models.

7     C ITATIONS , REFERENCES
Hu et al. (2021) Panigrahi et al. (2023) Shevlane et al. (2023) Zhou et al. (2022) Lanham et al.
(2023) Kahneman (2011)

R EFERENCES
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2011. ISBN
  9780374275631 0374275637.
Tamera Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Her-
  nandez, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina
  Nguyen, Newton Cheng, Nicholas Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson,


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Sam McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Shannon Yang, Thomas Henighan, Tim-
  othy Maxwell, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tristan Hume, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jared Kaplan, Jan
  Brauner, Samuel R. Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought rea-
  soning, 2023.
Abhishek Panigrahi, Nikunj Saunshi, Haoyu Zhao, and Sanjeev Arora. Task-specific skill localiza-
  tion in fine-tuned language models, 2023.
Toby Shevlane, Sebastian Farquhar, Ben Garfinkel, Mary Phuong, Jess Whittlestone, Jade Leung,
  Daniel Kokotajlo, Nahema Marchal, Markus Anderljung, Noam Kolt, Lewis Ho, Divya Siddarth,
  Shahar Avin, Will Hawkins, Been Kim, Iason Gabriel, Vijay Bolina, Jack Clark, Yoshua Bengio,
  Paul Christiano, and Allan Dafoe. Model evaluation for extreme risks, 2023.
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie
  Sedghi. Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning, 2022.


                                               6
