Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS : G EOMETRIC R EASON -
ING OVER S TRUCTURED K NOWLEDGE WITH L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Large language models (LLMs) are widely adopted in knowledge-intensive tasks
         and have achieved impressive performance thanks to their knowledge abilities.
         While LLMs have demonstrated outstanding performance on atomic or linear
         (multi-hop) QA tasks, whether they can reason in knowledge-rich scenarios with
         interweaving constraints remains an underexplored problem. In this work, we pro-
         pose geometric reasoning over structured knowledge, where pieces of knowledge
         are connected in a graph structure and models need to fill in the missing infor-
         mation of this graph. Such geometric knowledge reasoning would require the
         ability to handle structured knowledge, reason with uncertainty, verify facts, and
         backtrack when an error occurs. We specifically propose K NOWLEDGE C ROSS -
         WORDS , a multi-blank QA dataset where each problem consists of a natural lan-
         guage question representing the geometric constraints of an incomplete entity net-
         work, where LLMs are tasked with working out the missing entities while meet-
         ing all factual constraints. K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS contains 2,101 individ-
         ual problems, covering a wide array of knowledge domains and further divided
         into three difficulty levels. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate existing
         LLM prompting approaches on the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS benchmark. We
         additionally propose two new approaches, S TAGED P ROMPTING and V ERIFY-
         A LL, to augment LLMs’ ability to backtrack and verify structured constraints.
         Our results demonstrate that while baseline approaches perform well on easier
         problems but struggle with questions on the hard side, our proposed V ERIFY-A LL
         outperforms other methods by a large margin and is more robust with hard prob-
         lems. Further analysis reveals that LLMs’ ability of geometric reasoning over
         structured knowledge is still far from robust or perfect, susceptible to confounders
         such as the order of options, certain structural patterns, assumption of existence
         of correct answer, and more.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated an impressive ability on knowledge-intensive
tasks such as open-domain QA (Petroni et al., 2019), misinformation detection (Karimi & Tang,
2019), and fact-checking (Gao et al., 2023). To assess the knowledge abilities of LLMs, existing
tasks and datasets mostly focus on atomic (e.g., open-domain QA) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Das
et al., 2022) or linear (e.g., multi-hop QA) (Press et al., 2022) settings, probing LLMs’ responses to
simple or multiple concatenated facts where each reasoning step has a unique definite answer. How-
ever, knowledge is not always arranged in a simple linear manner: it often involves more complex
structural information, forming an interweaving network that connects various entities and relations
through multiple chains as illustrated in Figure 1.
Consequently, an underexplored yet crucial question arises: Can LLMs extend beyond linear com-
positionality and aggregate information from multiple chains along with various knowledge con-
straints? Specifically, when certain pieces of knowledge are missing, can LLMs successfully fill in
the blanks based on existing constraints represented by other available information in the network?
In this work, we evaluate how well models can aggregate information from the given constraints
across a graph representing pieces of knowledge and figure out the blanks in this graph. We term


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            Geometric
        Atomic (1-hop)                    Linear (multi-hop)
                                                                                             Daniel           Rupert              Maureen
                                                                                            Radcliffe          Grint              Lipman


                was released in                 was released in       was US President in
          HP                       ?       HP                 (2002)                   ?                acted in           acted in
                                                                                            HP                         ?               ALP
                                                                                                              Emma                 Amelia
       Q: When was Harry Potter And The     Q: Who was President in US when                                   Watson              Shankley

       Chamber Of Secrets released?         HP was released?                                  Q: Who acted in both Harry Potter
       A: 2002                              A: George Walker Bush                             and A Little Princess?
                                                                                              A: Miriam Margolyes


Figure 1: An illustration between the differences of atomic, linear, and geometric knowledge rea-
soning. Each reasoning step of atomic or linear QAs leads to a unique and definite (intermediate)
answer, while multiple candidates exist before all constraints are jointly considered in geometric
QA.


such ability geometric reasoning over structured knowledge. We believe that such reasoning intro-
duces additional requirements for LLMs beyond those encountered in atomic or linear tasks, such as
composing knowledge across multiple chains, reasoning with uncertainty, verification, backtrack-
ing, and more. To what extent could LLMs exhibit these abilities and handle contexts of geometric
knowledge reasoning remain underexplored.
To this end, we propose K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS, a graph-based multi-blank QA dataset to
evaluate whether LLMs could reason with structured knowledge bounded by geometric constraints.
Each knowledge crossword consists of a list of constraints representing the edges of an incomplete
graph of various entities, and the models need to reconstruct the graph by filling in blanks so that
all constraints are met. To solve such problems, models need to consider candidates for each blank,
jointly consider the provided constraints, verify whether to exclude or accept the candidates, and
backtrack to pick different candidates when necessary until all constraints are met. We build indi-
vidual knowledge crosswords by sampling subgraphs from an encyclopedic knowledge graph and
randomly masking out certain entities as blanks. For each subgraph, we generate distractors of
three difficulty levels for each blank to result in a multiple-choice setting. In total, K NOWLEDGE
C ROSSWORDS contains 2,101 problems, covering varying levels of difficulty, knowledge domains,
and more.
We assess LLMs’ performance on K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS with varying baseline approaches,
ranging from simple zero-shot prompting to advanced ones such as self-consistency (Wang et al.,
2022) and least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022). We find that all baseline approaches strug-
gle with harder problems and have significant performance drops when no relevant knowledge is
provided, while advanced prompting methods barely improve performance due to their reliance on
left-to-right reasoning patterns. To address these challenges, we introduce two new instruction-
based techniques, S TAGED P ROMPTING and V ERIFY-A LL, aiming at augmenting LLMs’ abilities
for backtracking, constraint verification, and more. We find that V ERIFY-A LL achieves top per-
formance and is more robust with harder settings, while the success of S TAGED P ROMPTING is
contingent on stronger base LLMs. Further analysis reveals that the geometric knowledge reasoning
ability of LLMs is far from robust, as it can be susceptible to a variety of factors such as option order,
“None of the above” possibilities, option amount, certain structural patterns, and more. We envision
K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS as a comprehensive testbed to evaluate LLM knowledge abilities in
more complex and structured settings.

2    T HE K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS B ENCHMARK
We propose the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS benchmark, a graph-based multi-blank QA dataset to
evaluate whether LLMs could reason with structured knowledge bounded by geometric constraints
(Appendix C). An overview of knowledge crossword is illustrated in Figure 2.
Definition Each knowledge crossword consists of a question graph GQ = {(h, r, t)|h, t ∈ VQ , r ∈
R}, where VQ is the set of entities represented as nodes of GQ and R is the set of all possible rela-
tions between entities. Each (h, r, t) in GQ denotes a directed edge representing a factual association
such as (Marvin Minsky, has won prize, Turing award). In the question graph GQ , certain nodes
bi ∈ VQ are masked out as blanks B = [b1 , b2 , . . . , b|B| ]. The goal of each knowledge crossword


                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Knowledge Crosswords                                            Staged Prompting (Ours)                                                    Verify-All (Ours)
     Instruction: Pick the correct              fulfilled constraints
                                                                           Stage 1               Current Answer: (?, ?)
     answer for each blank that                 remaining constraints
     satisfies all the given                                                                      PU                                                        PU
                                                                                                                             R.F.K                                          R.F.K
                                                                                      ③ Verify                                           ① Candidates       ② Verify
     constraints.
                                                                                            ② Update
                Princeton University          Robert F. Kennedy                   A.Y.                      2                                    A.Y.                  HU

                                                                                      ① Solve                                D.G.                                            D.G.
                      graduated from
        1                              2   graduated from
                                                                                                       T                                                         T
                                                                                                                        Redo Stage 1                                             Error!
            has won

                      Turing award            Daniel Gorenstein         Stage 1: (?, ?) ① blank 1: D.S. ② … ③
                                                                                                            Go to next stage                                PU
                                                                           Stage 2          Current Answer: (D.S., ?)                                                       R.F.K
                                                                                                                                         ① Candidates       ② Verify
     Constraints: (blank 1, has won prize, Turing
                                                                                                 PU
     award); (Robert F. Kennedy, graduated from,                                                                               R.F.K            M.M.                   HU
     blank 2); (blank 1, graduated from, Princeton
                                                                                                           ① Solve                                                           D.G.
     University); (blank 1, graduated from, blank 2);                          D.S.                                                                              T
     (Daniel Gorenstein, graduated from, blank 2)                                                 Error in current answer!                                                  All correct!
                                                                                                                               D.G.
                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                  Go to previous stage
     Options:                                                                                                                            Answer
     blank 1: A. Andrew Yao (A.Y.)                                      Stage 1: (?, ?) ① blank 1: M.M. ② … ③                                               PU
                                                                                                                                                                            R.F.K
              B. Dana Scott (D.S.)                                                                         Go to next stage
              C. Marvin Minsky (M.M.)                                   Stage 2: (M.M., ?) ① blank 2: HU ② … ③                                 M.M.                    HU
     blank 2: A. University of Naples Federico (UNF)                                                       Go to next stage
              B. Harvard University (HU)                                                                                                                                    D.G.

              C. Clemson University (CU)                                Stage 3: (M.M., HU) ① All constraints fulfilled!                                       T


Figure 2: Overview of K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS and two proposed approaches, S TAGED
P ROMPTING and V ERIFY-A LL. Each individual knowledge crossword includes task instruction,
description of the structured factual constraints, and multiple-choice QA options. In each stage of
S TAGED P ROMPTING, LLMs ① solve a blank based on one remaining constraint (dashed edge); ②
update the status by filling in the proposed answer; then ③ verify filled constraints to proceed or
backtrack. In V ERIFY-A LL, LLMs propose a combination of ① candidates and ② verify all con-
straints with those candidates, and repeat this process until all constraints are met.
is to find one combination of answers for all blanks A = [a1 , a2 , . . . , a|B| ] that satisfy all factual
associations represented as geometric constraints in the question graph GQ .
Data Source We resort to encyclopedic knowledge graphs, specifically YAGO (Suchanek et al.,
2023), as scaffolds of geometric knowledge reasoning to construct the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS
benchmark. We conduct preprocessing to remove certain relations in the YAGO knowledge graph
that are location-related, time-sensitive, or not self-evident. This is to ensure that the K NOWLEDGE
C ROSSWORDS is minimally affected by question ambiguity, outdated knowledge, etc. We obtain
the filtered knowledge graph as KG = {(h, r, t)|h ∈ H, r ∈ R, t ∈ T }, where H, R, and T are
the sets of heads, relations, and tails respectively. We proceed to use the filtered YAGO knowledge
graph as the data source for the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS benchmark.
Generating Question Graphs We first adopt two hyperparameters to control the property and
difficulty of the generated question graphs: question graph size sG , representing the total number
of nodes in a question graph, and blank size sB , representing the number of nodes masked out as
blanks. To obtain question graphs, we start from a random center node c and retrieve the k-hop
neighborhood of c as GN (c) . We then downsample GN (c) by randomly removing nodes with higher
degrees than a dynamic threshold td in the original knowledge graph KG, until the largest weakly
connected component in GN (c) has a size no greater than sG . This is motivated by the fact that
entities with higher degrees are presumably less typical and more ambiguous, potentially causing
distraction in the model’s reasoning (Shomer et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023). We refer to the largest
connected component in downsampled GN (c) as answer graph GA .
We then randomly select sB nodes in GA from those with higher degrees than another dynamic
threshold tb in GA and mask them out as blanks B. These high-degree blanks would be rich in geo-
metric associations and provide LLMs with more constraints to work with. We use sG , sB , as well
as the degree of the center node c and dynamic thresholds for the removing and masking steps td and
tb as difficulty control measures to diversify problems in the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS bench-
mark. As the question graph generation step does not guarantee answer uniqueness, we exhaustively
search answers for each GQ in KG and only retain those with one valid answer combination.
Negative Sampling for Multiple-Choice QA We mainly consider K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS
under a multiple-choice QA setting, where several options are provided for each blank in GQ . This
would require negative sampling for each blank to provide distractors in addition to the correct
answer, while we identify a taxonomy of three progressive rules for distractors from loose to strict:


                                                                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Rule #1: Same semantic role as the blank. If a blank bi is the head (or tail) of an edge with
  relation ri , then the distractor for bi should be selected from the set of heads (or tails) of edges
  with the same relation ri .
• Rule #2: In the neighborhood of the blank. The distractor for bi should occur in the neighbor-
  hood GN (c) around the center node c used to generate GQ . This rule further narrows the range of
  such edges so that the distractors are more likely to be in a similar context as the blank.
• Rule #3: Fulfill a definite constraint if any. If the other end of the edge that the blank bi is
  incident to is known, then we say such edge is a definite constraint for bi , and the distractor should
  satisfy at least one of such definite constraints for bi to fulfill Rule #3. Such distractors impose
  higher demands on language models in the sense that LMs should jointly consider all constraints
  to exclude them.
As a result, we obtain three negative sampling strategies with varying difficulty implications for
knowledge crosswords: easy, where distractors only meet Rule #1; medium, where distractors meet
Rule #1 and #2; hard, where distractors meet Rule #1, #2, and #3. We opt to separately assign
multiple options for each blank in GQ , using either easy, medium, or hard strategies. Most blanks
have three options including the correct answer and there are blanks with only two available options.
Relevant Knowledge We additionally consider two variants regarding external knowledge avail-
ability: an open-book setting, where no external knowledge is provided and LLMs need to solve
knowledge crosswords with only their internal parametric knowledge; a closed-book setting, where
external knowledge, both useful and confounding, is provided in a preamble to the problem descrip-
tion. LLMs would need to dynamically select useful information to facilitate geometric knowledge
reasoning. Concretely, we similarly sample confounding knowledge triples from KG, guided by
the three rules, to obtain confounding context for each GQ . Useful and confounding knowledge are
then downsampled to 1:3, shuffled, and presented before each knowledge crossword. In this way,
we provide both necessary knowledge and confounding information, making the solving process
non-trivial.
Evaluation Metrics We evaluate performance on K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS with two metrics:
Partial-Credit (PC), indicating the portion of blanks that have been answered correctly; Full-Credit
(FC), indicating whether all blanks are correct in a given knowledge crossword. Formally,
                                  PsB
                                        1[A∗i = Ai ]
                          PC = i=1                   , FC = 1[PC = 1],
                                          sB
where A∗i denotes the prediction of Bi by LLMs and 1[] denotes the indicator function.
Benchmark Statistics After the
                                          Subset       #Qs   Avg. #Nodes    Avg. #Edges    Avg. #Blanks
previous steps, we obtain 873 valid
question graphs with different levels     EASY         869      7.28            6.63           2.89
of scales and sparsity. Each ques-        MEDIUM       873      7.28            6.64           2.89
tion graph is then used to construct      HARD         359      7.09            6.41           2.62
three problems using the three lev-      Table 1: Statistics of the K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS
els of negative sampling difficulty,     Benchmark. We report the number of questions and the av-
easy, medium, and hard, enabling         erage number of nodes, edges, and blanks for each subset
fine-grained evaluation. The bench-      with different negative sampling difficulty.
mark statistics are shown in Table 1.

3     O UR A PPROACH
We hypothesize that the left-to-right reasoning patterns in autoregressive language models (Yao
et al., 2023) and prompting approaches would fall short of solving knowledge crosswords, which
require backtracking, maintaining problem states, verifying existing information, reasoning with
structured constraints, and more. To this end, we introduce two instruction-based methods that
promote these abilities, illustrated with a detailed example in Figure 2.

3.1   S TAGED P ROMPTING

The S TAGED P ROMPTING approach divides geometric knowledge reasoning into stages involving
three steps: solve, update, and verify. At the beginning of each stage, LLMs maintain a current status


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 w/ Relevant Knowledge                       w/o Relevant Knowledge
                            easy       medium            hard              easy        medium             hard
Method                  PC       FC    PC     FC     PC        FC    PC       FC      PC      FC      PC       FC
RANDOM                 34.3     6.1   34.2    5.5   33.5    8.4     34.3      6.1     34.2    5.5     33.5     8.4
UPPERBOUND             98.8    96.7   99.1   97.4   91.8    82.2     -         -       -       -       -       -
ZERO - SHOT            97.3    93.7   97.4   94.2   77.9    55.4    81.3      57.1    83.3    60.6    57.2     24.8
FEW- SHOT              97.8    93.2   97.6   93.5   78.8    54.0    83.7      60.8    84.7    63.3    56.8     25.3
C OT                   94.6    86.5   95.0   88.9   77.9    56.3    74.0      44.0    76.4    48.5    55.7     27.0
C OT+SC                95.9    89.8   96.6   91.2   78.7    57.4    75.2      45.8    77.3    49.1    56.7     28.4
LT M                   86.0    68.9   86.3   68.6   69.6    43.5    75.6      47.3    76.6    48.2    51.1     19.2
S TAGED P ROMPTING     91.9    81.6   91.2   80.4   70.5    44.5    64.3      34.3    67.4    38.3    47.9     15.8
V ERIFY-A LL           98.6    96.1   98.7   96.2   83.9    64.6    84.5      62.3    86.1    66.9    59.7     29.8

Table 2: Model performance with GPT-3.5- TURBO. PC indicates Partial-Credit and FC indicates
Full-Credit. The best results are bold-faced, and the second-best ones are underlined. Detailed
prompts can be found in Appendix E.
                               w/ Relevant Knowledge                         w/o Relevant Knowledge
                          easy         medium           hard           easy           medium            hard
Method                 PC      FC     PC     FC     PC     FC       PC       FC      PC      FC      PC      FC
RANDOM                 34.3    6.1    34.2   5.5    33.5    8.4     34.3     6.1     34.2    5.5     33.5    8.4
 Experiments with GPT-4
S TAGED P ROMPTING 99.1       98.8    96.3   95.6   95.4   94.2     75.4     70.7    78.8    74.0    52.3    32.4
V ERIFY-A LL          98.1    98.1    95.7   95.7   92.8   90.5     88.0     83.4    89.5    85.5    59.5    38.6

Table 3: Model performance (%) with different methods using GPT-4. PC indicates Partial-Credit
and FC indicates Full-Credit. The best results are bold-faced. With relevant knowledge prepended,
S TAGED P ROMPTING generally outperforms V ERIFY-A LL, and V ERIFY-A LL outperforms S TAGED
P ROMPTING when no relevant knowledge is provided. Note that the easy and medium subsets are
slightly downsampled in several settings due to computational costs.
of solved blanks and unresolved constraints (edges that involve unsolved blanks). In the solve step,
LLMs propose a candidate for an unsolved blank based on either internal or external knowledge; in
the update step, LLMs update unsolved constraints using the newly proposed candidate for a given
blank; in the verify step, LLMs reflect on the updated constraints in the update step and judge their
validity. If an invalid factual association is identified as a result of the proposed candidate, LLMs
backtrack to the problem status in the previous stages and propose another option; otherwise, LLMs
proceed to tackle the remaining blanks until all blanks are filled and all constraints are met.

3.2   V ERIFY-A LL

While S TAGED P ROMPTING presents an elaborate problem-solving process that tackles challenges
such as backtracking and status updates, such complex reasoning might be hard to learn in context
for LLMs. We additionally propose the V ERIFY-A LL approach: candidates for each blank are
simultaneously proposed, rather than in separate stages. A verification step is then employed to
assess the validity of all filled constraints using these proposed candidates. If an error is detected,
the LM should backtrack and propose an alternative set of candidates until no error is found.

4     E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS
4.1   BASELINES

We adopt various prompting techniques as baselines, including zero-shot (ZERO - SHOT) prompt-
ing, few-shot in-context learning (FEW- SHOT), Chain-of-Thought prompting (C OT), CoT with self-
consistency (C OT+SC), and least-to-most prompting (LT M). Besides, we adopt the RANDOM base-
line which refers to randomly selecting an option for each blank. We also present an UPPERBOUND
baseline, where we present the constraints in GQ filled with correct answers as relevant knowledge.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      easy       medium         hard
               w/ NOTA?     w/ correct options?
                                                  PC     FC     PC     FC     PC       FC
                   ✓                ✗             35.7   14.0   35.6   13.5   11.4    3.1
                   ✓                ✓             68.1   46.8   69.1   48.3   50.7   20.6
                   ✗                ✓             83.7   60.8   84.7   63.3   56.8   25.3

Table 4: Model performance (%) evaluated with FEW- SHOT under the w/o Relevant Knowledge
setting. The best results are bold-faced and the second-best ones are underlined. “NOTA” denotes
the instruction “Output ‘None of the above’ if none of the option combinations satisfy all the con-
straints.”; “correct options” denotes that the correct options are provided as a candidate option and
LLMs should output the answer instead of “None of the above” when correct options exist. Specifi-
cally, row 1 and row 2 correspond to setting #1 and #2 respectively.

4.2   M ODELS AND S ETTINGS

Unless otherwise specified, we use ChatGPT (GPT-3.5- TURBO) as the base language model in our
experiments, and we additionally test out GPT-4 with our approaches as reported in Table 3 and the
open-source Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) in Section 6. For few-shot prompting techniques (FEW-
SHOT , C OT, C OT+SC, LT M), we present 5 in-context exemplars. The sampling temperature τ is
set to 0.1 except for self-consistency; we sample 5 Chain-of-Thought responses with temperature
τ = 0.7 for the self-consistency baselines.

5     R ESULTS
We evaluate various approaches on K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS and present results in Table 2.

LLMs have preliminary abilities for geometric knowledge reasoning. Table 2 shows that all
investigated approaches outperform RANDOM baseline by a large margin despite the difficulty of
the task, while LLMs could achieve a 90+ Full-Credit score on simple problems and settings (e.g.,
easy and w/ knowledge).

All approaches exhibit severe performance drops on harder knowledge crosswords. While
it might be relatively straightforward for LLMs to eliminate false options that satisfy few definite
constraints in the knowledge crosswords, they face difficulties in excluding options that meet a
subset of all the constraints presented. This indicates that LLMs’ abilities for geometric knowledge
reasoning are greatly impacted by how confounding distractors are, meaning that LLMs are far from
robust in complex structured knowledge contexts.

Relevant knowledge does help LLMs solve knowledge crosswords. Despite the existence of
confounding information, LLMs do benefit from the relevant knowledge provided. On average, the
w/ knowledge setting exhibits a 34.3% FC gain compared to w/o knowledge settings. However,
it remains unclear whether LLMs obtain such performance gain by effectively understanding and
leveraging the relevant knowledge or by spurious correlations between relevant knowledge and given
constraints.

Existing advanced prompting methods show little improvement. Specifically, C OT, LT M and
C OT+SC have little improvement compared to basic ZERO - SHOT and FEW- SHOT prompting. The
average PC and FC of C OT, LT M and C OT+SC is 5.6% and 10.4% less than those of ZERO - SHOT
and FEW- SHOT. This suggests that the left-to-right reasoning patterns employed by these prompting
techniques may not be suitable for knowledge crosswords, as these prompting methods fail to effec-
tively encourage LLMs to perform the non-progressive steps of verification and backtracking when
necessary.

Adding verification and backtracking steps improves geometric reasoning ability. With GPT-
3.5- TURBO, a simple verification step in the instruction brings a huge gain for V ERIFY-A LL. Inter-
estingly, after a closer look into the responses from GPT-3.5- TURBO, we find that only a very limited
number of responses involve detecting errors in proposed candidates and backtracking accordingly.
This indicates that the performance gain mainly comes from LLMs proposing more precise answers
in a single attempt with the instruction that they need further verification.


                                                  6
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                         HDV\                         KDUG                                                                   HDV\                         KDUG
                                                         PHGLXP                                                                                              PHGLXP

3DUWLDO &UHGLW


                                                                                                       )XOO &UHGLW


                                             LQ FRQWH[W H[DPSODUV                                                                  LQ FRQWH[W H[DPSODUV
 Figure 3: Model performance (%) using C OT under the w/o Relevant Knowledge setting with an
 increasing number of in-context exemplars. An increase in the number of exemplars does not bring
 performance gain.
 Furthermore, while GPT-3.5- TURBO struggles at learning complex reasoning steps demonstrated in
 S TAGED P ROMPTING, Table 3 shows that S TAGED P ROMPTING achieves impressive results with
 GPT-4 and generally outperforms all other methods including V ERIFY-A LL when relevant knowl-
 edge are provided. This indicates that the more elaborate instructions of S TAGED P ROMPTING work
 best with more advanced LLMs, as smaller models struggle to grasp these detailed reasoning steps.

 6                               A NALYSIS
 None of the above In the main experiments, the                                &R7  )&                          &R7  3&
 correct answer is always provided as one of the                             6WDJHG  )&                    6WDJHG  3&
                                                                                                                       $FFXUDF\



 options for each blank and LLMs are instructed
 to pick the correct answer. To study whether
 LLMs would be robust if we tell LLMs that there
 could be such cases where none of the options
 is correct, we add additional instruction “Output
 ‘None of the above’ if none of the option com-            ILUVW                   UDQGRP                                        ODVW
 binations satisfy all the constraints.” and evalu-                        &RUUHFW DQVZHU LQGH[
 ate the performance of GPT-3.5- TURBO with the
 F EW- SHOT prompting. Specifically, we experi- Figure 4: Model performance (%) under the
 ment with two settings: #1. The correct option is w/o Relevant Knowledge setting using C OT and
 removed from candidates and LLMs should out- S TAGED P ROMPTING with different orders of
 put ‘None of the above’; #2. The correct option options evaluated on the hard subset.
 occurs in the candidates despite the additional
 instruction and LLMs should output the unique                        ]HUR VKRW  )&                   ]HUR VKRW  3&
 correct answer for each blank. Table 4 demon-                        UDQGRP  )&                         UDQGRP  3&
                                                                                                                      $FFXUDF\


 strates similar results as shown by Kadavath et al.
 (2022), GPT-3.5- TURBO seldom outputs “None
 of the above” even if the correct answer is not
 provided as one option (row 1 & row 2), while it
 does get affected by the absence of the assump-
 tion that correct option always exists (row 2 &

                                                                            RSWLRQV SHU EODQN
 row 3).
 Order of options As S TAGED P ROMPTING Figure 5: Model performance (%) evaluated on
 considers one candidate at one time, we expect 292 problems using ZERO - SHOT for increasing
 the performance may be negatively correlated number of options per blank. RANDOM denotes
 with the index of the correct answer in the list the baseline of random guess.
 of options. Figure 4 demonstrates that the performance of S TAGED P ROMPTING declines when the
 correct answer appears later. Such a negative correlation could be a manifestation of LLM halluci-
 nation (Ji et al., 2023). On the other hand, we see an opposite trend in the performance of C OT. This
     0
       Within 4k-context, in the w/o Relevant Knowledge setting, the numbers of finished responses for easy,
 medium, and hard questions are 755, 781, and 341 respectively; in the w/ Relevant Knowledge setting, the
 numbers of finished responses for easy, medium, hard questions are 759, 769 and 328 respectively. The credits
 are calculated based on these finished responses only.


                                                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


indicates that C OT does not consider the options sequentially and later options may be paid more
attention than earlier ones.
Number of options As the number of options for each blank increases, the problem becomes
harder due to the presence of more confounders. We expect to see a downward trend in model
performance when there are more distractors per blank. Unsurprisingly, the results in Figure 5
show that the performance is negatively correlated with the number of options per blank. We also
observe that performance gap with random guessing is narrowing, suggesting that K NOWLEDGE
C ROSSWORDS might be difficult for LLMs in the open-book generation setting. (Appendix A)
Number of in-context examplars Despite the in-context learning ability demonstrated by LLMs
(Brown et al., 2020), we find that more in-context exemplars fail to improve model performance on
K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS. As presented in Figure 3, for questions with all three difficulty levels,
the best performance is achieved at ZERO - SHOT except for the Full-Credit of hard problems. This
indicates that left-to-right CoT reasoning could not be adequately learned in context for the problem
of knowledge crosswords.

Specific structural patterns We observe that                                                 HDV\  3&                              PHGLXP  3&                               KDUG  3&
                                                                                             HDV\  )&                         PHGLXP  )&                          KDUG  )&
the occurrence of certain structural patterns in

the question graph makes the problem harder for

                                                      $FFXUDF\


LLMs. We identify three special structural pat-
terns: 1) A-B, where two blanks are connected by

an edge; 2) A-B-C, where three blanks are linked

together; 3) cycle, where blanks form a cycle. Ac-                                         RYHUDOO                            $ %                             $ % &                               F\FOH
cording to Figure 6, we see a decrease in the accu-
racy in the settings of A-B and A-B-C, compared       Figure 6: Model performance (%) for problems
to performance on the whole benchmark. We find        with specific structural patterns. “overall” de-
performance gains in problems with cycles, while      notes the performance calculated over the whole
such problems are very limited in K NOWLEDGE          benchmark.
C ROSSWORDS.
Difficulty of in-context examplars We inves-
tigate the correlation between the difficulty of                                  test Q
in-context exemplars and model performance by                         easy       medium       hard
evaluating the performance with 5-shot C OT examplar Q PC FC PC FC PC FC
using 4 different sets of in-context exemplars.          EASY      73.9 44.4 75.9 47.9 55.2 24.0
Specifically, we use four sets of in-context ex-        MEDIUM     75.4 47.9 77.2 49.7 55.1 25.9
emplars: easy, where all examples come from              HARD      73.4 43.5 76.2 48.7 55.3 24.0
the easy subset of K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS;               MIXED     74.9 46.0 75.7 47.4 55.8 26.5
similarly medium and hard; mixed, where a mix-
ture of 2 easy, 2 medium, and 1 hard examples are Table 5: Model performance (%) with C OT us-
incorporated. Table 5 demonstrates that for prob- ing exemplars of different difficulties under the
lems of different difficulties, LLMs learn bet- w/o Relevant Knowledge setting. The best re-
ter from medium or mixed in-context exemplars. sults are bold-faced.
This indicates that LLMs best conduct geometric knowledge reasoning when problems and solutions
with a range of difficulty levels are presented, enabling progressive in-context learning from simple
to hard. As a result, we use in-context exemplars with mixed difficulties in the experiments.
Fine-tuning and open-source LMs We additionally Method                             PC       FC
evaluate the geometric knowledge reasoning abilities of
an open-source language model - L LAMA 2-7 B with 100 RANDOM                       32.8      5.0
problems randomly selected across all difficulty sub- ZERO - SHOT                  29.6      5.0
sets. Without fine-tuning, L LAMA 2-7 B demonstrates a  FEW  - SHOT                35.5      7.0
performance close to random guess. After instruction-   INSTRUCTION     - TUNING   47.3     17.0
tuning with 1,471 knowledge crosswords randomly se-
lected from all 2,101 questions, the Partial-Credit and Table 6: Performance (%) of L LAMA 2-
Full-Credit become 17.7% and 12.0% higher than ZERO - 7 B on a dataset subset.
SHOT prompting as reported in Table 6. This indicates that instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2021)
could augment LLMs for solving knowledge crosswords, while to what extent they work with larger
LLMs requires further research.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R ELATED W ORK

Understanding and Expanding the Knowledge Abilities of LLMs After trained on massive
textual corpora, LLMs tend to encode a substantial amount of factual knowledge in their parametric
memory (Mallen et al., 2023). Since the advent of works like LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019), numerous
studies have sought to investigate the extent to which LLMs encode and retrieve factual knowledge
(Yu et al., 2022) and to understand the models’ capacity to utilize this parametric knowledge effec-
tively (Mallen et al., 2023). Mruthyunjaya et al. (2023) show that while LLMs possess the potential
to recall factual information, their ability to capture complex topological and semantic traits of KGs
remains notably limited. In addition, LLMs encounter challenges related to knowledge update (Hase
et al., 2023), knowledge conflict (Chen et al., 2022), irrelevant context (Shi et al., 2023a), long-tail
knowledge (Kandpal et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023) and more.
As a result, various methods have been proposed to further expand the knowledge abilities of lan-
guage models, including prompting techniques (Press et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022;
Kojima et al., 2022; Ye & Durrett, 2022), retrieval augmentation (Shi et al., 2023b), search engine
integration (Yu et al., 2022; Press et al., 2022), multi-LLM collaboration (Feng et al., 2023), and
more. While these works primarily focus on evaluating and improving abilities to handle atomic
(e.g., open-domain QA) or linear (e.g., multi-hop QA) knowledge, we propose to assess whether
LLMs could reason with structured knowledge bounded by geometric constraints that are better
aligned with the structural nature of knowledge.


Reasoning with Large Language Models LLMs have been evaluated on a myriad of reasoning
tasks in an in-context learning setting, including math problems (Ling et al., 2017; Lewkowycz et al.,
2022), logical reasoning (Srivastava et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022), factual knowledge reasoning
(Press et al., 2022), commonsense reasoning (Talmor et al., 2019), and more. Multiple prompt-
ing techniques have been developed to promote the reasoning ability of LLMs. Leveraging the
in-context learning behavior of LLMs, various prompting techniques (Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022; Khot et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022) have been proposed to boost the reasoning ability. Specif-
ically, Khot et al. (2022) and Yao et al. (2023) incorporate programs as guides to LLM generation.
In our work, we mainly focus on evaluating the LLM itself for its geometric reasoning ability, with
minimal guidance from explicit code or program-based guidance. And the prompting techniques in-
troduced in previous work barely improve the performance in K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS as their
inherent left-to-right reasoning patterns are not perfect for our problems. Experiments by Kadavath
et al. (2022) demonstrate that self-evaluation improves with model size, which in effect means that
verification has an advantage over generation. Following this finding and considering the nature of
our problems, we harness the self-evaluation ability of LLMs to improve the overall accuracy of
their responses.



8   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS, a multi-blank QA dataset where each prob-
lem consists of a natural language question representing the geometric constraints of an incomplete
entity network and LLMs are tasked with working out the missing entities while meeting all fac-
tual constraints. We envision K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS as a comprehensive testbed to evaluate
whether LLMs could perform geometric reasoning over structured knowledge. We adopt a variety
of prompting methods on K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS and find that all investigated approaches
perform above random, while we further propose S TAGED P ROMPTING and V ERIFY-A LL to tackle
unique challenges in geometric knowledge reasoning such as backtracking and fact verification. As
a result, V ERIFY-A LL outperforms all other techniques with ChatGPT while S TAGED P ROMPTING
works better with the more advanced GPT-4. Further analysis shows that the geometric reasoning
ability of LLMs over structured knowledge is far from robust, as it is impacted by factors such
as the order of options, “None of the above” scenarios, certain structure patterns entailing greater
uncertainty, and more.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

David Chang, Ivana Balažević, Carl Allen, Daniel Chawla, Cynthia Brandt, and Richard Andrew
  Taylor. Benchmark and best practices for biomedical knowledge graph embeddings. In Proceed-
  ings of the conference. Association for Computational Linguistics. Meeting, volume 2020, pp.
  167. NIH Public Access, 2020.

Hung-Ting Chen, Michael Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Rich knowledge sources bring complex knowl-
  edge conflicts: Recalibrating models to reflect conflicting evidence. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2292–2307, 2022.

Rajarshi Das, Ameya Godbole, Ankita Naik, Elliot Tower, Manzil Zaheer, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  Robin Jia, and Andrew McCallum. Knowledge base question answering by case-based reasoning
  over subgraphs. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4777–4793. PMLR, 2022.

Shangbin Feng, Zhaoxuan Tan, Zilong Chen, Ningnan Wang, Peisheng Yu, Qinghua Zheng, Xiaojun
  Chang, and Minnan Luo. Par: Political actor representation learning with social context and expert
  knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 12022–12036, 2022.

Shangbin Feng, Weijia Shi, Yuyang Bai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Tianxing He, and Yulia Tsvetkov.
  Cook: Empowering general-purpose language models with modular and collaborative knowledge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09955, 2023.

Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
  Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, et al. Rarr: Researching and revising what
  language models say, using language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16477–16508, 2023.

Peter Hase, Mona Diab, Asli Celikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
  Bansal, and Srinivasan Iyer. Methods for measuring, updating, and visualizing factual beliefs
  in language models. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2706–2723, 2023.

Qian Huang, Hongyu Ren, and Jure Leskovec. Few-shot relational reasoning via connection sub-
  graph pretraining. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6397–6409, 2022.

Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.

Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language mod-
  els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.

Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. Large language
  models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 15696–15707. PMLR, 2023.

Hamid Karimi and Jiliang Tang. Learning hierarchical discourse-level structure for fake news detec-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
  pp. 3432–3442, 2019.

Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:3843–3857, 2022.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program induction by rationale gen-
 eration: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. In Proceedings of the 55th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
 pp. 158–167, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/P17-1015. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1015.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
  memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 9802–9822, 2023.
Vishwas Mruthyunjaya, Pouya Pezeshkpour, Estevam Hruschka, and Nikita Bhutani. Rethinking
  language models as symbolic knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13676, 2023.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu,
  and Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, 2019.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. 2022.
Cheng Qian, Xinran Zhao, and Sherry Tongshuang Wu. ” merge conflicts!” exploring the impacts
  of external distractors to parametric knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08594, 2023.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
  machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383–2392, 2016.
Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael
  Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31210–31227. PMLR, 2023a.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Rich James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettle-
 moyer, and Wen-tau Yih. Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2301.12652, 2023b.
Harry Shomer, Wei Jin, Wentao Wang, and Jiliang Tang. Toward degree bias in embedding-based
  knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 705–715,
  2023.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Fabian Suchanek, Mehwish Alam, Thomas Bonald, Pierre-Henri Paris, and Jules Soria. Integrating
  the wikidata taxonomy into yago. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11884, 2023.
Kai Sun, Yifan Ethan Xu, Hanwen Zha, Yue Liu, and Xin Luna Dong. Head-to-tail: How knowl-
  edgeable are large language models (llm)? aka will llms replace knowledge graphs? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10168, 2023.
Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. Recitation-augmented language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
  tion answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1421. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1421.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot prompting for textual reason-
  ing. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:30378–30392, 2022.
Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chenguang Zhu,
 Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models are strong
 context generators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ISCUSSION

Geometric Reasoning in an open-book generation setting While we mainly focus on solving
knowledge crosswords in a multiple-choice setting, it is interesting to evaluate the geometric reason-
ing ability in an open-book generation setting. Specifically, the problems in K NOWLEDGE C ROSS -
WORDS have unique answers, which should be useful when switching to an open-book generation
setting as answer uniqueness makes evaluation easier and makes the problem clearer. Our prelim-
inary experiments show that solving knowledge crosswords in the open-book generation setting is
much harder. Considering the model performance in the multiple-choice setting, one method that
might be promising is to prompt LLMs themselves to generate candidates for each blank and thereby
transform the open-book generation problem into a multiple-choice problem.

Performance gain of V ERIFY-A LL While V ERIFY-A LL helps LLMs obtain large performance
gains in solving knowledge crosswords, it is quite intriguing when investigating where such gains
come from. Specifically, in the w/ Relevant Knowledge setting, among all 359 hard problems, we
find only 3 problems whose solution with V ERIFY-A LL involves detecting errors in verification and
re-propose candidates. Among the 3 problems, 2 are answered correctly by both V ERIFY-A LL and
C OT, and both methods fail the other problem. This leads to an interesting implication that the
performance gain comes from LLMs proposing more precise answers in the first attempt, and that
LLMs can jointly consider all constraints rather than consider one by one. We envision the study of
such performance gain and the application of the insight as possible future directions.

Application of geometric reasoning over structured knowledge Despite the difficulty of the
task, LLMs do show preliminary geometric reasoning ability over structured knowledge. While
such ability still has a long way to achieve perfection, this finding opens up the possibility of using
LLMs as flexible relational databases and accessing the parametric knowledge with prompts similar
to SQL (structured query language).

Same prompting approach with different LLMs While GPT-3.5- TURBO does not benefit from
S TAGED P ROMPTING, experiments using S TAGED P ROMPTING with GPT-4 demonstrate impressive
results under the w/Relevant Knowledge setting. Taking a close look at the responses of GPT-3.5-
TURBO , we find they fail to follow the reasoning steps presented in the exemplars even if we facilitate
the process by guiding the update step with program. On the other hand, GPT-4 learn better from
exemplars of S TAGED P ROMPTING with similar settings. This indicates that the success of S TAGED
P ROMPTING relies heavily on the choice of LLMs.


B    L IMITATIONS

Limited data source We construct K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS based on only the encyclopedic
knowledge graph YAGO, which covers topics on general knowledge about people, cities, countries,
movies, and organizations from Wikidata. Since we will make the code publicly available, we leave
it to future work on evaluating the geometric reasoning ability of LLMs on different topics with
various data sources, such as biomedical knowledge graphs (Chang et al., 2020) and networks in
social sciences (Feng et al., 2022).

Answer Uniqueness Due to the incompleteness of knowledge graphs, it is possible that the answer
to a problem in K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS is not unique. However, such likelihood is presumably
low and does not hurt the general evaluation of the geometric reasoning ability of LLMs.


C    K NOWLEDGE C ROSSWORDS D ETAILS

In this section, we elaborate on the details of benchmark construction.
1. YAGO filtering
    (a) We remove edges in YAGO with the following relations: (i) Location-related: isLocatedIn,
        livesIn, happenedIn, diedIn, wasBornIn; (ii) Time-sensitive: worksAt, playsFor, isAffili-


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Hyperparameter              Value
                               degreec                       5, 7, 9
                               sG                     6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
                               sB                     [ 41 · sG , 21 · sG ]
                               mr                         1.1, 1.2, 1.3
                               mb                             1, 1.1

                       Table 7: Hyperparamters for benchmark construction


        atedTo, isPoliticianOf, isLeaderOf; (iii) Not self-evident: influences, owns, isKnownFor,
        dealsWith, imports, exports, created, isInterestedIn, dealsWith, isConnectedTo.
   (b) The remaining relations in YAGO are: graduatedFrom, hasMusicalRole, hasAcademicAd-
       visor, hasChild, wroteMusicFor, hasCapital, actedIn, hasOfficialLanguage, hasWonPrize,
       hasGender, hasCurrency, directed, isCitizenOf, participatedIn, isMarriedTo, hasNeighbor,
       edited.
2. Modified k-hop neighborhood
    (a) A center node c is randomly selected from nodes with degree degreec in filtered YAGO.
   (b) We retrieve a modified 5-hop neighborhood GN (c) : in each layer, we retain at most 8 nodes.
       This approach assists us in obtaining a subgraph with a relatively long diameter while avoid-
       ing excessive density.
3. Downsample to GA
    (a) We repeatedly remove nodes from GN (c) until the number of nodes in the largest connected
        component in GN (c) is no more than question graph size sG .
         i. Sort the nodes in GN (c) by degree in filtered YAGO in descending order as vsorted,YAGO .
        ii. Denote reduce range multiplier as mr . Then reduce range rr is calculated as mr ·
            (|VN (c) | − sG ) where VN (c) is the set of nodes in GN (c) .
       iii. Randomly pick a node in vsorted,YAGO [(rr − 1)/2 : (rr − 1)] and remove this node from
            GN (c) .
   (b) Following the abovementioned approach, we downsample GN (c) to GA by removing nodes
       with relatively high degree in filtered YAGO and introduce randomness in this process.
4. Generate blanks to get GQ
    (a) To mask sB nodes in GA as blanks, denote blank range multiplier as mb and calculate blank
        range br as sB · mb .
   (b) Sort the nodes in GN (c) by degree in GQ in descending order as vsorted,GA .
    (c) We then randomly select sB nodes from the first br nodes in vsorted,GA as blanks.
Specifically, the hyperparameters we used for benchmark construction are listed in Tabel 7.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide examples of knowledge crosswords that GPT-3.5- TURBO answers cor-
rectly or wrongly using S TAGED P ROMPTING and V ERIFY-A LL. In-context exemplars are omitted
in this section to save space and can be found in Appendix E. Table 8 and Table 9 show results using
S TAGED P ROMPTING; Table 10, Table 11 and Table 12 show results using V ERIFY-A LL.


                    Table 8: Response using S TAGED P ROMPTING where the answers are
                    correct.

                                                                 S TAGED P ROMPTING
                        Prompt                                                                           Response
 [S TAGED P ROMPTING exemplars]                                   Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, is
 Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that sat-    married to, Dick Powell); (blank 2, acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is
 isfies all the given constraints.                                married to, blank 2); (Dick Powell, has gender, blank 1); (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, blank
 Knowledge: (June Allyson, is married to, Dick Powell);           1); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, blank 1).
 (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Char-       Stage 1 - solve: From (Dick Powell, has gender, blank 1), candidate for blank 1: B. male.
 lie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (Joan Blondell, is    Stage 1 - status update: Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Dick Powell, has
 married to, Dick Powell); (Joan Blondell, acted in, Support      gender, male); (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, male); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, male). Up-
 Your Local Gunfighter); (Suzanne Pleshette, acted in, Sup-       dated remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, is married to, Dick Powell); (blank 2,
 port Your Local Gunfighter); (James Garner, acted in, Sup-       acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is married to, blank 2).
 port Your Local Gunfighter); (Jack Elam, acted in, Support       Stage1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go
 Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is married to, June        to next stage.
 Allyson); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Espos-        Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: B. male. Remaining constraints containing blanks:
 ito); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (Dick      (blank 2, is married to, Dick Powell); (blank 2, acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick
 Powell, is married to, Joan Blondell); (Dick Powell, has         Powell, is married to, blank 2).
 gender, male); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Charlie         Stage 2 - solve: From (blank 2, is married to, Dick Powell), candidate for blank 2: B. Joan
 Chaplin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly, has gender, male);      Blondell.
 (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly, has gen-           Stage 2 - status update: Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Joan Blondell, is
 der, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gender, male); (Borislav       married to, Dick Powell); (Joan Blondell, acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick
 Mikhailov, has gender, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gen-         Powell, is married to, Joan Blondell). Updated remaining constraints containing blanks:
 der, male); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly,        Stage2 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go
 has gender, male); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, male). Con-        to next stage.
 straints: (blank 2, is married to, Dick Powell); (blank 2,       Stage 3 - status: Current answer: blank 1: B. male, blank 2: B. Joan Blondell. Remaining
 acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is       constraints with blanks: None.
 married to, blank 2); (Dick Powell, has gender, blank 1);        Stage 3 - solve: No more remaining constraints with blank. Final answer: blank 1: B, blank 2:
 (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, blank 1); (Cole Tinkler,        B✓
 has gender, blank 1).
 Options: blank 1: A. female, B. male blank 2: A. Suzanne
 Pleshette, B. Joan Blondell, C. James Garner
 Answer:


                                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table 9: Response using S TAGED P ROMPTING where the answers are
                    wrong.

                                                                 S TAGED P ROMPTING
                        Prompt                                                                           Response
 [S TAGED P ROMPTING exemplars]                                   Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (Paz Vega,
 Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that sat-    acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
 isfies all the given constraints.                                film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
 Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract);             Stage 1 - solve: From (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1), candidate for blank 1: A. The Human
 (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega,             Contract.
 acted in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega,              Stage 1 - status update: Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Paz Vega, acted in,
 acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A      The Human Contract); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract). Updated remaining
 Woman of Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Cham-           constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in,
 pion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight         The Human Contract).
 (1952 film)); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human           Stage1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go
 Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008        to next stage.
 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany      Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: A. The Human Contract. Remaining constraints
 Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted      containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in, The Human
 in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The         Contract).
 Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Hu-       Stage 2 - solve: From (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)), candidate for blank 2: A.
 man Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality);         Johnathon Schaech.
 (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)).            Stage 2 - status update: Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Johnathon Schaech,
 Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett        acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, The Human Contract). Up-
 Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night        dated remaining constraints containing blanks:
 (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).                      Stage2 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go
 Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit           to next stage.
 (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A.              Stage 3 - status: Current answer: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, blank 2: A. Johnathon
 Johnathon Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow               Schaech. Remaining constraints with blanks: None.
 Answer:                                                          Stage 3 - solve: No more remaining constraints with blank. Final answer: blank 1: A, blank 2:
                                                                  A ✗ (Correct answer: blank 1: A, blank 2: B)


                    Table 10: Response using V ERIFY-A LL where the answers are correct
                    and involves error detection and backtracking.

                                                                      V ERIFY-A LL
                        Prompt                                                                           Response
 [V ERIFY-A LL exemplars]                                         Candidate answer: blank 1: A. female, blank 2: B. Joan Blondell; Filled constraints with
 Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that sat-    candidate answer: (Joan Blondell, is married to, Dick Powell); (Joan Blondell, acted in, Support
 isfies all the given constraints.                                Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is married to, Joan Blondell); (Dick Powell, has gender,
 Knowledge: (June Allyson, is married to, Dick Powell);           female); (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, female); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, female);
 (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Char-       Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? (Dick Powell, has
 lie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (Joan Blondell, is    gender, female) is incorrect.
 married to, Dick Powell); (Joan Blondell, acted in, Support      Candidate answer: blank 1: B. male, blank 2: B. Joan Blondell; Filled constraints with can-
 Your Local Gunfighter); (Suzanne Pleshette, acted in, Sup-       didate answer: (Joan Blondell, is married to, Dick Powell); (Joan Blondell, acted in, Support
 port Your Local Gunfighter); (James Garner, acted in, Sup-       Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is married to, Joan Blondell); (Dick Powell, has gender,
 port Your Local Gunfighter); (Jack Elam, acted in, Support       male); (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, male); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, male);
 Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is married to, June        Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank
 Allyson); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Espos-        1: B, blank 2: B. ✓
 ito); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (Dick
 Powell, is married to, Joan Blondell); (Dick Powell, has
 gender, male); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Charlie
 Chaplin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly, has gender, male);
 (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly, has gen-
 der, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gender, male); (Borislav
 Mikhailov, has gender, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gen-
 der, male); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Robert Bly,
 has gender, male); (Cole Tinkler, has gender, male). Con-
 straints: (blank 2, is married to, Dick Powell); (blank 2,
 acted in, Support Your Local Gunfighter); (Dick Powell, is
 married to, blank 2); (Dick Powell, has gender, blank 1);
 (Borislav Mikhailov, has gender, blank 1); (Cole Tinkler,
 has gender, blank 1).
 Options: blank 1: A. female, B. male blank 2: A. Suzanne
 Pleshette, B. Joan Blondell, C. James Garner
 Answer:


                                                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table 11: Response using V ERIFY-A LL where the answers are correct
                    correctly in a single trial.

                                                                     V ERIFY-A LL
                        Prompt                                                                          Response
 [V ERIFY-A LL exemplars]                                        Candidate answer: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, blank 2: B. Idris Elba;
 Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that sat-   Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Jada
 isfies all the given constraints.                               Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film));
 Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract);            (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract);
 (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega,            Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank
 acted in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega,             1: A, blank 2: B. ✓
 acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A
 Woman of Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Cham-
 pion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight
 (1952 film)); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human
 Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008
 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany
 Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted
 in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The
 Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Hu-
 man Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality);
 (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)).
 Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett
 Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night
 (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
 Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit
 (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A.
 Johnathon Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
 Answer:


                     Table 12: Response using V ERIFY-A LL where the answers are wrong.

                                                                     V ERIFY-A LL
                        Prompt                                                                          Response
 [V ERIFY-A LL exemplars]                                        Candidate answer: blank 1: C. Don Knotts, blank 2: A. female;
 Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that sat-   Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Colleen Camp, has gender, female); (Don Knotts,
 isfies all the given constraints.                               has gender, female); (Don Knotts, acted in, The Private Eyes (1980 film)); (Diane Baker, has
 Knowledge: (Colleen Camp, has gender, female); (Robert          gender, female); (Jane Seymour, has gender, female);
 Bly, has gender, male); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male);        Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank
 (Charlie Chaplin, has gender, male); (Grace Zabriskie, has      1: C, blank 2: A. ✗ (Correct answer: blank 1: B, blank 2: A)
 gender, female); (Robert Bly, has gender, male); (Eric
 Maskin, has gender, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gender,
 male); (Tim Conway, acted in, The Private Eyes (1980
 film)); (Don Knotts, acted in, The Private Eyes (1980
 film)); (Bernard Fox (actor), acted in, The Private Eyes
 (1980 film)); (Grace Zabriskie, acted in, The Private Eyes
 (1980 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, has gender, male); (Eric
 Maskin, has gender, male); (Diane Baker, has gender, fe-
 male); (Robert Bly, has gender, male); (Jane Seymour, has
 gender, female); (Eric Maskin, has gender, male); (Robert
 Bly, has gender, male); (Charlie Chaplin, has gender, male).
 Constraints: (Colleen Camp, has gender, blank 2); (blank 1,
 has gender, blank 2); (blank 1, acted in, The Private Eyes
 (1980 film)); (Diane Baker, has gender, blank 2); (Jane Sey-
 mour, has gender, blank 2). Options: blank 1: A. Bernard
 Fox (actor), B. Grace Zabriskie, C. Don Knotts blank 2: A.
 female, B. male Answer:


                                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    P ROMPTS
We list the prompts for all experiments in Tables 2, 3 and 6.

              Table 13: Prompts used in main experiments for all baseline approaches and our
              approaches, with exemplars and an example question. “Knowledge” for each
              problem is only applicable in the “w/ Relevant Knowledge” setting.

                                    An example of knowledge crossword
Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
Desired format: blank i: Z ...
Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom
Night (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
Options:
blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay
blank 2: A. Johnathon Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
Answer: blank 1: A, blank 2: B

          Method                                                  Prompt
       UPPERBOUND            Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given
                             constraints.
                             Desired format: blank i: Z ...
                             Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Jada Pinkett Smith,
                             directed, The Human Contract); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film));
                             (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract). Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in,
                             blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night
                             (2008 film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                             Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six
                             Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany
                             Snow
                             Answer:
        ZERO - SHOT          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given
                             constraints.
                             Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in,
                             Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz
                             Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                             Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chap-
                             lin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, The Hu-
                             man Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe
                             Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                             film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in,
                             The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract);
                             (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad
                             Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                             Desired format: blank i: Z Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada
                             Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film));
                             (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                             Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six
                             Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany
                             Snow
                             Answer:


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        FEW- SHOT         Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Eliza Dushku, acted in, True Lies); (Tom Arnold (actor), acted in,
                          True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Stephen Collins, acted
                          in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Paul Sorvino, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Danny Glover, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          (Optional) Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton, B. Charlton Heston, C. Paul Sorvino
                          Answer: blank 1: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Taye Diggs, acted
                          in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Taye Diggs,
                          is married to, Idina Menzel); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to,
                          Jobst of Moravia); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Enchanted (film)); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted
                          in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to, Jobst of Moravia); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, blank 2); (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2); (Idina
                          Menzel, is married to, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Kelly LeBrock, B. Napoleon, C. Taye Diggs blank 2: A. Halloweentown High, B. Magnolia
                          (film), C. Rent (film)
                          Answer: blank 1: C, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Ocean’s Thirteen); (Andy Garcı́a, acted
                          in, The Untouchables (film)); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, The Pink Panther 2); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces);
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920
                          film)); (Virginia Madsen, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                          Where’s My Mummy?); (Mindy Cohn, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Grey DeLisle, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                          My Mummy?).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead, B. Smokin’ Aces, C. Beverly Hills Chihuahua blank
                          2: A. Ron Perlman, B. Casey Kasem, C. Jeremy Piven
                          Answer: blank 1: B, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (David Thewlis, acted in, Harry Potter (film
                          series)); (John Cleese, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Richard Harris, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Maureen Lipman, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Nigel Havers, acted
                          in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes, B. Maggie Smith, C. Emma Watson
                          Answer: blank 1: A
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints. Knowledge: (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, The Railway Children (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three
                          Ages); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer
                          Esposito); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Jimmy Hanley, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah
                          Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to,
                          John Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (John
                          Merivale, is married to, Jan Sterling); (Paul Douglas (actor), is married to, Jan Sterling).
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Liam Neeson, B. Jimmy Hanley, C. Nancy Wilson (rock musician) blank 2: A. Courage of Lassie,
                          B. 29 Acacia Avenue, C. Listen to Me (film) blank 3: A. José Marı́a Aznar, B. John Merivale, C. Prince Harald of
                          Denmark
                          Answer: blank 1: B, blank 2: B, blank 3: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted
                          in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                          Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada
                          Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon
                          Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
                          Answer:


                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          C OT            Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Eliza Dushku, acted in, True Lies); (Tom Arnold (actor), acted in,
                          True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Stephen Collins, acted
                          in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Paul Sorvino, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Danny Glover, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton, B. Charlton Heston, C. Paul Sorvino
                          Answer: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)). Therefore, blank 1: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Taye Diggs, acted
                          in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Taye Diggs,
                          is married to, Idina Menzel); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to,
                          Jobst of Moravia); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Enchanted (film)); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted
                          in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to, Jobst of Moravia); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, blank 2); (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2); (Idina
                          Menzel, is married to, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Kelly LeBrock, B. Napoleon, C. Taye Diggs blank 2: A. Halloweentown High, B. Magnolia
                          (film), C. Rent (film)
                          Answer: (Taye Diggs, acted in, Rent (film)); (Taye Diggs, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent
                          (film)). Therefore, blank 1: C, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Ocean’s Thirteen); (Andy Garcı́a, acted
                          in, The Untouchables (film)); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, The Pink Panther 2); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces);
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920
                          film)); (Virginia Madsen, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                          Where’s My Mummy?); (Mindy Cohn, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Grey DeLisle, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                          My Mummy?).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead, B. Smokin’ Aces, C. Beverly Hills Chihuahua blank
                          2: A. Ron Perlman, B. Casey Kasem, C. Jeremy Piven
                          Answer: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Jeremy Piven, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). Therefore, blank 1: B, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (David Thewlis, acted in, Harry Potter (film
                          series)); (John Cleese, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Richard Harris, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Maureen Lipman, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Nigel Havers, acted
                          in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes, B. Maggie Smith, C. Emma Watson
                          Answer: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986
                          TV serial)). Therefore, blank 1: A
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, The Railway Children (film));
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John
                          Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Jimmy Hanley, acted in,
                          29 Acacia Avenue); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona
                          O’Neill); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Charlie
                          Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (John Merivale, is married to, Jan Sterling); (Paul Douglas (actor), is married to,
                          Jan Sterling).
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Liam Neeson, B. Jimmy Hanley, C. Nancy Wilson (rock musician) blank 2: A. Courage of Lassie,
                          B. 29 Acacia Avenue, C. Listen to Me (film) blank 3: A. José Marı́a Aznar, B. John Merivale, C. Prince Harald of
                          Denmark
                          Answer: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Jimmy
                          Hanley, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John Merivale); (John Merivale, is married to, Jan
                          Sterling). Therefore, blank 1: B, blank 2: B, blank 3: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted
                          in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                          Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada
                          Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon
                          Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
                          Answer:


                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          LT M            Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Eliza Dushku, acted in, True Lies); (Tom Arnold (actor), acted in,
                          True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Stephen Collins, acted
                          in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Paul Sorvino, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Danny Glover, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton, B. Charlton Heston, C. Paul Sorvino
                          Answer: Considering (blank 1, acted in, True Lies), maybe blank 1: A, or blank 1: B; considering (blank 1, acted in,
                          True Lies), (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)), maybe blank 1: B. Therefore, blank 1: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Taye Diggs, acted
                          in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Taye Diggs,
                          is married to, Idina Menzel); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to,
                          Jobst of Moravia); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Enchanted (film)); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted
                          in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to, Jobst of Moravia); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, blank 2); (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2); (Idina
                          Menzel, is married to, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Kelly LeBrock, B. Napoleon, C. Taye Diggs blank 2: A. Halloweentown High, B. Magnolia
                          (film), C. Rent (film)
                          Answer: Considering (blank 1, acted in, blank 2), maybe blank 1: C and blank 2: C; considering (blank 1, acted in,
                          blank 2), (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel), maybe blank 1: C and blank 2: C; considering (blank 1, acted in,
                          blank 2), (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel), (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2), maybe blank 1: C and blank 2: C;
                          considering (blank 1, acted in, blank 2), (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel), (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2), (Idina
                          Menzel, is married to, blank 1), maybe blank 1: C and blank 2: C; Therefore, blank 1: C, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Ocean’s Thirteen); (Andy Garcı́a, acted
                          in, The Untouchables (film)); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, The Pink Panther 2); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces);
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920
                          film)); (Virginia Madsen, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                          Where’s My Mummy?); (Mindy Cohn, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Grey DeLisle, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                          My Mummy?).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead, B. Smokin’ Aces, C. Beverly Hills Chihuahua blank
                          2: A. Ron Perlman, B. Casey Kasem, C. Jeremy Piven Answer: Considering (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1), maybe
                          blank 1: A, or blank 1: B, or blank 1: C; considering (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1), (blank 2, acted in, blank 1),
                          maybe blank 1: B and blank 2: C; considering (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1), (blank 2, acted in, blank 1), (blank 2,
                          acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?), maybe blank 1: B and blank 2: C. Therefore, blank 1: B, blank 2: C
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (David Thewlis, acted in, Harry Potter (film
                          series)); (John Cleese, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Richard Harris, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Maureen Lipman, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Nigel Havers, acted
                          in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes, B. Maggie Smith, C. Emma Watson
                          Answer: Considering (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)), maybe blank 1: A, or blank 1: B, or blank 1: C;
                          considering (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)), (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)), maybe
                          blank 1: A. Therefore, blank 1: A
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, The Railway Children (film));
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, 29 Acacia Avenue); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John
                          Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Jimmy Hanley, acted in,
                          29 Acacia Avenue); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, Jimmy Hanley); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Oona
                          O’Neill); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, John Merivale); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Charlie
                          Chaplin, is married to, Oona O’Neill); (John Merivale, is married to, Jan Sterling); (Paul Douglas (actor), is married to,
                          Jan Sterling).
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2); (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1); (blank 1, acted in, blank 2);
                          (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3); (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Liam Neeson, B. Jimmy Hanley, C. Nancy Wilson (rock musician) blank 2: A. Courage of Lassie,
                          B. 29 Acacia Avenue, C. Listen to Me (film) blank 3: A. José Marı́a Aznar, B. John Merivale, C. Prince Harald of
                          Denmark
                          Answer: Considering (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2), maybe blank 2: B; considering (Dinah Sheridan, acted in,
                          blank 2), (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1), maybe blank 1: B and blank 2: B; considering (Dinah Sheridan,
                          acted in, blank 2), (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1), (blank 1, acted in, blank 2), maybe blank 1: B and blank 2:
                          B; considering (Dinah Sheridan, acted in, blank 2), (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1), (blank 1, acted in, blank
                          2), (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 3), maybe blank 1: B and blank 2: B and blank 3: B; considering (Dinah
                          Sheridan, acted in, blank 2), (Dinah Sheridan, is married to, blank 1), (blank 1, acted in, blank 2), (Dinah Sheridan, is
                          married to, blank 3), (blank 3, is married to, Jan Sterling), maybe blank 1: B and blank 2: B and blank 3: B. Therefore,
                          blank 1: B, blank 2: B, blank 3: B
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted
                          in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                          Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada
                          Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon
                          Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
                          Answer:


                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TAGED P ROMPTING (ours) Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                                        Knowledge: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Eliza Dushku, acted in, True Lies); (Tom Arnold (actor), acted in,
                                        True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Stephen Collins, acted
                                        in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Paul Sorvino, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Danny Glover, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                                        (Optional)
                                        Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)).
                                        Options: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes, B. Maggie Smith, C. Emma Watson
                                        Answer: Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 1, acted in, Harry
                                        Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). Stage 1 - solve: From (blank 1, acted
                                        in, Harry Potter (film series)), candidate for blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes. Stage 1 - status update: Current answer:
                                        blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes. Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry
                                        Potter (film series)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). Updated remaining constraints
                                        containing blanks: None. Stage 1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No.
                                        Go to next stage. Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes. Remaining constraints containing
                                        blanks: None. Stage 2 - solve: No more remaining constraints with blank. Final answer: blank 1: A
                                        Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                                        Knowledge: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (David Thewlis, acted in, Harry Potter (film
                                        series)); (John Cleese, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Richard Harris, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Joe
                                        Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Maureen Lipman, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Nigel Havers, acted
                                        in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). (Optional)
                                        Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                                        Options: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton, B. Charlton Heston, C. Paul Sorvino
                                        Answer: Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 1, acted in, True
                                        Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)). Stage 1 - solve: From (blank 1, acted in, True Lies), candidate for blank
                                        1: A. Bill Paxton. Stage 1 - status update: Current answer: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton. Filled remaining constraints
                                        with current answer: (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)). Updated remaining
                                        constraints containing blanks: None. Stage 1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining
                                        constraints? (Bill Paxton, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)) is incorrect. Redo stage 1. Stage 1 - status: Current answer:
                                        None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                                        Stage 1 - solve: From (blank 1, acted in, True Lies), candidate for blank 1: B. Charlton Heston. Stage 1 - status update:
                                        Current answer: blank 1: B. Charlton Heston. Filled remaining constraints with current answer: (Charlton Heston,
                                        acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)). Updated remaining constraints containing blanks:
                                        None. Stage 1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go to next stage.
                                        Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: B. Charlton Heston. Remaining constraints with blanks: None. Stage 2 -
                                        solve: No more remaining constraints with blank. Final answer: blank 1: B
                                        Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                                        Knowledge: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Ocean’s Thirteen); (Andy Garcı́a, acted
                                        in, The Untouchables (film)); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, The Pink Panther 2); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces);
                                        (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920
                                        film)); (Virginia Madsen, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                                        Where’s My Mummy?); (Mindy Cohn, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Grey DeLisle, acted in,
                                        Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). (Optional)
                                        Constraints: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                                        My Mummy?).
                                        Options: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead, B. Smokin’ Aces, C. Beverly Hills Chihuahua blank
                                        2: A. Ron Perlman, B. Casey Kasem, C. Jeremy Piven
                                        Answer: Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in,
                                        blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). Stage 1 - solve: From
                                        (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1), candidate for blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead. Stage 1 - status
                                        update: Current answer: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead. Filled remaining constraints with
                                        current answer: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead). Updated remaining constraints
                                        containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                                        Where’s My Mummy?). Stage 1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error occur in filled remaining constraints? No.
                                        Go to next stage. Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead. Remaining
                                        constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead); (blank 2, acted in,
                                        Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). Stage 2 - solve: From (blank 2, acted in, Things to Do in Denver When
                                        You’re Dead), candidate for blank 2: None of the given candidates satisfies the constraint. There is error in current
                                        answer. Go back to previous stage: stage 1. Stage 1 - status: Current answer: None. Remaining constraints containing
                                        blanks: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                                        My Mummy?). Stage 1 - solve: From (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1), candidate for blank 1: B. Smokin’ Aces.
                                        Stage 1 - status update: Current answer: blank 1: B. Smokin’ Aces. Filled remaining constraints with current answer:
                                        (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces). Updated remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Smokin’
                                        Aces); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). Stage 1 - verify filled constraints: Does any error
                                        occur in filled remaining constraints? No. Go to next stage. Stage 2 - status: Current answer: blank 1: B. Smokin’
                                        Aces. Remaining constraints containing blanks: (blank 2, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                                        Where’s My Mummy?). Stage 2 - solve: From (blank 2, acted in, Smokin’ Aces), candidate for blank 2: C. Jeremy
                                        Piven. Stage 2 - status update: Current answer: blank 1: B. Smokin’ Aces, blank 2: C. Jeremy Piven. Filled remaining
                                        constraints with current answer: (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                                        Where’s My Mummy?). Remaining constraints with blanks: None. Stage 2 - verify filled constraints: Does any error
                                        occur in filled constraints? No. Go to next stage. Stage 3 - status: Current answer: blank 1: B. Smokin’ Aces, blank
                                        2: C. Jeremy Piven. Remaining constraints with blanks: None. Stage 3 - solve: No more remaining constraints with
                                        blank. Final answer: blank 1: B, blank 2: C
                                        Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                                        Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted
                                        in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                                        Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada
                                        Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts,
                                        acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                                        film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe
                                        Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                                        Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                                        film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                                        Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon
                                        Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
                                        Answer:


                                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    V ERIFY-A LL (ours)   Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Eliza Dushku, acted in, True Lies); (Tom Arnold (actor), acted in,
                          True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Stephen Collins, acted
                          in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Paul Sorvino, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); (Danny Glover, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, True Lies); (blank 1, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton, B. Charlton Heston, C. Paul Sorvino
                          Answer: Candidate answer: blank 1: A. Bill Paxton; Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Bill Paxton, acted
                          in, True Lies); (Bill Paxton, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)); Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with
                          candidate answer? (Bill Paxton, acted in, Chiefs (miniseries)) is incorrect. Candidate answer: blank 1: B. Charlton
                          Heston; Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Charlton Heston, acted in, True Lies); (Charlton Heston, acted in,
                          Chiefs (miniseries)); Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank
                          1: A.
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Taye Diggs, acted
                          in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Bradley Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Taye Diggs,
                          is married to, Idina Menzel); (Charlie Chaplin, is married to, Mildred Harris); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to,
                          Jobst of Moravia); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Enchanted (film)); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent (film)); (Joe Roberts, acted
                          in, Neighbors (1920 film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages)f; (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); (Bradley
                          Cooper, is married to, Jennifer Esposito); (Mary, Queen of Hungary, is married to, Jobst of Moravia); (Charlie Chaplin,
                          is married to, Mildred Harris). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, blank 2); (blank 1, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, blank 2); (Idina
                          Menzel, is married to, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Kelly LeBrock, B. Napoleon, C. Taye Diggs blank 2: A. Halloweentown High, B. Magnolia
                          (film), C. Rent (film)
                          Answer: Candidate answer: blank 1: C. Taye Diggs, blank 2: B. Magnolia (film); Filled constraints with candidate
                          answer: (Taye Diggs, acted in, Magnolia (film)); (Taye Diggs, is married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in,
                          Magnolia (film)); (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with
                          candidate answer? (Taye Diggs, acted in, Magnolia (film)) is incorrect. Candidate answer: blank 1: C. Taye Diggs,
                          blank 2: C. Rent (film); Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Taye Diggs, acted in, Rent (film)); (Taye Diggs, is
                          married to, Idina Menzel); (Idina Menzel, acted in, Rent (film)); (Idina Menzel, is married to, Taye Diggs); Verification:
                          Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank 1: C, blank 2: C.
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Ocean’s Thirteen); (Andy Garcı́a, acted
                          in, The Untouchables (film)); (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, The Pink Panther 2); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces);
                          (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Neighbors (1920
                          film)); (Virginia Madsen, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in
                          Where’s My Mummy?); (Mindy Cohn, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); (Grey DeLisle, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Scooby-Doo! in Where’s
                          My Mummy?).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Things to Do in Denver When You’re Dead, B. Smokin’ Aces, C. Beverly Hills Chihuahua blank
                          2: A. Ron Perlman, B. Casey Kasem, C. Jeremy Piven
                          Answer: Candidate answer: blank 1: B. Smokin’ Aces, blank 2: C. Jeremy Piven; Filled constraints with candidate
                          answer: (Andy Garcı́a, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Jeremy Piven, acted in, Smokin’ Aces); (Jeremy Piven, acted in,
                          Scooby-Doo! in Where’s My Mummy?); Verification: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer?
                          No. Therefore, blank 1: B, blank 2: C.
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (David Thewlis, acted in, Harry Potter (film
                          series)); (John Cleese, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Richard Harris, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Three Ages); (Maureen Lipman, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Nigel Havers, acted
                          in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (blank 1, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (blank 1, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)).
                          Options: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes, B. Maggie Smith, C. Emma Watson
                          Answer: Candidate answer: blank 1: A. Miriam Margolyes; Filled constraints with candidate answer: (Miriam Mar-
                          golyes, acted in, Harry Potter (film series)); (Miriam Margolyes, acted in, A Little Princess (1986 TV serial)); Verifica-
                          tion: Does error occur in filled constraints with candidate answer? No. Therefore, blank 1: A
                          Instruction: Pick the correct answer for each blank that satisfies all the given constraints.
                          Knowledge: (Paz Vega, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (Paz Vega, acted
                          in, The Six Wives of Henry Lefay); (Paz Vega, acted in, The Spirit (film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, A Woman of
                          Paris); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, The Champion (1915 film)); (Charlie Chaplin, directed, Limelight (1952 film)); (Jada
                          Pinkett Smith, directed, The Human Contract); (Johnathon Schaech, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Joe Roberts,
                          acted in, Our Hospitality); (Brittany Snow, acted in, Prom Night (2008 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (Joe Roberts, acted in, The Haunted House (1921 film)); (Idris Elba, acted in, The Human Contract); (Joe
                          Roberts, acted in, Our Hospitality); (William Hopper, acted in, The Bad Seed (1956 film)). (Optional)
                          Constraints: (Paz Vega, acted in, blank 1); (Jada Pinkett Smith, directed, blank 1); (blank 2, acted in, Prom Night (2008
                          film)); (blank 2, acted in, blank 1).
                          Options: blank 1: A. The Human Contract, B. The Spirit (film), C. The Six Wives of Henry Lefay blank 2: A. Johnathon
                          Schaech, B. Idris Elba, C. Brittany Snow
                          Answer:


                                                             23
