Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U N I P R E D I C T : L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS ARE U NI -
VERSAL TABULAR C LASSIFIERS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Tabular data prediction is a fundamental machine learning task for many appli-
         cations. Existing methods predominantly employ discriminative modeling and
         operate under the assumption of a fixed target column, necessitating re-training
         for every new predictive task. Inspired by the generative power of large language
         models (LLMs), this paper exploits the idea of building universal tabular data pre-
         dictors based on generative modeling, namely UniPredict. Here, we demon-
         strate the scalability of an LLM to extensive tabular datasets, enabling it to com-
         prehend diverse tabular inputs and predict target variables following the provided
         instructions. Specifically, we train a single LLM on an aggregation of 169 tabular
         datasets with diverse targets and compare its performance against baselines that
         are trained on each dataset separately. We observe this versatile UniPredict
         model demonstrates an advantage over other models, ranging from 5.4% to 13.4%,
         when compared with the best tree-boosting baseline and the best neural network
         baseline, respectively. We further test UniPredict in few-shot learning set-
         tings on another 62 tabular datasets. Our method achieves strong performance
         in quickly adapting to new tasks. In low-resource few-shot setup, we observed a
         100%+ performance advantage compared with XGBoost, and significant margin
         over all baselines. We envision that UniPredict sheds light on developing a
         universal tabular data prediction system that learns from data at scale and serves a
         wide range of prediction tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Tabular data is organized in a tabular or spreadsheet format within a relational database. Each row
within the table corresponds to a specific data sample, and the columns encompass a range of feature
variables with diverse types, such as categorical, numerical, binary, and textual features. Tabular data
prediction is fundamental to many real-world machine-learning applications such as click-through
rate prediction (Yang & Zhai, 2022) and medical outcome prediction (Wang & Sun, 2022).
Nonetheless, most previous methods fall short by assuming a fixed target. This entails selecting a
specific column, such as patient mortality in breast cancer cases, with the other columns as the input
features. Therefore, a model trained to predict this particular target becomes specialized and cannot
be employed for predicting any other target, such as cancer relapse. To predict a different target, one
must create a new dataset corresponding to the desired target and retrain the model. This practice
renders substantial work involved in developing and hosting dataset-specific tabular data predictors.
Unlike most traditional algorithms that make discriminative modeling for tabular prediction, we in-
tend to harness LLMs for tabular prediction through generative modeling. Figure 1 demonstrates the
difference between the previous practices and our modeling paradigm. This paradigm provides sub-
stantial flexibility in (1) processing natural language descriptions of tabular data and (2) generating
predictions for specified target labels based on input instructions. While previous works have tried
to fine-tune LLMs for generating target labels of tabular data (Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al.,
2023), they have their limitations, mainly in that they still require training specific predictors for
each dataset and target variable. Moreover, these generative prediction methods do not provide the
associated confidence of their predictions as traditional tabular prediction models do. By contrast,
the goal of this work is to build universal tabular predictors based on generative LLM, which accept
arbitrary inputs and predict for arbitrary targets, following the input instructions.


                                                   1
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Traditional
  Traditional TPTP
     Traditional TPvs.
                 vs. vs.In-domain
                     In-domain  TPTP
                          In-domain TPvs.
                                    vs.   Universal
                                        Universal
                                        vs.       TPTP
                                            Universal TP
 Col ColyCol
         1   y1             y1                             Col ColyCol
                                                                   1          y1   y1                            Col ColCol
                                                                                                                        y1             y1 y1
                         model1 model1
                                    model1
 D1 D1 D1                                                   D1 D1 D1                                             D1 D1D1


                                                       Domain1


                                                                                                                Domain1
                                                                 Domain1


                                                                                                                Domain1
                                             Domain1


                                                                                                      Domain1
Dataset Dataset
        1       1
             Dataset 1                                  Dataset 1Dataset 1
                                                                      Dataset 1    model1 model1
                                                                                             model1             Dataset 1Dataset 1 1
                                                                                                                             Dataset

 Col Col yCol
           2  y2 y2                                        Col Col Col
                                                                   y1  y1 y1                                     Col ColCol
                                                                                                                         y2            y2 y2
                                    model2
                         model2 model2
 D2 D2 D2                                                  D2 D2 D2                                              D2 D2D2
             Dataset 2                                                Dataset 2                                                                     model
                                                                                                                                           model model
Dataset Dataset
        2       2                                       Dataset 2Dataset 2                                                   Dataset
                                                                                                                Dataset 2Dataset 2 2

Col Coly3Col y3 y3                                     Col Coly2Col y2 y2                                       Col ColyCol
                                                                                                                        3   y3 y3
                                    model3
                         model3 model3
D3 D3 D3                                                D3 D3 D3                                                D3 D3D3


                                                                                                                                                                                  Few-shot
                                                                                                                                                                       Few-shot
                                                                                                                                                            Few-shot
             Dataset
Dataset Dataset
        3       3    3                                                Dataset
                                                        Dataset 3Dataset 3    3                                              Dataset
                                                                                                                Dataset 3Dataset 3 3

 Col ColyCol y4 y4                                         Col ColyCol y2 y2                                     Col ColCol
                                                                                                                        y4 y4 y4


                                                                                                                Domain2
                                                                 Domain2


                                                                                                                Domain2
                                                                                                      Domain2
                                                       Domain2
                                             Domain2
         4                                                          2
                                    model4
                         model4 model4                                                       model2                                                              Unseen   datasets
                                                                                   model2 model2                                                             Unseen
                                                                                                                                                      Unseen datasets datasets
 D4 D4 D4                                                   D4 D4 D4                                             D4 D4D4                               y4 Col Col
                                                                                                                                                  Col Col           y5 Coly5 y5
                                                                                                                                                              y4 y4 Col
             Dataset
Dataset Dataset
        4       4    4                                                Dataset
                                                        Dataset 4Dataset 4    4                                              Dataset
                                                                                                                Dataset 4Dataset 4 4

Col Coly5 Col y5 y5                                    Col Coly2Col y2 y2                                            y5Col y5 y5
                                                                                                                Col Col
                                    model5
                         model5 model5                                                                                                                 Col ColCol y6                         y6 y6
D5 D5 D5                                                  D5 D5 D5                                               D5 D5D5
             Dataset
Dataset Dataset
        5       5    5                                                Dataset
                                                        Dataset 5Dataset 5    5                                              Dataset
                                                                                                                Dataset 5Dataset 5 5


         (a) Traditional tabular models                      (b) In-domain tabular models                       (c) Universal tabular models

   Figure 1: Visualization for three tabular modeling paradigms. Left: In Traditional Tabu-
   lar Modeling tasks (Figure 1a), distinct models are trained individually on each dataset, making
   them incapable of adaptation to new datasets with differing features and targets. Middle: In the
   In-Domain Tabular Modeling tasks (Figure 1b), where flexibility is allowed for features, the tar-
   gets remain the same across datasets. Right: the proposed Universal Tabular Modeling paradigm
   (Figure 1c), which accommodates arbitrary inputs and predicting for arbitrary targets. This paradigm
   does not impose any restrictions on the domains of the datasets used. In Universal Tabular Mod-
   eling, the datasets can originate from entirely different domains.


   Specifically, this work explores the ways to unlock the potential of LLMs as universal tabular data
   predictors, namely UniPredict, which hinges on the following insights:

   • Data Scale: Scaling to 160+ diverse tabular datasets to fuel the training of a powerful LLM that
     performs prediction for diverse inputs and targets.
   • Prompt Engineering: The prompts that integrate the metadata (e.g., the dataset description and
     schema of columns), the input tabular sample, and the instruction for prediction generation.
   • Instruction Tuning: Instruction tuning that encourages LLM to not only generate the label but
     also provide confidence estimates for its predictions.

   We elaborate on our framework in Section 2, which is followed by the experiment results in Sec-
   tion 3. In detail, we train a single UniPredict model on the aggregated training sets from 169
   tabular datasets and test it on the corresponding test sets. For comparison, we train one unique
   baseline model for each tabular dataset and report their performances. We observe that the univer-
   sal tabular predictor UniPredict outperforms the best neural network baselines by 13.4% and the
   best boosting algorithms by 5.4%, across the test sets. Additionally, we observed that UniPredict
   exhibits an advantage in the low-resource regime. Even as the sample size increases, it consistently
   maintains among the top models. We close with the discussion of related papers in Section 4 and
   the conclusion in Section 5.

   2          M ETHOD AND I MPLEMENTATION
   2.1           P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

   Before going into details of the proposed method, we define two problems that we aim to resolve:

   Universal Tabular Modeling Given a dataset Dn in any domain, we have its components
   Dn = {Mn , Sn ; Tn } that include the metadata Mn , samples Sn , and targets Tn . Different from
   traditional tabular models fn : Sn → Tn (shown in Figure 1a) that gives a 1-to-1 dataset-model
   relationship, or in-domain tabular models ftask : Sn → Ttask (shown in Figure 1b), we require a
   universal model funiv : S → T such that funiv (Sn ; Mn ) = Tn . This approach enables us to create


                                                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      Framework
                                                                                               Step 1: Prompt Setup
         Metadata
                                                                 Add context/schema information

                                                                                                                   The dataset is about {metadata 1}, each
                                                                                                                   column means {metadata 2}, ...
                                                     {column 1} is {value 1};                                      The features are: {column 1} is {value 1},          Merge prompts from
                                                     {column 2} is {value 2},                                      {column 2} is {value 2},                            different datasets
               +                  Serialization                                        Add instruction
                                                              …,                                                   …, {column n} is {value n},                                                    Prompts
         Col         y1                              {column n} is {value n}                                       …
          Col             y                                                                                        Predict the probability of each class by
                              y
         D Col
                          2
          1                   3                                                                                    {class 1} for {description 1}, {class 2} for
               2                                                                                                   {description 2}, …                                                             Prompt Base

          Datasets                                        Serialized Input                                                              Prompt

                                                         Step 2: Target Augmentation                                                                                         Step 3: Learning
                                                                                                                                                                                         Backbone

      Targets                           One-hot Targets                                Target withs confidence                              Target Base                            +                 +
                                                                                                                                                                       Prompts                            Targets

      y1                                       y1                                                   y1
        y1                                       y1                                                   y1
         y1                                         y1                                                     y1
                   One-hot encoding
                                          [0, 1, 0, 0]         Probability redistribution                              Merge datasets
      1                                                                                     [0.1, 0.7, 0.1, 0.1]
                                                                                                                                                                                              Training
                                          [0, 0, 0, 1]                                      [0.2, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5]                              Targets
      3                                                                                     [0.0, 0.1, 0.9, 0.0]
                                          [0, 0, 1, 0]
      2
                                                                                                                                                                                            Col     y4    Col       y5


                                                                                                helper
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Col           y6


                                                             External Predictor                                                                                   Few-shot/fine-tuning            Unseen datasets


Figure 2: The UniPredict framework. It consists of three steps: 1) Prompt Setup sets up the
prompts by metadata, sample serialization, and instructions; 2) Target Augmentation transforms
target values into categories with confidence estimates; and 3) Learning fine-tunes the backbone
model by prompts and targets yielded from the previous procedures.


a more versatile prediction setting. The model parameters are no longer dependent on any particular
dataset or task domain. Instead, a single set of parameters, with the aid of metadata, can be used for
all datasets from any domain (shown in Figure 1c).

Few-shot Learning We expect our model f that is trained on datasets {D1 , D2 , · · · Dn } to be
also available to predict for a new target Tn+1 , given (Sn+1 , Mn+1 ) ∈ Dn+1 . We can fine-tune f
with the new dataset Dn+1 in a low-resource regime to achieve few-shot learning.
As illustrated in Figure 2, The UniPredict framework is structured around three primary steps:
First, in Prompt Setup §2.2, prompts are established through metadata, sample serialization, and in-
structions. Second, Target Augmentation §2.3 involves transforming target values into categorized
forms accompanied by confidence estimates. Last, the Learning §2.4 step fine-tunes the backbone
model utilizing the prompts and targets derived from the preceding procedures.

2.2      P ROMPT E NGINEERING

Tabular data have to be transformed into natural language inputs to be comprehended by LLMs.
It is highlighted that the quality of this natural language input has a major impact on the LLM’s
performance (Zhao et al., 2021). We hereby present how we formulate the input prompt for our
UniPredict framework. Technically, based on dataset D = {M, S; T} we define the function
prompt(M̂, Ŝ, I) that takes pre-processed metadata M̂ and tabular sample Ŝ, and the instruction I
as input and perform serialization to produce the natural language input for LLMs:
Metadata M̂ represents a serialized description of the context and schema definition of the dataset.
Tabular Sample Ŝ that represents serialized contents of the raw sample.
Instruction I that contains the guidance that prompts LLMs to make the final prediction about the
target, e.g., the probability prediction for each target class.
We describe the detailed setup of these components in the following sections. We also offer the
example of used prompts in Appendix B.1.


                                                                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Metadata Re-formatting As UniPredict accommodates a wide range of tabular datasets that
share distinct schema, the dataset metadata plays a vital role in facilitating the language modeling
on these diverse tabular data. For instance, many table columns are abbreviations or coded with
a private dictionary, thus hurdling LLMs in comprehending the tabular inputs. In practice, the
metadata is usually provided in unstructured texts with the raw dataset. Here, we propose to design
a function reformat(M) that consolidates arbitrary input M to (1) a description of the target to
predict and (2) the semantic descriptions of features. We employ GPT-3.51 to automate the metadata
reformatting process. We offer the example metadata reformatting process in Appendix B.2.

Feature Serialization Given the raw metadata M and the samples S, we define the function
serialize(c, v) to produce a str output given the column names c and feature values v, where
c ∈ reformat(M) and v ∈ S. Each value is paired with the corresponding column in the format
of “{column} is {value}, {column} is {value}, ...”. Besides, we round numeric values to a fixed pre-
cision before tokenization, and more data-dependent binning methods, such as adaptive histogram
binning, may be considered. Some examples of the serialization can be found in Appendix B.3.

2.3     I NSTRUCTION F ORMULATION & TARGET AUGMENTATION

When encountering tabular data prediction with LLM, the most natural idea is to put the tabular
sample as the input and prompt LLM to generate the target label (Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann
et al., 2023). For instance, prompting LLM with the input “Is the person’s annual income ≥ 50?”
to yield the output “yes” or “no” as the binary prediction. However, it has two main drawbacks:

• Reliability Unlike traditional ML algorithms that produce the probability prediction for each
  class, this method merely produces the output label. Due to the uncertainty in text generation, the
  label prediction from LLM may be unreliable without a numerical estimation of its confidence.
• Robustness We empirically identified this modeling paradigm may fail to converge when encoun-
  tering challenging tabular prediction tasks or noisy inputs. In these scenarios, the LLM may either
  refuse to generate predictions or tend to continue the input texts.

To overcome these challenges, we propose instructing models to predict each target class probability,
e.g., “yes: 0.8; no: 0.2”. This is achieved by adding another target augmentation step.

Target Augmentation We transform the target label into a set of probabilities for each class via
a function called “augment”. Formally, for target T in an arbitrary dataset D, we define a function
augment(T) = {C, P}, where C are new categories of targets with semantic meaning and P are
the assigned probabilities to each category. We extend the target into categorical one-hot encoding
and then use an external predictor to create the calibrated probability distributions. This replaces the
0/1 one-hot encoding while maintaining the final prediction outcome. For datasets with discrete tar-
get values (e.g., classification), the target classes are processed by one-hot encoding. For continuous
numerical targets (e.g., regression), the categories are defined by their quantiles.
We use an isotopic calibrated XGBoost classifier (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) with
n estimators=100 as the external predictor. We train one predictor for each dataset
and then leverage it to produce the probability for each class for all samples. It is noted that this
predictor serves as a probability estimator for sample labels without the loss of information or data
leakage. Formally, given the target classes t ∈ {0, ..., |C|} and target probabilities p ∈ P, we
define a function serialize target(t, p) that serializes target classes and probabilities
into a sequence formatted as “class {t1 } : {p1 }, class {t2 } : {p2 }, . . . ”. This sequence
is used as the referenced output to fine-tune the LLM. Besides the merit of entailing confidence
predictions, target augmentation offers more sufficient supervision for LLMs, which we find vital
for its robustness in training and inference.

Instruction Formulation The instruction I describes the objective that prompts LLM to com-
prehend the input tabular sample and predict for the augmented target augment(T). Given
the target classes t ∈ [0, |C|] and target semantic explanation e ∈ C, we define a function
   1
       OpenAI API: gpt-3.5-turbo


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


serialize class(t, e) that converts the classes t, and their corresponding semantic expla-
nation e, into a natural language sequence “class {t} means {e}, . . . ”. We present the example
prompts in Appendix B.4.

2.4     L EARNING

LLM for Tabular Prediction During fine-tuning, our objective is to minimize the differ-
ence between the output sequence generated by the adapted LLM function (represented by
LLM(prompt(M̂, Ŝ, I))) and the reference output sequence generated from target augmentation (rep-
resented by serialize target(augment(T))). However, during testing, we evaluate the prediction cor-
rectness instead of the similarity between the output and reference sequences. To do this, we map
the natural language sequence generated by the LLM function to the actual class that the model is
predicting. We then check the correctness of the prediction by comparing it with the ground truth
label. We use a regex expression matching technique for the mapping procedure. We have included
examples for such comparisons in Appendix B.5.

Learning In our model learning process, we generate prompts using samples and metadata from
different datasets and update the model based on instruction fine-tuning. Subsequently, we assess
the model’s actual performance by comparing its class predictions (after output mapping) to the
original target values. This evaluation is conducted on both the datasets used during training and
previously unseen datasets. We adapt GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) as our backbone, and we used
the huggingface2 package for training. See Appendix C.3 for the detail of parameter choice.

2.5     O UR I MPLEMENTATION OF U NI P REDICT

Dataset Setup We collect the datasets from Kaggle3 . We pre-select the datasets from the
classification category and drop the datasets that do not provide organized and recognizable
metadata. We leverage the Kaggle API 4 to download both the raw data and their descriptions
with an argument --file-size csv to restrict the dataset format. In this way, we simplify the
follow-up dataset reading procedures. To ensure a comprehensive evaluation, we do not preselect
datasets by their domains, categories, or purposes.
We end with the training corpus built from 169 datasets. For each selected dataset, we perform a
max-size cutoff at 7500 samples to prevent any datasets with too many samples from dominating
the corpus. The number of training samples in the entire corpus is 366,786. Dataset statistics can be
found in Appendix C.2.

Implementations The target augmentation step is done by the XGBoost classifiers. However, as
mentioned in Section 2.3, we accept other classifiers to be adapted as long as they produce proper
probability values. Furthermore, measuring the information entailed by different classifiers in this
problem is also a potential topic to explore.
Besides the normal UniPredict framework, we instantiate a variant that only takes feature names
from the metadata, named as UniPredict-light; in contrast, we named our normal version
UniPredict-heavy. UniPredict-light is expected to take less time for fine-tuning and
demonstrate an equal or better performance when the dataset is well-maintained. Since no assump-
tions should be made to unknown datasets, UniPredict-heavy is the most reliable baseline.
The difference in implementation of the two variants can be found in Appendix B.1.


3       E XPERIMENT

In this section, we conducted extensive experiments with UniPredict and a suite of cutting-edge
tabular prediction baselines, with a focus on answering the following research questions:
    2
      https://huggingface.co/
    3
      https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
    4
      https://github.com/Kaggle/kaggle-api


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1.0                                                                        7

                                                                            6
 0.8
                                                                            5
 0.6
                                                                            4
 0.4
                                                                            3

 0.2                                                                        2

                                                                            1
 0.0
                                                                                            y -light bLLM      ost   MLP                r      t
              eavy    light LLM XGBoost   MLP                r
                                                        forme TabNe
                                                                    t                 -heav      t Ta     XGBo                   nsforme TabNe
        dict-h redict- Tab                      FT-Tra
                                                      ns                         edict UniPredic                           FT-Tra
  UniPre UniP                                                               UniPr

                   (a) Model Accuracy                                                            (b) Model Rank

Figure 3: The average accuracy and rank of UniPredict-heavy, UniPredict-light,
TabLLM (Hegselmann et al., 2023) XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), MLP, TabNet (Arik &
Pfister, 2021) and FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021) on 169 datasets. Each dot indicates
a trial on one dataset. UniPredict-heavy demonstrates a remarkable performance advantage
over the best neural network model (FT-Transformer) with a relative improvement of 13.4%. It
also surpasses the best-performing tree-boosting algorithms by a margin of 5.4%. Our framework’s
advantage is further confirmed by Figure 3b, the model ranking (the less the better)

• Universal Tabular Modeling (Section 3.2) Can a single UniPredict model succeed in per-
  forming a universal modeling of extensive tabular datasets?
• Few-shot learning (Section 3.3) Compared with the baselines, how well does a pre-trained
  UniPredict model adapt to new tasks?
• Analysis #1 (Section 3.4) Under what circumstances is UniPredict less competitive to others?
• Analysis #2 (Section 3.5) What are the key factors that make UniPredict a successful candi-
  date for universal tabular prediction?

3.1    BASELINE M ODELS

We included MLP as the simplest neural baseline. Drawing inspiration from the effectiveness of tree-
boosting algorithms on tabular tasks, we assessed the performance of XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin,
2016), a preeminent model in this domain. To explore the effectiveness of attention-based models
in our tasks, we also included TabNet (Arik & Pfister, 2021) and FT-Transformer (Gorishniy
et al., 2021) to our experimental evaluation. Additionally, we incorporated TabLLM (Hegselmann
et al., 2023) into our analysis, as it represents another model designed for tabular data with a focus
on Large Language Models. The configurations and specifics of these baseline models are provided
in Appendix C.1. Given the dataset-specific and non-transferable nature of the baseline models, we
established isolated instances for each dataset included in our study. In contrast, for UniPredict,
which aims at Universal Tabular Prediction, we instantiated a single model instance capable of
handling all the datasets used in our experimentation.

3.2    R ESULTS ON U NIVERSAL TABULAR M ODELING

We assessed model accuracy on the test set of all 169 datasets and summarized the results in Figure 3.
It is noted that due to the limitation of baseline models in terms of transferability onto new datasets,
a distinct model was trained for each dataset, as discussed in Section 3.1. Nonetheless, even without
additional dataset-specific fine-tuning, both variants of UniPredict consistently outperform all
baseline models in terms of accuracy.
Specifically, UniPredict-heavy achieves a notable increase in absolute accuracy of 2.2% when
compared to XGBoost, which stands as the top-performing model among the baseline models.
Meanwhile, UniPredict-light, following in the footsteps of its full-size counterpart, continues
to exhibit better performance relative to the other models. The ranking metric confirms their dom-


                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   0.8                                                                                         7
                               UniPred-heavy                                                                                                                      UniPred-heavy
                               UniPred-light                                                                                                                      UniPred-light
                   0.7         TabLLM                                                                          6                                                  TabLLM
                               XGBoost                                                                                                                            XGBoost
                               MLP                                                                                                                                MLP
                   0.6                                                                                         5                                                  FT-Trans
                               FT-Trans


                                                                                            Average Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                  TabNet
Average Accuracy

                               TabNet
                   0.5
                                                                                                               4
                   0.4
                                                                                                               3
                   0.3
                                                                                                               2
                   0.2

                   0.1                                                                                         1
                         0.1     0.2    0.3    0.4     0.5      0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9                              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5      0.6   0.7      0.8    0.9
                                               Train Set Proportion                                                                  Train Set Proportion

                   (a) Model Accuracy (The higher the better)                                                      (b) Model Rank (The lower the better)

Figure 4: The average accuracy and rank of UniPredict-heavy, UniPredict-light,
TabLLM XGBoost, MLP, TabNet and FT-Transformer on 62 datasets. We vary the train-
ing data size, ranging from the lowest (10%) to the highest (90%) of the full dataset. The pre-trained
UniPredict series exhibit remarkable data efficiency in generalizing to new tasks.

inance over the baselines. In this metric, both UniPredict-heavy and UniPredict-light
consistently occupy top positions. As a candidate of tree-boosting method, although XGBoost
shares a similar median ranking with the best-performing models, it displays a higher 25% quartile
in Figure 3b, indicating a sparser distribution of rankings. The other baselines fail to deliver com-
parable performance. TabLLM, designed as an LLM-driven model for individual datasets, does not
yield results that are on par with other lighter methods. Despite its moderate ranking in terms of
accuracy, it falls to the lower ranks when considering median ranking. Further details on dataset-
specific results regarding accuracy and rank are provided in Appendix D.1.

3.3                      R ESULTS ON F EW- SHOT L EARNING

We experimented UniPredict’s few-shot learning accuracy, compared with baseline models that
are trained individually on each of the 62 datasets, where each dataset contains less than 100 samples.
This setup is to evaluate models on low-resource datasets because (1) collecting high-quality samples
is of high cost in practice, and (2) models that generalize well in large datasets do not always perform
as well as in small datasets. For each dataset, we divided it into a train set and a test set, which served
for training each model and fine-tuning the pre-trained UniPredict and TabLLM. To thoroughly
assess our model’s capacity for generalization, we devised multiple experimental configurations
involving the partitioning of the training dataset into different proportions, spanning from 10% to
90% of the entire dataset. For each of these settings, we trained separate baseline models on the
respective datasets.
Figure 4 shows the accuracy and ranking of all models with varying training data sizes. The
UniPredict series demonstrates a significant advantage in the low-resource regime, particularly
when the training sets contain less than 50% of the samples. As the sample size increases, they
consistently remain among the top-performing models. The same trend is reflected in the result
of model rankings as illustrated in Figure 4b. In contrast, XGBoost shines as the best model in
resource-rich training setups, achieving an average accuracy of 0.62 when the training set size is
set to 90% of the entire dataset. However, it struggles in scenarios with small training sets. In the
extreme low-resource case, where the training set proportion is 10%, it exhibits the poorest perfor-
mance among all models, with an over 118% disadvantage to UniPred-heavy, and ranks at the
bottom. On the other hand, FT-Transformer, an attention-based model, performs comparably to
UniPredict-heavy but falls short of surpassing either UniPredict-light or XGBoost in
any of the setups. Its rank, however, jumped to the second in the last experiment setup on Figure 4b.
MLP delivers a moderate performance, while TabNet fails to converge effectively in these experi-
mental setups. Similarly, TabLLM encounters problems in this context. Throughout all conditions,
both TabLLM and TabNet consistently rank at the bottom and do not demonstrate improvement as
the training set size scales up. Additional information is provided in Appendix D.2 for more detailed
performance analysis of all models.


                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       6                                8
12             12                                                                  7
                                       5          5                     7
10                                                                      6
                                       4                                5
 8
                                       3    3               3           4
 6
      5                                                                 3
                                       2
 4
                       3     3                                          2    2                   2
                                       1                          1
 2                                                                      1
 0                                     0                                0                 0
      COL      FV     META   OTH           COL    FV       META   OTH       COL    FV    META    OTH

            (a) Overview                   (b) UniPredict-heavy             (c) UniPredict-light

Figure 5: an overview of the causes for which either model (Figure 5a), UniPredict-heavy
(Figure 5b), or UniPredict-light (Figure 5c) experienced poor performance. As described in
Section 3.4, COL, FV, META and OTH stand for Excessive Column Number, Bad Feature Values,
Bad Metadata and Other reasons, respectively. Among the 169 datasets examined, 8 datasets are in-
cluded in UniPredict-heavy’s investigation, with 12 causes identified. UniPredict-light
fails on 10 datasets, with 11 causes identified.

3.4       ACHILLES ’ H EEL : U N I P R E D I C T ’ S FAILURE ANALYSIS

In this section, we aim to explore situations where our UniPredict framework does not perform
well, which provides insight for deploying UniPredict and further enhancement. We have iden-
tified these situations by collecting datasets from the supervised setup (as used in Section 3.2) and
identifying the datasets in which either UniPredict-heavy or UniPredict-light ranks in
the bottom 2 (6th or 7th) among all compared methods. For each of these datasets, we have col-
lected potential causes that may lead to the poor performance of our method. We conclude that most
failures can be attributed to one or more of the following causes:

• COL: Too many COLumns in the dataset. This may result in serialized input strings that exceed
  the context limit of the language model. It hence undermines model performance because the
  exceeding parts are pruned.
• FV: Poorly represented Feature Values that are challenging for the model to process and compre-
  hend. Examples include an excessive number of numerical values or meaningless characters.
• META: Inadequate or ambiguous METAData, such as vague or meaningless column names and
  metadata, can confuse the model when comprehending the inputs.
• OTH: OTHer factors not explicitly covered above that may deteriorate model performance.

We include examples of each causes in Appendix D.3. As illustrated in Figure 5, bad feature val-
ues are the primary cause behind approximately half of the failures observed in our framework.
Additionally, UniPredict-heavy is affected by confusing metadata descriptions and oversized
columns. Interestingly, UniPredict-light, which is configured with minimal metadata usage
(as discussed in Section 2.5), seems poised to minimize the influence of poor metadata. However, it
paradoxically appears to struggle more with uninterpretable feature values, leading it to encounter
more instances of poor performance compared to the default setup, UniPredict-heavy.
In a nutshell, we conclude with three hints in developing UniPredict in practice: (1) offering
informative and accurate metadata for the input tabular dataset; (2) improving the context window
limit of the LLM predictor to process more complicated inputs; and (3) cleaning up bad feature
values before the training.

3.5       A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we conduct an ablation study to examine whether the re-formatting and augmenting
of targets are the critical factors contributing to the success of UniPredict. The results are pre-
sented in Table 1. In the ablation study, the language models were fine-tuned using labels that only
contained the one-hot encoding of the target class without the confidence information distributed into
classes. The results consistently demonstrate that regardless of the model variant (whether light
or heavy), the model with target augmentation performs noticeably better than the model without
augmentation. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the ablation of UniPredict-light results in a


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       UniP-h     Abl-h    UniP-l    Abl-l
          Universal Tabular Modeling (avg.)             0.721     0.686    0.740     0.575
          Universal Tabular Modeling (med.)             0.810     0.746    0.790     0.590
          Few-Shot Learning: Low-data (avg.)            0.525     0.483    0.513     0.349
          Few-Shot Learning: Low-data (med.)            0.521     0.474    0.500     0.289
          Few-Shot Learning: High-data (avg.)           0.543     0.545    0.590     0.321
          Few-Shot Learning: High-data (med.)           0.563     0.571    0.645     0.333

Table 1: The result of ablation among UniPredict-heavy (UniP-h), UniPredict-heavy
without target augmentation (Abl-h), UniPredict-light (UniP-l), UniPredict-light
without target augmentation (Abl-l). Tasks examined are Univeral Tabular Modeling that uses
the same set up as Section 3.2, and Few-shot Learning as Section 3.3. The latter task involves both
a low-data setup (Train Set Proportion = 0.3) and a high-data setup (Train Set Proportion = 0.8),
which correspond to the conditions shown in Figure 4. For each task and setup, we provide both the
average and median performance metrics across all datasets.


more significant decrease in performance compared to UniPredict-heavy. This finding aligns
with the conjecture made in Section 2.5 that the heavy variant is more robust and adaptable across
different implementations and scenarios.

4   R ELATED W ORK

Tabular Prediction. Tree-based models have shown outstanding performance on tabular prediction
tasks (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017). Inspired by the rise of deep learning for tabular
prediction (Arik & Pfister, 2021), the recent research has emphasized three ways of improvement:
(1) taking advantage of pre-training or transfer learning on broad tabular data (Wang & Sun, 2022;
Zhu et al., 2023); (2) adapting pre-trained large language models to generate the target label column
as the prediction (Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023); and (3) mining the graph structure
considering an overview of the tabular dataset (Du et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). In addition,
Wang et al. (2023) unify tabular data from various sources into a natural language format, estab-
lishing a tabular prediction pipeline capable of handling diverse inputs. However, most of these
algorithms perform discriminative modeling for tabular prediction and hence are restricted to mak-
ing the prediction for a fixed target. UniPredict, by contrast, depends on generative modeling
for the prediction of any user-specified target.
Large Language Model. LLMs have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in logical thinking and
solving language tasks under instructions (Bubeck et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023a). It has moti-
vated researchers to adopt LLMs for a series of tabular data tasks, including tabular data generation
(Borisov et al., 2022) and table-to-text generation (Zhao et al., 2023b). Meanwhile, LLMs are fine-
tuned for tabular prediction as generation task (Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023). While
these studies have showcased LLM is able to generate target labels given textualized tabular data,
there remains an unexplored opportunity: constructing a versatile tabular predictor capable of han-
dling a wide array of tabular datasets. In addition, previous LLM-based tabular predictors are usually
trained to generate the target label while not offering the corresponding prediction probabilities. We
argue it is crucial to inspect the prediction probabilities made by LLMs, which is necessary when
deploying them in production.

5   C ONCLUSION

We present UniPredict that can learn from an aggregation of widespread tabular datasets called
universal tabular prediction. We train a single UniPredict model on 169 datasets with more
than 300,000 samples and test it on the other 62 datasets for few-shot learning. Empirically,
UniPredict yields the best prediction accuracy of 0.81 (2.2% absolute, 5.4% relative improve-
ment compared to XGBoost). On unseen datasets, after dataset-specific fine-tuning, it exhibits great
advantage when the training sets contain less than 50% of the samples (118% relative advantage to
XGBoost at train-ratio=0.1) and consistently ranks at the top 2 in all scenarios. We envision that
UniPredict paves the way for deploying foundational tabular prediction systems.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sercan Ö Arik and Tomas Pfister. Tabnet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6679–6687, 2021.
Vadim Borisov, Kathrin Sessler, Tobias Leemann, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji Kasneci. Lan-
  guage models are realistic tabular data generators. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Pei Chen, Soumajyoti Sarkar, Leonard Lausen, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Sheng Zha, Ruihong
  Huang, and George Karypis. HYTREL: Hypergraph-enhanced tabular data representation learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08623, 2023.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794,
  2016.
Tuan Dinh, Yuchen Zeng, Ruisu Zhang, Ziqian Lin, Michael Gira, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn,
  Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. LIFT: Language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-
  language machine learning tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11763–
  11784, 2022.
Kounianhua Du, Weinan Zhang, Ruiwen Zhou, Yangkun Wang, Xilong Zhao, Jiarui Jin, Quan Gan,
  Zheng Zhang, and David P Wipf. Learning enhanced representation for tabular data via neigh-
  borhood propagation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16373–16384,
  2022.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18932–18943,
  2021.
Stefan Hegselmann, Alejandro Buendia, Hunter Lang, Monica Agrawal, Xiaoyi Jiang, and David
  Sontag. TabLLM: Few-shot classification of tabular data with large language models. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 5549–5581. PMLR, 2023.
Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-
  Yan Liu. LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Zifeng Wang and Jimeng Sun. Transtab: Learning transferable tabular transformers across tables.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09328, 2022.
Zifeng Wang, Chufan Gao, Cao Xiao, and Jimeng Sun. Anypredict: Foundation model for tabular
  prediction, 2023.
Yanwu Yang and Panyu Zhai. Click-through rate prediction in online advertising: A literature
  review. Information Processing & Management, 59(2):102853, 2022.
Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improv-
  ing few-shot performance of language models, 2021.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023a.
Yilun Zhao, Haowei Zhang, Shengyun Si, Linyong Nan, Xiangru Tang, and Arman Cohan. Large
  language models are effective table-to-text generators, evaluators, and feedback providers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.14987, 2023b.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bingzhao Zhu, Xingjian Shi, Nick Erickson, Mu Li, George Karypis, and Mahsa Shoaran. Xtab:
  Cross-table pretraining for tabular transformers. In ICML, 2023.


                                             11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contents

   B.1 Prompt Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
   B.2 Metadata Reformatting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      13
   B.3 Feature Serialization Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
   B.4 Target Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
   B.5 LLM Output Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16
   C.1 Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
   C.2 Dataset Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
   C.3 Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
   D.1 Detailed Model Performance on Universal Tabular Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
   D.2 Model Performance on Few-Shot Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
   D.3 Example Cause of Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26


                                                12
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A     T HE S IGNIFICANCE OF U N I P R E D I C T

    B     M ETHODOLOGY: M ORE D ETAIL
    B.1    P ROMPT T EMPLATES

    The quality of the natural language input provided to Large Language Models (LLMs) play a
    crucial role in determining the model’s output and, consequently, its performance on tabular
    prediction tasks. The following are the prompt templates used in the implementation of both
    UniPredict-heavy and UniPredict-light:
1   """
2         Below is the description of a dataset, an object profile from the
          dataset and a target description. Predict the target by the given
          information of the object.\n
3         # Dataset description: {metadata}\n
4         # Object description: {features}\n
5         # You should return the probability of each class by: \n{instructions
          }\n
6         # Answer: \n
7   """
                               Listing 1: Prompt for UniPredict-heavy

1   """
2         Below is a dataset. Predict the target by the given information of
          the object.\n
3         # Object description: {features}\n
4         # You should return the probability of each class by: \n{instructions
          }\n
5         # Answer: \n
6   """
                               Listing 2: Prompt for UniPredict-light

    The key distinction between UniPredict-heavy and UniPredict-light lies in the utiliza-
    tion of re-formatted metadata information. UniPredict-heavy incorporates this re-formatted
    metadata to enhance the language model’s understanding of the dataset context and schema, while
    UniPredict-light opts not to include this information to maintain a lighter and more con-
    cise prompting approach. We talk about the metadata re-formatting procedure in Section 2.2 and
    Appendix B.2.

    B.2    M ETADATA R EFORMATTING

    Metadata often goes overlooked in data analysis as traditional models and algorithms do not typically
    incorporate them as part of the input. However, metadata can provide valuable insights and context
    for various aspects of data analysis, including the dataset’s purpose and the target for prediction. In
    our framework, we actively collect metadata from two sources:

    • Dataset Descriptions, which usually appear in the front page of the dataset as an introduction.
    • Column values, which can be found inside of the datasheet.

    With this information, we generate re-formatted dataset metadata for the following subjects:

    • Dataset Purpose This section states the purpose of the dataset, providing necessary context and
      background information.
    • Target This section specifies the item within the dataset that should be the target for prediction.
    • Column meanings This section explains the meaning of columns, especially in cases where col-
      umn names may not directly map to semantic meanings (e.g., columns labeled ’a’, ’b’, ’c’, etc.).
      It also elaborates on the significance of each column, often drawing from the dataset description
      to provide a more comprehensive understanding.


                                                      13
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     In our implementation, we use the gpt-3.5-turbo model via the OpenAI-API to facilitate
     metadata re-formatting. Our prompt input to gpt-3.5 is shown as below:
 1   """
 2         The following is the metadata of a tabular dataset. Return the
           information for:\n
 3             1. the target of the dataset. If no target exists, choose one
           from the column as target for the dataset to classify.\n
 4             2. the features and their explanations, or N/A if there are no
           explanations. Replace all hyphens and/or underscores with spaces.\n\n
 5         Give your output in json. The following is an example output:\n
 6         ’{\n’
 7         ’     "target": "Age",\\n’
 8         ’     "metadata": "The target of the dataset is Age. \\n Features and
           their explanations:\\n     gender: an animal\’s gender.\\n    weight:
           an animal\’s actual weight, in kg." \\n ’
 9         ’}\n\n’
10         Do NOT respond anything else than the needed information. Make it
           brief but informative.
11         Your responses should only be code, without explanation or formatting
           .\n\n
12         columns:{col}\n\n
13         metadata:{metadata}\n
14         Provide your response in stringfied JSON format.
15   """
                       Listing 3: Prompt for metadata re-formatting via OpenAI-API

     Example inputs that are filled into this prompt template are as follows:
 1   metadata = "The dataset provides a snapshot of a sample Netflix userbase,
          showcasing various aspects of user subscriptions, revenue, account
         details, and activity. Each row represents a unique user, identified
         by their User ID. The dataset includes information such as the user’s
          subscription type (Basic, Standard, or Premium), the monthly revenue
          generated from their subscription, the date they joined Netflix (
         Join Date), the date of their last payment (Last Payment Date), and
         the country in which they are located.\n\nAdditional columns have
         been included to provide insights into user behavior and preferences.
          These columns include Device Type (e.g., Smart TV, Mobile, Desktop,
         Tablet), Total Watch Time (in minutes), and Account Status (whether
         the account is active or not). The dataset serves as a synthetic
         representation and does not reflect actual Netflix user data. It can
         be used for analysis and modeling to understand user trends,
         preferences, and revenue generation within a hypothetical Netflix
         userbase."
 2
 3   col = "User ID,Subscription Type,Monthly Revenue,Join Date,Last Payment
         Date,Country,Age,Gender,Device,Plan Duration"
     Listing 4: Example input to the prompt for metadata re-formatting.         Information origin:
     arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-dataset

     The following is our expected metadata after being re-formatted:
 1   """
 2         The target of the dataset is Subscription Type. \n Features and their
            explanations:\n User ID: unique identifier for each user.\n Monthly
           Revenue: the amount of revenue generated from each user’s
           subscription.\n Join Date: the date when each user joined Netflix.\n
           Last Payment Date: the date of the last payment made by each user.\n
           Country: the country in which each user is located.\n Age: the age of
            each user.\n Gender: the gender of each user.\n Device: the type of
           device used by each user.\n Plan Duration: the duration of each user’
           s subscription plan.


                                                      14
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3   """
    Listing 5: Example output from metadata re-formatting.                      Result generated from:
    arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-dataset


    B.3   F EATURE S ERIALIZATION E XAMPLE

    We present 3 sample feature serializations from different datasets below:
1 columns = "User ID,Subscription Type,Monthly Revenue,Join Date,Last
      Payment Date,Country,Age,Gender,Device,Plan Duration"
2 values = "1448,Standard,14,18-07-22,07-07-23,United States,33,Female,
      Laptop,1 Month"
3 # result: "’User ID is 1448; Monthly Revenue is 14; Join Date is
      18-07-22; Last Payment Date is 07-07-23; Country is United States;
      Age is 33; Gender is Female; Device is Laptop; Plan Duration is 1
      Month.\n’"
    Listing 6: Feature serialization sample from arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-dataset.

1 columns = ",reviewerName,overall,reviewText,reviewTime,day_diff,
      helpful_yes,helpful_no,total_vote,score_pos_neg_diff,
      score_average_rating,wilson_lower_bound"
2 values = "2346,J. Morse,5.0,’When I opened the micro disc and adapter I
      did’t know what to do with them. I went to UTube on installing them,
      and all became clear. The micro fits into the top of the adapter and
      then the whole thing fits into my camera. Very neat and high powered
      .’,2013-09-09,455,0,0,0,0,0.0,0.0"
3 # result: "Unnamed: 0 is 2346; reviewerName is J. Morse; reviewText is
      When I opened the micro disc and adapter I did’t know what to do with
       them. I went to UTube on installing them, and all became clear. The
      micro fits into the top of the adapter and then the whole thing fits
      into my camera. Very neat and high powered.; reviewTime is
      2013-09-09; day diff is 455; helpful yes is 0; helpful no is 0; total
       vote is 0; score pos neg diff is 0; score average rating is 0.0;
      wilson lower bound is 0.0.\n"
                  Listing 7: Feature serialization sample from tarkkaanko-amazon.

1 columns = "Pregnancies,Glucose,BloodPressure,SkinThickness,Insulin,BMI,
      DiabetesPedigreeFunction,Age,Outcome"
2 values = "6,98,58,33,190,34,0.43,43,0"
3 # result: ’Pregnancies is 6.0; Glucose is 98.0; BloodPressure is 58.0;
      SkinThickness is 33.0; Insulin is 190.0; BMI is 34.0;
      DiabetesPedigreeFunction is 0.43; Age is 43.0.\n’
       Listing 8: Feature serialization sample from whenamancodes-predict-diabities.


    B.4   TARGET AUGMENTATION

    As explained in Section 2.3, we re-format the targets into one-hot encodings and assign probabilities
    to them rather than using the one-hot binary labels (l ∈ 0, 1). The process of producing one-hot
    encodings depends on the nature of the target: If the targets are continuous values, we cluster the
    them into four quarters within the domain and represent them as categories; if the targets are already
    discrete values, we directly use the target value as the categories. The results are then serialized to
    be the reference output that the model is using for training. We provide specific examples for each
    of these implementations below:
1 # target_space: [’Standard’, ’Premium’, ’Basic’]
2 example_target = [’Premium’]
3 target_after_one_hot = [0, 1, 0]
4 target_after_augmentation = [0.32, 0.39, 0.29]
5


                                                      15
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6 # outcome from target augmentation:
7 target_class_details = ’class 0 stands for "Standard"; class 1 stands for
       "Premium"; class 2 stands for "Basic"’
8 target_serialization = ’class 0: 0.32; class 1: 0.39; class 2: 0.29.’

    Listing 9:   Descrete target augmentation                          example.             Data     come    from
    arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-dataset.

1 # target_space = 1121 - 63770
2 # categorized_target_space: ["<4740.0", "4740.0 - 9380.0", "9380.0 -
      16600.0", ">16600.0"]
3 example_target = [’9095.069’]
4
5 # outcome from target augmentation:
6 target_class_details = ’class 0 stands for ">16600.0"; class 1 stands for
       "<4740.0"; class 2 stands for "9380.0 - 16600.0"’
7 target_serialization = ’class 0: 0.09; class 1: 0.0; class 2: 0.05; class
       3: 0.86.’
    Listing 10:  Continuous target                     augmentation      example.            Data     come   from
    mirichoi0218-insurance.


    B.5       LLM O UTPUT M APPING

    For an LLM output that follows the format we described in Section B.4, we can use Regex matching
    to capture model’s prediction.
    Let
1   response = ’class 0: 0.09; class 1: 0.0; class 2: 0.05; class 3: 0.86.’

    be a sample response from the LLM, we obtain a listed result of numerical probabilities by applying
1   result = re.findall(r’[\d]*[.][\d]+’, response)
2   # result = [0.09, 0.0, 0.05, 0.86]

    Based on the listed result, we can compute the model’s prediction on classes by finding the index of
    the maximum in the list.
1   result_class = pred_cls.index(max(result))
2   # result_class = 3



    C        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

    C.1       BASELINE

    In this section, we present our baseline setups:

    • XGBoost is a tree-ensemble method that has been broadly used in tabular prediction. In our
      experiment, we train XGBoost instances via its official release on Python. 5 We apply ordinal
      encoding on all features and categories except the numerical features and tune one instance on
      each dataset with n estimators=100, max depth=6, learning rate=0.3.
    • Multilayer Perceptron is a fundamental neural network architecture that consists of fully-
      connected hidden layers. We use the MLPClassifier instance from scikit-learn. On
      each dataset, a model is instantiated with learning rate=1e-3, n hidden layer=1,
      activation=’relu’, optimizer=’adam’. We also set random state=1 and
      max iteration=100.
        5
            Information can be found at https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/python/python intro.html.


                                                            16
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    • FT-Transformer is an attention-based model designed and trained specifically for tabular data
      tasks. We use the original implementation from the author 6 with no extra changes on im-
      plementation. The hyperparameters we use here are num batchs=8, num epochs=100,
      learning rate=1e-3.
    • TabNet is another attention based model on tabular data. We instantiate models from its official
      release on python 7 . Similar to our approach with XGBoost, we applied the same data prepro-
      cessing procedure to TabNet. Specifically, we used ordinal encoding for features and categories
      (excluding numerical features). We conducted model tuning using the default hyperparameters.
    • TabLLM is an LLM-based system specifically designed for tabular prediction tasks. In our imple-
      mentation, we followed the setup as described in the original work. We chose to utilize the GPT-2
      model as the backbone model for TabLLM to match our backbone choice for a fair comparison.
      When incorporating specific instructions into the prompt, instead of creating separate instances to
      ask ’yes-or-no’ questions individually for each target class, we streamlined the process by instruct-
      ing the model to predict the class name directly. This approach simplifies the training procedure
      and conserves computational resources. An example prompt is presented below. We train isolated
      TabLLM instances on each dataset, regardless of the origin of the dataset (supervised division or
      few-shot division).
1   """
2           Below is a dataset. Predict the target by the given information of
            the object.\n
3           # Object description: {features}\n
4           # You should return your choice of class by stating the class number,
             {instructions}\n
5           # Answer: \n
6 """
7 # ’instructions’ includes a sequence stating the detail of each class,
      for example ’class 1 is for "a", class 2 is for "b", ...’
8 # Example model output: ’class 1’

                                              Listing 11: Prompt for TabLLM


    C.2      DATASET S TATISTICS

    We present all dataset statistics in Table 2 and Table 3. In the training setup, all datasets are split
    with a train-set-ratio=0.9. In the few-shot testing setup, all datasets are tested with different train set
    ratios ranging from 0.1 to 0.9.

    Table 2: Dataset statistics for model training and testing (Results shown in Section 3.2). We include
    each dataset’s Name, number of rows, number of cols, and whether the dataset’s targets are continu-
    ous (Ctns). The last measurement determines whether the dataset’s targets need to be re-categorized
    into quarters, as detailed in Appendix B.4.

             Name                             rows cols Ctns Name                             rows cols Ctns
             arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-    2500 9 False deependraverma13-diabetes-          768  8 False
             dataset                                         healthcare-comprehensive-
                                                             dataset
             bhanupratapbiswas-uber-data-     1156 6 False swathiunnikrishnan-amazon-         602    22   False
             analysis                                        consumer-behaviour-dataset
             hemanthhari-psycological-        1175 21 False arslanr369-bitcoin-price-2014-    3228   6    False
             effects-of-covid                                2023
             saloni1712-chatgpt-app-reviews   2292 3 True naveenkumar20bps1137-predict-       4424   34   False
                                                             students-dropout-and-academic-
                                                             success
             sanjanchaudhari-user-behavior-   7488 8 False bhanupratapbiswas-bollywood-       1284   9    False
             on-instagram                                    actress-name-and-movie-list
             arnavsmayan-vehicle-             2000 7 False bharath011-heart-disease-          1319   8    False
             manufacturing-dataset                           classification-dataset
       6
           https://github.com/Yura52/rtdl
       7
           https://pypi.org/project/pytorch-tabnet/


                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     shroukgomaa-babies-food-             696    25   False amirhosseinmirzaie-countries-      2848   17   False
     ingredients                                            life-expectancy
     amirhosseinmirzaie-pistachio-        1718   16   False shashankshukla123123-              2240   29   False
     types-detection                                        marketing-campaign
     uciml-pima-indians-diabetes-         768    8    False shubhamgupta012-titanic-dataset    889    8    False
     database
     bhanupratapbiswas-fashion-           1000   8    False blastchar-telco-customer-churn     7043   20   False
     products
     mirichoi0218-insurance               1338   6    False suraj520-dairy-goods-sales-        4325   22   False
                                                            dataset
     uciml-red-wine-quality-cortez-et-    1599   11   False akshaydattatraykhare-diabetes-     768    8    False
     al-2009                                                dataset
     arnabchaki-data-science-salaries-    3755   10   False prkhrawsthi-bitcoin-usd-daily-     3104   6    False
     2023                                                   price-with-volume-2015-2023
     hawkingcr-airbnb-for-boston-         3585   20   False saunakghosh-nba-players-dataset    5130   7    False
     with-fraud-detection
     rtatman-chocolate-bar-ratings        1795   8    False pavansubhasht-ibm-hr-analytics-    1470   34   False
                                                            attrition-dataset
     gyanprakashkushwaha-laptop-          1273   12   False fedesoriano-stroke-prediction-     5110   11   False
     price-prediction-cleaned-dataset                       dataset
     bhanupratapbiswas-world-top-         2614   21   False vstacknocopyright-blood-           748    5    False
     billionaires                                           transfusion-service-center-data
     ashishkumarjayswal-movies-           4000   14   False bhanupratapbiswas-ipl-dataset-     577    15   False
     updated-data                                           2008-2016
     mathchi-diabetes-data-set            768    8    False harishkumardatalab-medical-        2772   6    False
                                                            insurance-price-prediction
     arslanr369-roblox-stock-pricing-     572    6    False yasserh-titanic-dataset            891    11   False
     2021-2023
     iqmansingh-company-employee-         5000   12   False shivamb-disney-movies-and-tv-      1450   11   False
     dataset                                                shows
     alexisbcook-pakistan-intellectual-   1142   12   False tahzeer-indian-startups-by-state   7091   5    False
     capital
     harshitshankhdhar-imdb-dataset-      1000   15   False shreyapurohit-anime-data           6850   4    False
     of-top-1000-movies-and-tv-
     shows
     raddar-icr-integer-data              617    57   False uciml-mushroom-classification      8124   22   False
     adityakadiwal-water-potability       3276    9   False shreyanshverma27-imdb-horror-       836    7   False
                                                            chilling-movie-dataset
     ruchi798-data-science-job-           607    11   False hesh97-titanicdataset-traincsv     891    11   False
     salaries
     phangud-spamcsv                      5572   1    False dileep070-heart-disease-           4238   15   False
                                                            prediction-using-logistic-
                                                            regression
     abcsds-pokemon                       800    12   False atharvaingle-crop-                 2200   7    False
                                                            recommendation-dataset
     rounakbanik-pokemon                  801    40   False thedevastator-cancer-patients-     1000   25   False
                                                            and-air-pollution-a-new-link
     andrewmvd-fetal-health-         2126        21   False saurabh00007-diabetescsv           768    8    False
     classification
     larsen0966-student-performance- 649         32   False nikhil1e9-netflix-stock-price      5325   6    False
     data-set
     yasserh-wine-quality-dataset    1143        12   False ashishkumarjayswal-loanamount- 614        12   False
                                                            approval
     ananthr1-weather-prediction          1461   5    True thedevastator-higher-education-  4424      34   False
                                                            predictors-of-student-retention
     rpaguirre-tesla-stock-price          1692   6    False muhammadtsabitulazmi-liga-1-     568      11   False
                                                            indonesia-player-dataset
     ashishkumarjayswal-diabetes-         768    8    False wearefuture01-hepatitis-c-       615      13   True
     dataset                                                prediction
     aakashjoshi123-exercise-and-         3864   11   False kumargh-pimaindiansdiabetescsv 767        8    False
     fitness-metrics-dataset
     gauravduttakiit-resume-dataset       962    1    False surajjha101-stores-area-and-       896    4    False
                                                            sales-data
     rishikeshkonapure-hr-analytics-      1470   34   False eishkaran-heart-disease            1190   11   False
     prediction



                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     vikramamin-customer-churn-         7043    20   False redwankarimsony-heart-disease-     920    15   True
     decision-tree-and-random-forest                       data
     hashemi221022-diabetes             768     8    False rajyellow46-wine-quality           6497   12   False
     vikramamin-time-series-            1827    4    False reihanenamdari-breast-cancer       4024   15   False
     forecasting-using-prophet-in-r
     uciml-indian-liver-patient-records 583     10   False teertha-ushealthinsurancedataset   1338   6    False
     ninzaami-loan-predication          614     12   False timoboz-tesla-stock-data-from-     2416   6    False
                                                           2010-to-2020
     elakiricoder-gender-                5001   7    False jainilcoder-netflix-stock-price-   1009   6    False
     classification-dataset                                prediction
     burak3ergun-loan-data-set           614    12   False sanjanchaudhari-bankloan           1500   11   False
     alirezachahardoli-bank-personal-    5000   13   False sbhatti-financial-sentiment-       5842    1   False
     loan-1                                                analysis
     altruistdelhite04-gold-price-data   2290   5    False carolzhangdc-imdb-5000-movie-      5043   27   False
                                                           dataset
     desalegngeb-german-fintech-         978    23   False crxxom-manhwa-dataset              2943   14   False
     companies
     varpit94-tesla-stock-data-          2956   6    False hashemi221022-bank-loans           5000   13   False
     updated-till-28jun2021
     geomack-spotifyclassification       2017   16   False jillanisofttech-brain-stroke-      4981   10   False
                                                           dataset
     mayankpatel14-second-hand-          1000   11   False rkiattisak-student-performance-    1000   7    False
     used-cars-data-set-linear-                            in-mathematics
     regression
     sabasaeed1953-stock-prices-of-      700    7    False primaryobjects-voicegender         3168   20   False
     2023
     maryammanoochehry-bank-             5000   13   False bhavkaur-simplified-titanic-       2240   3    False
     personal-loan                                         dataset
     sidhus-crab-age-prediction          3893   8    False ahsan81-superstore-marketing-      2240   21   False
                                                           campaign-dataset
     fedesoriano-hepatitis-c-dataset     615    13   True oles04-bundesliga-seasons           5508   22   False
     gabrielsantello-cars-purchase-      1000    4   False andrewmvd-udemy-courses            3678   11   False
     decision-dataset
     whenamancodes-students-             1000   7    False patelprashant-employee-attrition   1470   34   False
     performance-in-exams
     barun2104-telecom-churn             3333   10   False kandij-diabetes-dataset            768    8    False
     vedavyasv-usa-housing               5000    6   False team-ai-spam-text-message-         5572   1    False
                                                           classification
     prevek18-ames-housing-dataset       2930   81   False mazlumi-ielts-writing-scored-      1435   8    False
                                                           essays-dataset
     vijayvvenkitesh-microsoft-stock-    1511   5    False ruchi798-tv-shows-on-netflix-      5368   11   False
     time-series-analysis                                  prime-video-hulu-and-disney
     tarkkaanko-amazon                   4915   11   True kingabzpro-cosmetics-datasets       1472   10   False
     receplyasolu-6k-weather-labeled-    6368    5   False kabure-german-credit-data-with-    1000   10   False
     spotify-songs                                         risk
     mahnazarjmand-bank-personal-        5000   13   False sudarshan6561-ipl-2023             568    4    False
     loan
     agirlcoding-all-space-missions-     4324   8    False mfaisalqureshi-spam-email          5572   1    False
     from-1957
     cpluzshrijayan-milkquality          1059   7    False awaiskaggler-insurance-csv         1338   6    False
     thedevastator-employee-attrition-   1470   34   False surajjha101-top-youtube-           1000   6    False
     and-factors                                           channels-data
     hansrobertson-american-             1447   3    False dansbecker-aer-credit-card-data    1319   11   False
     companies-profits-and-benefits-
     from-ai
     whenamancodes-predict-diabities     768    8    False nancyalaswad90-review             768     8    False
     ruchi798-student-feedback-          1001   9    False siddharthss-crop-                2200     7    False
     survey-responses                                      recommendation-dataset
     therealsampat-predict-movie-        839    32   False maryalebron-life-expectancy-data 2938     24   False
     success-rate
     noordeen-insurance-premium-         1338   6    False ybifoundation-food-app-business    2205   26   False
     prediction
     oles04-top-leagues-player           2612   17   False buntyshah-auto-insurance-          1000   39   False
                                                           claims-data



                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      lightonkalumba-us-womens-         753   22   False tejashvi14-employee-future-         4653   8    False
      labor-force-participation                          prediction
      arnabchaki-indian-restaurants-   6593   7    False kanths028-usa-housing               5000   6    False
      2023
      ravibarnawal-mutual-funds-india- 814    19   False dsfelix-us-stores-sales             4248   19   False
      detailed
      sanjanchaudhari-netflix-dataset  1818   10   False tejashvi14-engineering-             2966   7    False
                                                         placements-prediction
      bhavkaur-hotel-guests-dataset   2000    9    False warcoder-earthquake-dataset         782    18   False
      mayurdalvi-simple-linear-       1000    2    False arashnic-time-series-forecasting-   1825    6   False
      regression-placement-data                          with-yahoo-stock-price
      bretmathyer-telemedicine-used   3344    14   False iamsumat-spotify-top-2000s-         1994   14   False
                                                         mega-dataset
      ahsan81-food-ordering-and-      1898    8    False kreeshrajani-human-stress-          2838   6    False
      delivery-app-dataset                               prediction
      shivamb-hm-stores-dataset       4292    20   True christinestevens-cstevens-           3737   20   False
                                                         peloton-data
      aakashjoshi123-spotify-top-hits- 1000   6    False ishadss-productivity-prediction-    1197   14   False
      data                                               of-garment-employees
      chirin-africa-economic-banking- 1059    13   False mayuriawati-bangalore-chain-        1826   7    False
      and-systemic-crisis-data                           restaurants-ratings-and-reviews
      azminetoushikwasi–lionel-messi- 704     12   False
      all-club-goals


Table 3: Dataset statistics for the few-shot testing (Results shown in Section 3.3). We include each
dataset’s Name, number of rows, number of cols, and whether the dataset’s targets are continuous
(Ctns). The last measurement determines whether the dataset’s targets need to be re-categorized
into quarters, as detailed in Appendix B.4.

      Name                              rows cols Ctns Name                            rows cols Ctns
      mauryansshivam-paytm-revenue- 12        20 False yapwh1208-students-score          56  12 False
      users-transactions
      kagankoral-dceu-box-office-and-    13    9 False drahulsingh-rohit-sharma-all-     43   8 False
      rating-dataset                                   international-cricket-centuries
      tapakah68-email-spam-              84    2 False drahulsingh-s-chanderpaul-all-    41   8 False
      classification                                   international-cricket-centuries
      whydhruv-viratkohli-76centuries    76   13 False drahulsingh-largest-banks        100   3 False
      hammadjavaid-100-most-             101   8 True sanjanchaudhari-scheme-wise-       18   7 False
      expensive-footballers-of-all-time                placement-pmkvy
      bhanupratapbiswas-national-        37   11 False drahulsingh-top-largest-          84   7 False
      youth-volunteers-2022-2023                       universities
      drahulsingh-kane-williamson-all- 72      8 False abhijitdahatonde-india-           37   8 False
      cricket-centuries                                population-1947-2011
      ravivarmaodugu-data-on-            49    4 False drahulsingh-mohammad-yousuf-      39  10 False
      investment-and-employment-                       all-cricket-centuries
      in-india
      abhishek14398-salary-dataset-      30    2 False mauryansshivam-youtube-ads-       17   1 False
      simple-linear-regression                         revenue
      sanjanchaudhari-pixarmovies        15   15 False amirmotefaker-supply-chain-      100 23 False
                                                       dataset
      allanwandia-supply-chain-data      31   22 False omarsobhy14-student-loans         57   5 False
      drahulsingh-virat-kohli-all-       134   8 False hammadjavaid-highest-grossing- 105     8 False
      international-cricket-centuries                  indian-movies-2023
      christph-harry-potter-potion-      132   3 False karthickveerakumar-salary-data-   30   1 False
      recipes                                          simple-linear-regression
      sujithmandala-obesity-             108   6 False harshsingh2209-supply-chain-     100 23 False
      classification-dataset                           analysis
      drahulsingh-ross-taylor-all-       40    8 False sanjanchaudhari-us-employment- 71     11 False
      international-cricket-centuries                  and-unemployment
      anirudhkulkarni455-vande-bharat 26      15 False yasserh-student-marks-dataset    100   2 False
      dev523-cbse-class-x-result-data    48    7 False drahulsingh-matthew-hayden-all- 40     8 False
                                                       international-cricket-centuries


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      arindambaruah-void-formation-       196      13    False ravitejakotharu-salary-datacsv       30        1     False
      process-data-in-welding
      drahulsingh-chris-gayle-all-        42        9    False abhijitdahatonde-rohit-sharma-       43       10     False
      international-cricket-centuries                          centuries
      drahulsingh-hashim-amla-all-        55        8    False rsadiq-salary                        35        1     False
      international-cricket-centuries
      codebreaker619-salary-data-with-    30        2    False drahulsingh-ab-de-villiers-all-      47        8     True
      age-and-experience                                       international-cricket-centuries
      yusufdede-lung-cancer-dataset       59        6    False mauryansshivam-netflix-ott-          17       14     False
                                                               revenue-and-subscribers-csv-file
      rohankayan-years-of-experience-     30        1    False thamersekhri-liverpool-matches-      59       39     False
      and-salary-dataset                                       dataset-2022-2023
      whenamancodes-impacts-of-           14       22    False devchauhan1-salary-datacsv           30        1     False
      energy-production
      ruiromanini-mtcars                  32       11    False maraglobosky-hot-dog-eating-         62        7     False
                                                               contest-results
      komalkhetlani-apple-iphone-data     62       10    False anandhuh-latest-covid19-india-       36        8     False
                                                               statewise-data
      mathurinache-                       57       98    False fredericobreno-play-tennis           14        5     False
      electriccarsalesbymodelinusa
      farhanmd29-50-startups              50        4    False aaditshukla-beach-water-and-             9     4     False
                                                               weather-sensor-locations
      hussainnasirkhan-multiple-linear-   20        2    False hb20007-gender-classification        66        4     False
      regression-dataset
      usharengaraju-coursera-ipo-            8     35    False yashmerchant-cities                  73        5     False
      tweets
      drahulsingh-rahul-dravid-all-       48        8    False fivethirtyeight-the-ultimate-        85       12     False
      international-cricket-centuries                          halloween-candy-power-ranking



C.3   M ODEL T RAINING
We utilize a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) model as backbone. We perform training following an instruc-
tion fine-tuning process. The optimizer choice is AdamW with lr=5e-5, beta 1 = 0.9, beta 2 =
0.999, epsilon = 1e-8, weight decay = 0. The model is trained for 3 epochs. The model
takes approximately 75 hours to be trained on a single RTX3090.
The few-shot learning process is almost identical to the training process described above. The only
difference is that we increase the epoch to 30 to ensure convergence.


D     R ESULT
D.1   D ETAILED M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON U NIVERSAL TABULAR P REDICTION
We present all models’ performance on each supervised dataset in Table 4, including the ablation models.

D.2   M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON F EW-S HOT DATASETS
We present additional accuracy/ranking figures and datapoints for the few-shot datasets. Figure 6 demon-
strates each model’s performance when train-set-proportion=0.1, Figure 7 shows their performance when
the value is set to 0.5, and Figure 6 gives the picture of models at a resource-rich setup (train-set-
proportion=0.9). See Section 3.3 for detailed discussion.

Table 4: The performance of UniPredict-heavy (UniP-h), its ablation (Abl-h),
UniPredict-light (UniP-l), its ablation (Abl-l), TabLLM (TabLLM), XGBoost (XGBoost),
MLP (MLP), FT-Transformer (FT-Trans), and TabNet (TabNet) on the supervised datasets.
Each model’s accuracy on the test set is reported. See Section 3.2 for the result analysis.

 Dataset Name                        UniP-h Abl-h UniP-l Abl-l TabLLM XGBoost MLP FT-Trans TabNet
 arnavsmayan-netflix-userbase-        0.632 0.556 0.616 0.596    0.332 0.600  0.372 0.608   0.564
 dataset
 deependraverma13-diabetes-          0.701       0.649   0.740    0.688   0.597      0.727      0.779       0.701      0.597
 healthcare-comprehensive-
 dataset


                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 bhanupratapbiswas-uber-data-        0.940   0.948   0.940   0.845   0.914   0.009   0.914   0.897   0.922
 analysis
 swathiunnikrishnan-amazon-          0.262   0.279   0.295   0.246   0.000   0.328   0.279   0.410   0.213
 consumer-behaviour-dataset
 hemanthhari-psycological-           0.763   0.737   0.822   0.356   0.000   0.805   0.000   0.153   0.000
 effects-of-covid
 arslanr369-bitcoin-price-2014-      0.994   0.975   0.988   0.418   0.947   1.000   0.235   0.994   0.551
 2023
 saloni1712-chatgpt-app-reviews      0.948   0.517   0.957   0.483   0.000   0.400   0.322   0.483   0.483
 naveenkumar20bps1137-predict-       0.616   0.510   0.616   0.415   0.000   0.777   0.628   0.738   0.628
 students-dropout-and-academic-
 success
 sanjanchaudhari-user-behavior-      0.865   0.832   0.865   0.830   0.805   0.808   0.652   0.833   0.824
 on-instagram
 bhanupratapbiswas-bollywood-        0.527   0.527   0.527   0.403   0.357   0.581   0.000   0.651   0.000
 actress-name-and-movie-list
 arnavsmayan-vehicle-                0.350   0.305   0.395   0.325   0.240   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
 manufacturing-dataset
 bharath011-heart-disease-           0.970   0.652   0.962   0.568   0.561   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
 classification-dataset
 shroukgomaa-babies-food-            0.600   0.886   0.671   0.400   0.243   0.986   0.000   0.286   0.000
 ingredients
 amirhosseinmirzaie-countries-       0.804   0.782   0.804   0.435   0.505   0.905   0.000   0.277   0.000
 life-expectancy
 amirhosseinmirzaie-pistachio-       0.855   0.808   0.872   0.762   0.669   0.895   0.407   0.866   0.407
 types-detection
 shashankshukla123123-               0.844   0.786   0.848   0.674   0.781   0.848   0.000   0.821   0.000
 marketing-campaign
 uciml-pima-indians-diabetes-        0.727   0.675   0.701   0.610   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.688   0.597
 database
 shubhamgupta012-titanic-dataset     0.854   0.730   0.820   0.573   0.607   0.775   0.809   0.764   0.629
 bhanupratapbiswas-fashion-          0.380   0.340   0.320   0.350   0.280   0.390   0.350   0.440   0.310
 products
 blastchar-telco-customer-churn      0.834   0.749   0.827   0.732   0.743   0.728   0.447   0.762   0.789
 mirichoi0218-insurance              0.851   0.843   0.866   0.575   0.440   0.821   0.746   0.881   0.455
 suraj520-dairy-goods-sales-         0.734   0.730   0.661   0.432   0.256   0.965   0.813   0.933   0.938
 dataset
 uciml-red-wine-quality-cortez-et-   0.544   0.519   0.562   0.394   0.394   0.662   0.588   0.644   0.438
 al-2009
 akshaydattatraykhare-diabetes-      0.675   0.662   0.766   0.636   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.701   0.597
 dataset
 arnabchaki-data-science-salaries-   0.963   0.971   0.963   0.763   0.902   0.995   0.588   0.963   0.258
 2023
 prkhrawsthi-bitcoin-usd-daily-      0.990   0.984   0.984   0.566   0.971   0.997   0.238   0.981   0.559
 price-with-volume-2015-2023
 hawkingcr-airbnb-for-boston-        0.886   0.836   0.889   0.752   0.000   0.864   0.850   0.833   0.866
 with-fraud-detection
 saunakghosh-nba-players-dataset     0.856   0.850   0.850   0.811   0.840   0.875   0.000   0.115   0.000
 rtatman-chocolate-bar-ratings       0.400   0.272   0.372   0.278   0.306   0.350   0.333   0.344   0.311
 pavansubhasht-ibm-hr-analytics-     0.871   0.810   0.830   0.755   0.000   0.857   0.769   0.776   0.837
 attrition-dataset
 gyanprakashkushwaha-laptop-         0.633   0.539   0.609   0.477   0.211   0.758   0.586   0.656   0.438
 price-prediction-cleaned-dataset
 fedesoriano-stroke-prediction-      1.000   0.937   1.000   0.916   0.914   0.937   0.000   0.945   0.000
 dataset
 bhanupratapbiswas-world-top-        0.989   0.859   0.962   0.466   0.435   0.996   0.557   0.969   0.000
 billionaires
 vstacknocopyright-blood-            0.960   0.693   0.973   0.653   0.667   0.747   0.800   0.773   0.187
 transfusion-service-center-data
 ashishkumarjayswal-movies-          0.295   0.292   0.233   0.212   0.000   0.410   0.000   0.003   0.000
 updated-data
 bhanupratapbiswas-ipl-dataset-      0.121   0.345   0.207   0.121   0.000   0.966   0.000   0.000   0.000
 2008-2016
 mathchi-diabetes-data-set           0.701   0.662   0.753   0.688   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.688   0.597
 harishkumardatalab-medical-         0.795   0.809   0.773   0.471   0.647   0.986   0.788   0.899   0.719
 insurance-price-prediction


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 arslanr369-roblox-stock-pricing-     0.966   0.966   0.966   0.776   0.241   1.000   0.345   1.000   0.241
 2021-2023
 yasserh-titanic-dataset              0.789   0.800   0.722   0.767   0.533   0.511   0.000   0.600   0.000
 iqmansingh-company-employee-         0.886   0.698   0.908   0.524   0.384   0.922   0.230   0.928   0.838
 dataset
 shivamb-disney-movies-and-tv-        1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   0.986   0.690   0.966   0.434
 shows
 alexisbcook-pakistan-intellectual-   0.843   0.930   0.696   0.183   0.000   0.974   0.000   0.035   0.000
 capital
 tahzeer-indian-startups-by-state     0.670   0.618   0.707   0.493   0.479   0.624   0.285   0.534   0.292
 harshitshankhdhar-imdb-dataset-      0.250   0.320   0.330   0.240   0.260   0.430   0.000   0.290   0.000
 of-top-1000-movies-and-tv-
 shows
 shreyapurohit-anime-data             0.969   0.991   0.969   0.626   0.988   0.270   0.696   0.990   0.987
 raddar-icr-integer-data              0.000   0.000   0.694   0.484   0.000   0.968   0.000   0.790   0.000
 uciml-mushroom-classification        1.000   1.000   0.999   0.999   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
 adityakadiwal-water-potability       0.631   0.503   0.567   0.421   0.500   0.692   0.000   0.622   0.000
 shreyanshverma27-imdb-horror-        0.286   0.321   0.274   0.274   0.190   0.262   0.298   0.357   0.286
 chilling-movie-dataset
 ruchi798-data-science-job-           0.836   0.803   0.754   0.607   0.344   0.951   0.246   0.967   0.295
 salaries
 hesh97-titanicdataset-traincsv       0.778   0.733   0.756   0.733   0.533   0.511   0.000   0.600   0.000
 phangud-spamcsv                      1.000   0.995   1.000   0.989   0.993   0.864   0.869   0.869   0.869
 dileep070-heart-disease-             0.965   0.767   0.962   0.762   0.743   0.823   0.000   0.851   0.000
 prediction-using-logistic-
 regression
 abcsds-pokemon                       0.087   0.113   0.100   0.037   0.000   0.300   0.225   0.312   0.000
 atharvaingle-crop-                   0.973   0.964   0.914   0.600   0.000   0.995   0.973   0.991   0.132
 recommendation-dataset
 rounakbanik-pokemon                  1.000   0.975   0.975   0.852   0.000   1.000   0.000   0.864   0.000
 thedevastator-cancer-patients-       0.450   0.390   0.560   0.310   0.220   0.560   0.360   0.670   0.290
 and-air-pollution-a-new-link
 andrewmvd-fetal-health-              0.859   0.798   0.845   0.620   0.000   0.958   0.845   0.925   0.479
 classification
 saurabh00007-diabetescsv             0.753   0.662   0.714   0.662   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.649   0.597
 larsen0966-student-performance-      0.138   0.354   0.123   0.062   0.000   0.446   0.262   0.462   0.015
 data-set
 nikhil1e9-netflix-stock-price        0.989   0.994   0.991   0.593   0.994   1.000   0.358   0.981   0.829
 yasserh-wine-quality-dataset         0.504   0.504   0.557   0.400   0.357   0.617   0.530   0.583   0.348
 ashishkumarjayswal-loanamount-       0.758   0.694   0.758   0.677   0.677   0.677   0.000   0.339   0.000
 approval
 ananthr1-weather-prediction          0.925   0.707   0.952   0.694   0.333   0.837   0.714   0.837   0.476
 thedevastator-higher-education-      0.862   0.856   0.885   0.833   0.000   0.894   0.885   0.874   0.907
 predictors-of-student-retention
 rpaguirre-tesla-stock-price          0.976   0.976   0.982   0.888   0.965   1.000   0.235   0.971   0.453
 muhammadtsabitulazmi-liga-1-         0.105   0.105   0.105   0.105   0.088   0.228   0.175   0.193   0.070
 indonesia-player-dataset
 ashishkumarjayswal-diabetes-         0.701   0.675   0.727   0.623   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.675   0.597
 dataset
 wearefuture01-hepatitis-c-           0.935   0.790   0.887   0.516   0.855   0.984   0.000   0.113   0.000
 prediction
 aakashjoshi123-exercise-and-         0.801   0.809   0.796   0.607   0.253   0.804   0.442   0.796   0.770
 fitness-metrics-dataset
 kumargh-pimaindiansdiabetescsv       0.104   0.143   0.169   0.130   0.065   0.156   0.182   0.169   0.078
 gauravduttakiit-resume-dataset       0.144   0.186   0.124   0.144   0.000   0.021   0.124   0.340   0.031
 surajjha101-stores-area-and-         0.289   0.300   0.233   0.222   0.300   0.233   0.178   0.267   0.222
 sales-data
 rishikeshkonapure-hr-analytics-      0.850   0.789   0.857   0.741   0.762   0.850   0.769   0.898   0.837
 prediction
 eishkaran-heart-disease              0.866   0.815   0.874   0.723   0.681   0.966   0.866   0.933   0.655
 vikramamin-customer-churn-           0.834   0.749   0.837   0.694   0.743   0.799   0.447   0.755   0.789
 decision-tree-and-random-forest
 redwankarimsony-heart-disease-       0.489   0.446   0.543   0.435   0.359   0.587   0.000   0.380   0.000
 data


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 hashemi221022-diabetes               0.675   0.636   0.753   0.701   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.675   0.597
 rajyellow46-wine-quality             0.469   0.412   0.489   0.366   0.406   0.691   0.000   0.002   0.000
 vikramamin-time-series-              0.317   0.738   0.317   0.552   0.306   0.344   0.257   0.273   0.262
 forecasting-using-prophet-in-r
 reihanenamdari-breast-cancer         0.397   0.308   0.400   0.345   0.261   0.367   0.345   0.347   0.355
 uciml-indian-liver-patient-records   0.695   0.610   0.763   0.627   0.678   0.712   0.000   0.763   0.000
 teertha-ushealthinsurancedataset     0.903   0.836   0.851   0.657   0.440   0.821   0.746   0.843   0.455
 ninzaami-loan-predication            0.694   0.677   0.790   0.581   0.677   0.710   0.000   0.339   0.000
 timoboz-tesla-stock-data-from-       0.983   0.992   0.979   0.409   0.909   0.240   0.273   0.963   0.517
 2010-to-2020
 elakiricoder-gender-                 0.976   0.972   0.972   0.964   0.946   0.970   0.964   0.976   0.978
 classification-dataset
 jainilcoder-netflix-stock-price-     0.950   0.960   0.970   0.960   0.267   1.000   0.257   0.970   0.257
 prediction
 burak3ergun-loan-data-set            0.710   0.661   0.742   0.742   0.677   0.677   0.000   0.339   0.000
 sanjanchaudhari-bankloan             0.600   0.613   0.667   0.580   0.527   0.700   0.573   0.687   0.727
 alirezachahardoli-bank-personal-     0.982   0.982   0.992   0.974   0.954   0.984   0.892   0.980   0.982
 loan-1
 sbhatti-financial-sentiment-         1.000   0.750   1.000   0.749   0.737   0.491   0.321   0.533   0.533
 analysis
 altruistdelhite04-gold-price-data    0.917   0.921   0.900   0.860   0.258   0.939   0.703   0.956   0.489
 carolzhangdc-imdb-5000-movie-        0.453   0.370   0.424   0.311   0.000   0.552   0.000   0.255   0.000
 dataset
 desalegngeb-german-fintech-          0.969   0.929   0.929   0.867   0.000   1.000   0.000   0.143   0.000
 companies
 crxxom-manhwa-dataset                0.993   0.990   0.990   0.936   0.000   0.990   0.000   0.366   0.000
 varpit94-tesla-stock-data-           0.990   0.986   0.990   0.328   0.943   0.530   0.216   0.983   0.693
 updated-till-28jun2021
 hashemi221022-bank-loans             0.986   0.990   0.986   0.970   0.954   0.984   0.892   0.984   0.982
 geomack-spotifyclassification        1.000   0.995   0.995   0.554   0.941   1.000   0.921   0.990   0.861
 jillanisofttech-brain-stroke-        1.000   0.920   1.000   0.910   0.912   0.928   0.938   0.906   0.938
 dataset
 mayankpatel14-second-hand-           0.740   0.730   0.760   0.520   0.320   0.190   0.790   0.910   0.270
 used-cars-data-set-linear-
 regression
 rkiattisak-student-performance-      0.530   0.420   0.550   0.370   0.290   0.620   0.580   0.660   0.350
 in-mathematics
 sabasaeed1953-stock-prices-of-       0.957   0.986   0.957   0.571   0.357   0.957   0.257   0.957   0.229
 2023
 primaryobjects-voicegender           0.953   0.962   0.965   0.536   0.934   0.019   0.972   0.987   0.669
 maryammanoochehry-bank-              0.986   0.988   0.988   0.972   0.954   0.984   0.892   0.982   0.982
 personal-loan
 bhavkaur-simplified-titanic-         0.982   0.737   0.978   0.701   0.723   0.768   0.719   0.754   0.750
 dataset
 sidhus-crab-age-prediction           0.621   0.500   0.669   0.431   0.415   0.585   0.595   0.610   0.608
 ahsan81-superstore-marketing-        0.893   0.835   0.835   0.750   0.768   0.884   0.000   0.862   0.000
 campaign-dataset
 fedesoriano-hepatitis-c-dataset      0.952   0.790   0.871   0.435   0.855   0.984   0.000   0.113   0.000
 oles04-bundesliga-seasons            1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   0.000   1.000   0.000   0.584   0.000
 gabrielsantello-cars-purchase-       0.930   0.810   0.830   0.690   0.460   0.900   0.440   0.910   0.400
 decision-dataset
 andrewmvd-udemy-courses              0.908   0.984   0.913   0.927   0.970   0.207   0.402   0.454   0.000
 whenamancodes-students-              0.620   0.500   0.640   0.350   0.260   0.600   0.630   0.580   0.310
 performance-in-exams
 patelprashant-employee-attrition     0.844   0.830   0.850   0.714   0.762   0.844   0.769   0.878   0.837
 barun2104-telecom-churn              0.892   0.862   0.910   0.793   0.805   0.913   0.853   0.898   0.865
 kandij-diabetes-dataset              0.727   0.675   0.740   0.688   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.727   0.597
 vedavyasv-usa-housing                0.670   0.634   0.670   0.564   0.272   0.226   0.222   0.706   0.700
 team-ai-spam-text-message-           1.000   0.995   1.000   0.989   0.993   0.864   0.869   0.869   0.869
 classification
 prevek18-ames-housing-dataset        0.683   0.614   0.710   0.491   0.000   0.823   0.000   0.256   0.000
 mazlumi-ielts-writing-scored-        0.542   0.333   0.597   0.312   0.000   0.472   0.000   0.243   0.000
 essays-dataset



                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 vijayvvenkitesh-microsoft-stock-    0.993   0.980   0.993   0.500   0.375   0.987   0.283   0.993   0.217
 time-series-analysis
 ruchi798-tv-shows-on-netflix-       0.534   0.451   0.549   0.395   0.426   0.084   0.432   0.480   0.436
 prime-video-hulu-and-disney
 tarkkaanko-amazon                   0.974   0.746   0.982   0.711   0.000   0.793   0.768   0.715   0.789
 kingabzpro-cosmetics-datasets       0.318   0.757   0.284   0.581   0.000   0.372   0.162   0.311   0.203
 receplyasolu-6k-weather-labeled-    0.319   0.339   0.308   0.301   0.218   0.443   0.185   0.327   0.316
 spotify-songs
 kabure-german-credit-data-with-     0.750   0.640   0.700   0.680   0.600   0.790   0.710   0.680   0.490
 risk
 mahnazarjmand-bank-personal-        0.992   0.990   0.982   0.968   0.946   0.992   0.904   0.992   0.984
 loan
 sudarshan6561-ipl-2023              0.368   0.281   0.474   0.211   0.333   0.667   0.000   0.211   0.000
 agirlcoding-all-space-missions-     0.988   0.887   0.977   0.873   0.864   0.889   0.813   0.855   0.898
 from-1957
 mfaisalqureshi-spam-email           1.000   0.991   1.000   0.989   0.993   0.864   0.869   0.869   0.869
 cpluzshrijayan-milkquality          0.991   0.906   0.925   0.896   0.481   1.000   0.849   1.000   0.274
 awaiskaggler-insurance-csv          0.649   0.687   0.664   0.575   0.216   0.888   0.239   0.821   0.209
 thedevastator-employee-attrition-   0.830   0.803   0.844   0.762   0.762   0.850   0.769   0.884   0.837
 and-factors
 surajjha101-top-youtube-            0.140   0.170   0.210   0.140   0.130   0.300   0.230   0.200   0.140
 channels-data
 hansrobertson-american-             0.331   0.303   0.331   0.324   0.269   0.276   0.255   0.310   0.283
 companies-profits-and-benefits-
 from-ai
 dansbecker-aer-credit-card-data     0.977   0.962   0.985   0.947   0.970   0.970   0.977   0.939   0.712
 whenamancodes-predict-diabities     0.727   0.662   0.740   0.636   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.714   0.597
 nancyalaswad90-review               0.701   0.675   0.727   0.597   0.597   0.727   0.779   0.727   0.597
 ruchi798-student-feedback-          0.089   0.059   0.079   0.089   0.099   0.069   0.079   0.109   0.129
 survey-responses
 siddharthss-crop-                   0.968   0.955   0.932   0.564   0.041   0.995   0.973   0.986   0.132
 recommendation-dataset
 therealsampat-predict-movie-        0.905   0.833   0.929   0.595   0.714   1.000   0.000   0.798   0.000
 success-rate
 maryalebron-life-expectancy-data    0.235   0.279   0.269   0.231   0.313   0.241   0.000   0.286   0.000
 noordeen-insurance-premium-         0.910   0.858   0.873   0.590   0.343   0.836   0.754   0.843   0.485
 prediction
 ybifoundation-food-app-business     0.000   0.000   0.199   0.090   0.140   0.430   0.213   0.416   0.199
 oles04-top-leagues-player           0.385   0.336   0.412   0.286   0.286   0.233   0.000   0.160   0.000
 buntyshah-auto-insurance-           0.810   0.780   0.750   0.770   0.710   0.790   0.000   0.770   0.000
 claims-data
 lightonkalumba-us-womens-           1.000   0.987   1.000   0.947   0.789   1.000   1.000   1.000   0.592
 labor-force-participation
 tejashvi14-employee-future-         0.929   0.790   0.940   0.732   0.682   0.865   0.633   0.848   0.345
 prediction
 arnabchaki-indian-restaurants-      0.406   0.314   0.403   0.320   0.332   0.412   0.276   0.341   0.376
 2023
 kanths028-usa-housing               0.624   0.646   0.692   0.566   0.272   0.226   0.222   0.692   0.700
 ravibarnawal-mutual-funds-india-    0.280   0.305   0.268   0.244   0.195   0.427   0.000   0.146   0.000
 detailed
 dsfelix-us-stores-sales             0.974   0.960   0.967   0.791   0.826   0.998   0.809   0.979   0.880
 sanjanchaudhari-netflix-dataset     0.319   0.467   0.423   0.280   0.154   0.538   0.231   0.385   0.198
 tejashvi14-engineering-             0.956   0.771   0.946   0.764   0.781   0.879   0.822   0.869   0.586
 placements-prediction
 bhavkaur-hotel-guests-dataset       0.970   0.800   0.970   0.740   0.770   0.845   0.000   0.855   0.000
 warcoder-earthquake-dataset         0.835   0.835   0.962   0.241   0.266   0.759   0.418   0.722   0.253
 mayurdalvi-simple-linear-           0.650   0.520   0.690   0.510   0.530   0.550   0.470   0.610   0.500
 regression-placement-data
 arashnic-time-series-forecasting-   0.995   0.967   0.989   0.530   0.760   0.262   0.262   1.000   0.273
 with-yahoo-stock-price
 bretmathyer-telemedicine-used       0.934   0.931   0.934   0.737   0.830   0.988   0.000   0.481   0.000
 iamsumat-spotify-top-2000s-         0.375   0.305   0.340   0.340   0.295   0.345   0.310   0.355   0.245
 mega-dataset



                                                        25
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            7

     0.8                                                                                    6

                                                                                            5
     0.6
                                                                                            4
     0.4
                                                                                            3

     0.2                                                                                    2

                                                                                            1
     0.0
                                                                                                            y -light bLLM      ost   MLP                r      t
                  eavy    light LLM XGBoost   MLP                r
                                                            forme TabNe
                                                                        t                             -heav      t Ta     XGBo                   nsforme TabNe
            dict-h redict- Tab                      FT-Tra
                                                          ns                                     edict UniPredic                           FT-Tra
      UniPre UniP                                                                           UniPr

       (a) Model Accuracy (The higher the better)                                                (b) Model Rank (The lower the better)

    Figure 6: The average accuracy and rank of UniPredict-heavy, UniPredict-light,
    TabLLM XGBoost, MLP, TabNet and FT-Transformer on the few-shot dataset with train-
    set-ratio set to 0.1.


     ahsan81-food-ordering-and-                     0.521        0.289      0.547   0.253       0.295         0.353        0.147      0.379             0.389
     delivery-app-dataset
     kreeshrajani-human-stress-                     0.690        0.764      0.715   0.736       0.687         0.602        0.549      0.556             0.549
     prediction
     shivamb-hm-stores-dataset                      0.644        0.530      0.633   0.481       0.481         0.605        0.000      0.037             0.000
     christinestevens-cstevens-                     0.179        0.209      0.238   0.168       0.171         0.559        0.000      0.150             0.000
     peloton-data
     aakashjoshi123-spotify-top-hits-               0.690        0.690      0.690   0.670       0.620         0.780        0.000      0.740             0.000
     data
     ishadss-productivity-prediction-               0.475        0.442      0.558   0.358       0.250         0.683        0.000      0.242             0.000
     of-garment-employees
     chirin-africa-economic-banking-                0.972        0.981      0.991   0.887       0.877         0.991        0.934      0.991             0.896
     and-systemic-crisis-data
     mayuriawati-bangalore-chain-                   0.814        0.940      0.776   0.617       0.093         1.000        0.131      0.934             0.186
     restaurants-ratings-and-reviews
     azminetoushikwasi–lionel-messi-                0.704        0.662      0.563   0.493       0.423         0.662        0.634      0.606             0.056
     all-club-goals


    D.3     E XAMPLE C AUSE OF FAILURE
    In Section 3.4 we presented a failure study on UniPredict, and gave some possible issues that
    cause the model to give poor performance. We present demonstrations for each causes below:
1
2 # Column names:
3 """
4 Marital status,Application mode,Application order,Course,Daytime/evening
      attendance,Previous qualification,Nacionality,Mother’s qualification,
      Father’s qualification,Mother’s occupation,Father’s occupation,
      Displaced,Educational special needs,Debtor,Tuition fees up to date,
      Gender,Scholarship holder,Age at enrollment,International,Curricular
      units 1st sem (credited),Curricular units 1st sem (enrolled),
      Curricular units 1st sem (evaluations),Curricular units 1st sem (
      approved),Curricular units 1st sem (grade),Curricular units 1st sem (
      without evaluations),Curricular units 2nd sem (credited),Curricular
      units 2nd sem (enrolled),Curricular units 2nd sem (evaluations),
      Curricular units 2nd sem (approved),Curricular units 2nd sem (grade),
      Curricular units 2nd sem (without evaluations),Unemployment rate,
      Inflation rate,GDP,Target


                                                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1.0                                                                           7

                                                                               6
 0.8
                                                                               5
 0.6
                                                                               4
 0.4
                                                                               3

 0.2                                                                           2

                                                                               1
 0.0
                                                                                               y -light bLLM      ost       MLP                 r      t
                avy         ght LM XGBoost
          ict-heniPredict-li TabL            MLP             rmerTabNet                  -heav      t Ta     XGBo                        nsforme TabNe
         d                                         FT-Tra
                                                         nsfo                       edict UniPredic                                FT-Tra
  UniPre      U                                                                UniPr

   (a) Model Accuracy (The higher the better)                                          (b) Model Rank (The lower the better)

Figure 7: The average accuracy and rank of UniPredict-heavy, UniPredict-light,
TabLLM XGBoost, MLP, TabNet and FT-Transformer on the few-shot dataset with train-
set-ratio set to 0.5.


 1.0                                                                               7

                                                                                   6
 0.8
                                                                                   5
 0.6
                                                                                   4

 0.4                                                                               3

                                                                                   2
 0.2
                                                                                   1
 0.0                                                                                               y -light bLLM      ost
                                                                                             -heav               XGBo       MLP               mer Net
                                                                                        edict UniPredic
                                                                                                        t Ta                             nsfor Tab
              eavy    light LLM XGBoost      MLP               er et               UniPr                                          FT-Tra
        dict-h redict- Tab                               nsform TabN
  UniPre UniP                                      FT-Tra


   (a) Model Accuracy (The higher the better)                                          (b) Model Rank (The lower the better)

Figure 8: The average accuracy and rank of UniPredict-heavy, UniPredict-light,
TabLLM XGBoost, MLP, TabNet and FT-Transformer on the few-shot dataset with train-
set-ratio set to 0.9.


                                                                          27
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 5   """
 6
 7 # Column value example:
 8 """
 9 1,8,5,2,1,1,1,13,10,6,10,1,0,0,1,1,0,20,0,0,0,0,0,0.0,0,0,0,0,0,0.0,0,
       10.8,1.4,1.74,Dropout
10 """
11
12   # Note: This sample also has the FV (Poorly represented Feature Values)
         problem as there are too many numerical values inside.
     Listing 12: Example columns and values that have the COL (too many column) problem. Data
     origin: suraj520-dairy-goods-sales-dataset

 1
 2 # Column names:
 3 """
 4 fixed acidity,volatile acidity,citric acid,residual sugar,chlorides,free
       sulfur dioxide,total sulfur dioxide,density,pH,sulphates,alcohol,
       quality,Id
 5 """
 6
 7 # Column value example:
 8 """
 9 7.4,0.7,0.0,1.9,0.076,11.0,34.0,0.9978,3.51,0.56,9.4,5,0
10 """

     Listing 13: Example columns and values that have the FV (Poorly represented Feature Values)
     problem. Dataset origin: yasserh-wine-quality-dataset

 1 # Dataset metadata:
 2 """
 3 (No metadata)
 4 """
 5
 6 # Column names:
 7 """
 8 (No Column names)
 9 """
10
11 # Column value example:
12 """
13 1,85,66,29,0,26.6,0.351,31,0
14 """

     Listing 14: Example columns and values that have the META (Inadequate or ambiguous Metadata)
     problem. Dataset origin: kumargh-pimaindiansdiabetescsv

 1 # Dataset metadata:
 2 """
 3 Description: This dataset contains information on the performance of high
        school students in mathematics, including their grades and
       demographic information. The data was collected from three high
       schools in the United States.\n\n
 4 Columns:\n\n\t
 5 **Gender:** The gender of the student (male/female)\n\n\t
 6 **Race/ethnicity:** The student’s racial or ethnic background (Asian,
       African-American, Hispanic, etc.)\n\n\t
 7 **Parental level of education:** The highest level of education attained
       by the student’s parent(s) or guardian(s)\n\n\t
 8 **Lunch:** Whether the student receives free or reduced-price lunch (yes/
       no)\n\n\t
 9 **Test preparation course:** Whether the student completed a test
       preparation course (yes/no)\n\n\t


                                                  28
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


10 **Math score:** The student’s score on a standardized mathematics test\n\
       n\t
11 **Reading score:** The student’s score on a standardized reading test\n\n
       \t
12 **Writing score:** The student’s score on a standardized writing test\n\
       nThis dataset could be used for various research questions related to
        education, such as examining the impact of parental education or
       test preparation courses on student performance. It could also be
       used to develop machine learning models to predict student
       performance based on demographic and other factors.\n\n
13 source: http://roycekimmons.com/tools/generated_data/exams\n"
14 """
15
16 # Column names:
17 """
18 "gender","race/ethnicity","parental level of education","lunch","test
       preparation course","math score","reading score","writing score"
19 """
20
21 # Column value example:
22 """
23 "female","group D","some college","standard","completed","59","70","78"
24 """
25
26   # Nothing is explicitly wrong in this dataset.
     Listing 15: Example columns and values that have the OTH (Other factors) problem. Dataset origin:
     rkiattisak-student-performance-in-mathematics


                                                    29
