Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROMPTAGENT: S TRATEGIC P LANNING WITH L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS E NABLES E XPERT- LEVEL
P ROMPT O PTIMIZATION
 Xinyuan Wang1∗ Zhen Wang12∗† Chenxi Li1∗ Fan Bai5 Haotian Luo2
 Jiayou Zhang2 Nebojsa Jojic3 Eric Xing24 Zhiting Hu1
 1
   UC San Diego 4 Carnegie Mellon University
 3
   Microsoft Research 5 Georgia Institute of Technology
 2
   Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
 {xiw136, zhw085, zhh019}@ucsd.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

          Highly effective, task-specific prompts are often heavily engineered by experts to
          integrate detailed instructions and domain insights based on a deep understanding
          of both instincts of large language models (LLMs) and the intricacies of the target
          task. However, automating the generation of such expert-level prompts remains
          elusive. Existing prompt optimization methods tend to overlook the depth of do-
          main knowledge and struggle to efficiently explore the vast space of expert-level
          prompts. Addressing this, we present PromptAgent, an optimization method that
          autonomously crafts prompts equivalent in quality to those handcrafted by ex-
          perts. At its core, PromptAgent views prompt optimization as a strategic planning
          problem and employs a principled planning algorithm, rooted in Monte Carlo tree
          search, to strategically navigate the expert-level prompt space. Inspired by human-
          like trial-and-error exploration, PromptAgent induces precise expert-level insights
          and in-depth instructions by reflecting on model errors and generating constructive
          error feedback. Such a novel framework allows the agent to iteratively examine
          intermediate prompts (states), refine them based on error feedbacks (actions), sim-
          ulate future rewards, and search for high-reward paths leading to expert prompts.
          We apply PromptAgent to 12 tasks spanning three practical domains: BIG-Bench
          Hard (BBH), as well as domain-specific and general NLP tasks, showing it sig-
          nificantly outperforms strong Chain-of-Thought and recent prompt optimization
          baselines. Extensive analyses emphasize its capability to craft expert-level, de-
          tailed, and domain-insightful prompts with great efficiency and generalizability1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Prompt engineering aims to craft effective prompts for harnessing the full potential of large language
models (LLMs). Recent automatic prompt engineering, i.e., prompt optimization, has successfully
studied training soft prompts (Lester et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), or searching
for optimal combinations of discrete tokens (Shin et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022), by utilizing internal states or gradients of LLMs. For cutting-edge, proprietary API-based
LLMs like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b), prompt engineering largely relies on somewhat ad-hoc human-
machine interactions. Human prompting experts thus need a unique blend of domain knowledge
and intuition for LLMs to design the most effective prompts. For instance, an ideal prompt from
human experts, shown in Figure 1, might integrate nuanced elements like task descriptions, domain
knowledge, solution guidance, etc., all of which substantially boost prompt quality and performance.
Automating expert-level prompt engineering on API-based LLMs presents significant challenges,
largely due to the intricate nature of expert-level prompts, as illustrated in Figure 1. Although re-
cent prompt optimization approaches have begun to utilize techniques like iterative sampling or
    ∗
      Equal contribution
    †
      Corresponding author
    1
      Code and demo are available at: https://github.com/XinyuanWangCS/PromptAgent


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Biomedical Task Input
         Linkage studies in this family suggested a close linkage between the c2 deficiency gene and genes coding
         for B18 , Dw2 , and BfS antigens .                        “c2 deficiency” is a disease mention to be extracted


               Ordinary User Prompt                                    Prompt From Sampling-Based Method
          Extract the disease or condition from the sentence,         If any disease or condition is mentioned in the
          if any is mentioned.                                        sentence, extract it.

                Expert-level Prompt
            Task Description       You're tasked with extracting diseases or conditions from the given sentence …

           Domain Knowledge        Avoid associated elements: inheritance patterns, genes or gene loci (like PAH) …

           Solution Guidance       Consider both specific diseases and broader categories, common abbreviations …

           Exception Handling      The term 'locus' should be recognized as a genomic location, not a disease name …

           Output Formatting       Provide the identified diseases in this format: {entity_1,entity_2, ...} …
                    …

            Ordinary User/Sampled Prompt Output                          Expert Prompt Output
           c2 deficiency gene                                          c2 deficiency

Figure 1: Expert-level prompt vs. ordinary human-written prompt and prompt from sampling-based
methods (i.e., Automatic Prompt Engineer, Zhou et al. (2022)). The task is in the biomedical domain
for extracting disease entities (NCBI, Doğan et al. (2014)). The expert prompt provides much richer
domain-specific details and structured guidance than the other two, leading to the correct prediction.

evolutionary algorithms, such as Monte Carlo search (Zhou et al., 2022) or Gibbs sampling (Xu
et al., 2023), they mostly employ heuristic methods like text edits or paraphrasing for generating
candidate prompts (Zhou et al., 2022; Prasad et al., 2023). These approaches also often rely on
straightforward iteration algorithms and lack a principled strategy to guide the exploration. Con-
sequently, they tend to settle on local variants of prompts from ordinary users and rarely ascend to
the excellence and nuances of expert-level prompts. Critically, many of these methods overlook that
prompting engineering is essentially a human-in-the-loop application. In this process, humans refine
prompts by fixing intermediate errors and integrating necessary domain knowledge through itera-
tive interactions. This iterative refinement process characterizes the merits of how human experts
craft superior prompts. Yet, the challenge remains that human exploration, while effective, can be
expensive and less efficient at handling multiple errors simultaneously to explore the prompt space,
thereby impeding the scalability of expert-level prompting.
To address the above challenges and combine human-like explo-                Human     APE  PromptAgent
                                                                         1.0
ration with machine efficiency, we introduce PromptAgent in this
paper. Drawing inspiration from human trial-and-error processes,         0.8
                                                                                               Avg. Performance


PromptAgent seamlessly incorporates the principled planning ap-
                                                                         0.6
proach, specifically Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), to strategi-
cally optimize the prompting process. Notably, PromptAgent refor-        0.4
mulates prompt optimization as a strategic planning problem to ad-       0.2
dress the complexity of expert-level prompt space. Under this plan-
ning framework, it plays trial-and-error iteration to retrieve model     0.0
                                                                              GPT-3.5* GPT-4 PaLM 2
errors and leverages the self-reflection ability of LLMs (Jang, 2023;
                                                                      Figure 2: Prompt comparison
Shinn et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023) to generate insightful error
                                                                      across different base models.
feedback. This feedback, in turn, plays a critical role in effec-
tively inducing domain knowledge and guiding towards in-depth prompts. Through strategic plan-
ning, PromptAgent iteratively leverages insightful error feedback (action) to refine each version
of prompts (state). Starting from an initial prompt (state), PromptAgent systematically grows the
prompt space in a tree structure and prioritizes high-reward traces to navigate the vast space of
expert-level prompts. The principled MCTS planning allows PromptAgent to look ahead and sim-
ulate future rewards, which are then backpropagated to update the beliefs about the current prompt
so that PromptAgent can explore more promising alternatives later.
We demonstrate that PromptAgent can discover productive expert-level prompts by applying it to 12
tasks spanning three practical and distinct domains: BIG-Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022),
as well as domain-specific and general NLP tasks. Starting with an initial human-written prompt and
a small set of training samples, PromptAgent not only enhances the performance of the initial human
prompt greatly but also significantly surpasses strong Chain-of-Thought (CoT) and recent prompt


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) MCTS Planning for Prompting                                     (b) State Transition

                                                        Current Prompt: Please determine whether one sentence entails the next.

                                                               Step1: Retrieve Errors from Base Model
                                                        Premise: William learns that kids play in water coming up in streams out of
                                                        a tiled floor with image of a large rose on it.
                                                        Hypothesis: William learns that kids are playing in water.

                                                         Label: Non-entailment   Prediction: Entailment

                                                               Step 2: Generate Error Feedback (Action)
                                                        Meta-prompt 1: Summarize errors and suggest improvements

                                                        Error Feedback: Ignoring Context and Detail—The model might be
                                                        overlooking the details of the premise 'kids play in water coming up in
                                                        streams out of a tiled floor with an image of a large rose on it,', which
                                                        directly implies the hypothesis.

                                                               Step 3: Update Prompt (State)
                                                        Meta-prompt 2: Given the error feedback, give me a better prompt

                                                        New Prompt: Compare the provided sentences … Take into account the
                                                        subtleties in the context, pinpoint the order of events and differentiate
                                                        between facts and assumptions. If the hypothesis is a direct result of the
                                                        premise, select 'entailment'


Figure 3: (a) MCTS (Monte Carlo Tree Search) planning for expert-level prompting. The tree struc-
ture enables strategic planning for PromptAgent. (b) A simplified state transition example. Given a
current state (prompt), the base model (gpt-3.5-turbo) collects errors from the task dataset. The
optimizer model (gpt-4) provides error feedback accordingly. The optimized model then updates
the prompt according to the feedback and transits to the next state.
optimization baselines. For instance, Figure 2 shows PromptAgent consistently outperforms human
and Automatic Prompt Engineer (APE) (Zhou et al., 2022) baselines across GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and
PaLM 2, yielding improvements by 9.1%, 7.7% and 6% over APE, respectively. Extensive qualitative
results further highlight the expert-level aspects of optimized prompts, indicating that PromptAgent
effectively bridges the domain gap in challenging tasks, offering great exploration efficiency and
generalizability. As we anticipate the emergence of even more powerful LLMs that can understand
intricate instructions, we believe that expert-level prompting will spearhead the next era of prompt
engineering, where PromptAgent stands as a pioneering step in this research direction.

2       M ETHODOLOGY
Given a base LLM B and a target task T , the job at hand for a prompt engineer is to craft an op-
timized natural language prompt P T that maximizes the performance of B on T . However, the
gap between novice and expert prompt engineers can be significant, particularly for tasks demand-
ing specialized domain expertise, such as in the biomedical domain. Our primary objective is to
autonomously refine the task prompt P T to bridge this knowledge gap, minimizing human inter-
vention. Most existing approaches rely on sampling local prompt alternatives iteratively, which is
not only resource-intensive but also lacks assurance of yielding an optimal final prompt. In light of
this, we introduce PromptAgent, an agent-based framework to produce expert-level task prompts via
strategic planning and reflecting with error feedback during the prompting process, striking a proper
balance of exploration and performance.
Problem formulation. Adopting a standard setting in prompt optimization (Zhou et al., 2022), we
start with an initial natural language task prompt P0 (e.g., “Let’s solve this problem step-by-step”)
and a small set of training samples from target task T as (Q, A) = {qi , ai }N   i=1 , where qi /ai are
input/output pairs for each sample (e.g., a question and its answer). Given the model input consisting
of P and qi , the base LLM B makes the prediction (typically through a left-to-right generation
process) based on pB (ai |qi , P)2 . The goal of prompt optimization is to find the optimal natural
language prompt P ∗ that maximizes the performance towards a measure function    PR (e.g., accuracy).
This can be formally defined as an optimization problem: P ∗ = arg maxP∈S          i R(pB (ai |qi , P)),
where S denotes the sample space for a natural language prompt, an infinite and intractable space, if
not impossible, to comprehensively enumerate. Conventionally, human experts draw upon a blend
of heuristics and domain-specific insights to craft such prompts. Although previous optimization
methods have attempted to leverage iterative sampling methods for prompt discovery (Zhou et al.,
2022), we advance this line of research by proposing a unified framework that seamlessly integrates
    2
        Note this is traditionally a zero-shot setting we focus on, where task prompt excludes any training samples.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


strategic planning for superior, expert-level prompt optimization. Next, we introduce the formulation
of PromptAgent and then present the planning-based prompt optimization.
2.1 P ROMPTAGENT F RAMEWORK D ESIGN
The goal of PromptAgent is to inject expert-level prior into the task prompt while maintaining effi-
cient exploration via strategic planning. For planning, the state is represented by each version of task
prompt P, and the actions need to encapsulate the potential modifications over the current prompt.
Each action could represent, for instance, editing certain words or phrases or paraphrasing P (Jiang
et al., 2020; Prasad et al., 2023). However, to make the action space more meaningful and trigger
prior knowledge, we instead propose a different action space. As shown in Figure 3 (b), the action is
defined as an error feedback representing the direction of further refining the current prompt (state).
Specifically, PromptAgent generates the action in two steps: collecting errors from training samples
(Step 1) and reflecting on errors to draw useful lessons (Step 2) that potentially improve the prompt
P. Our action generation is also inspired by the recent self-reflection of LLMs (Pryzant et al., 2023).
Given the definition of state and action, PromptAgent formally models the prompt optimization as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) by the tuple (S, A, T, r) in which S is the state space, A is the
action space, T is the transition function T : S×A 7→ S, and r is the reward function r : S×A 7→ R.
Given a current state st , PromptAgent generates an action at based on at ∼ pO (a|st , m1 ), where
m1 is a prompt working on another optimizer LLM O to help the action generation. The action
generation is operationalized by Step 1&2 in Figure 3 (b). Then, PromptAgent obtains a new state
based on the transition function pO (st+1 |st , at , m2 ), where m2 is another prompt helping the state
transition and update the prompt, also working on the optimizer LLM O. More specifically, given
the action at as the error feedback from Step 1&2, PromptAgent asks the optimizer to generate
a new prompt considering previous states and error feedbacks. Finally, to assess the quality of
each new state st after applying action at , PromptAgent straightforwardly defines a reward function
rt = r(st , at ) as the performance on a held-out set separated from the given training samples. The
exact definition of reward will depend on task-specific metrics.
2.2 S TRATEGIC P LANNING FOR P ROMPT O PTIMIZATION
The aforementioned reformulation of the prompt optimization enables us to seamlessly integrate
PromptAgent with principle planning algorithms, notably the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS).
This enables strategically navigating the vast prompt space while balancing the exploration and
exploitation in finding high-reward paths of error feedbacks, which leads to the most generalizable
expert-level prompts. Specifically, we observe some error feedbacks (actions) may inject instance-
specific details into task prompts (states) that are hard to generalize task-wise (exploitation), where
we need strategic planning to explore novel error feedbacks for higher rewards (exploration). MCTS
operationalizes such strategic planning, as shown in Figure 3 (a), by progressively constructing a tree
structure with each node as a state and each edge as the action for transiting states. MCTS expands
the tree strategically by maintaining a state-action value function, Q : S × A 7→ R, which represents
the potential future rewards for applying an action at to a state st . In other words, we rely on
this function, Q(st , at ), to look ahead and estimate the potential rewards for paths following the
current state-action pair. To update this Q function and expand the tree, MCTS iteratively performs
four operations: selection, expansion, simulation, and back-propagation. The iteration process ends
when a pre-defined number of iterations is reached, and we then select the highest-reward trace for
the final prompt. We next explain the four operations in PromptAgent, and the pseudocode of our
MCTS-based prompt optimization can be found in Algorithm 1 of the Appendix.
Selection is the first step that selects the most promising nodes at each level to be further expanded
and explored. At each iteration, it starts from the root node s0 , traverses through each tree level,
selects a subsequent child node at every level, and stops at a leaf node. When selecting the child
node at each level, we leverage the Upper Confidence bounds applied to Trees (UCT) algorithm,
which is well-known for balancing the exploitation (choosing high-value nodes) and exploration
(choosing less-visited nodes) as follows:
                                                          s                    !
                           ∗                       ′           ln N (st )
                          at = arg max Q(st , at ) + c ·                                            (1)
                                 a′t ∈A(st )                 N (ch(st , a′t ))
where A(st ) is the action set for node st , N (st ) is the number of visiting times for node st , ch(s, a)
represents the child node for st after applying action a′t and c is a constant to adjust the exploration.
As we can see, the first term signifies exploitation by the Q value, and the second term indicates


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


exploration, measuring the uncertainty for less visited nodes. In other words, if a node was less
explored and its child node was less visited before, the second term will be higher.
Expansion grows the tree by adding new child nodes to the leaf node reached by the previous
selection step. This is done by applying the action generation and state transition (Figure 3 (b))
multiple times, resulting in multiple new actions and states. Note that we may sample multiple
training batches to derive diverse error feedback (actions). Within new nodes, we then send the
highest-reward one to the next simulation step.
Simulation is the lookahead step to simulate the future trajectories for the selected node from the
previous expansion step. This step usually comes with a playout policy to reach the terminal state
quickly and calculate the future rewards. The choice of playout could be flexible, such as choosing
random moves until the terminal. To reduce the computation cost of simulation and simplify the pro-
cess, we perform the previous expansion step iteratively until the terminal, i.e., we keep generating
multiple actions and selecting the highest-reward node to proceed to the next tree level.
Back-propagation happens when a terminal state is met during the simulation. The terminal state
is usually defined when a pre-defined maximum depth is reached, or an early-stopping criterion is
encountered. We then back-propagate the future rewards along the path from the root to the terminal
node by updating the Q value function. Specifically, for each state-action pair in the path, Q(st , at )
is updated by aggregating the rewards from all future trajectories starting from st as follows:
                                                                          
                                            M
                                         1 X           X
                         Q∗ (st , at ) =                       r(s′ , a′ )                        (2)
                                         M j=1        j       j
                                                   s′ ∈Sst ,a′ ∈Aat

where M is the number of future trajectories starting from st , Ssjt and Ajat represent the j-th state
and action sequences starting from st and at , respectively.
PromptAgent executes the above four operations with a pre-defined number of iterations to stabilize
the Q values and fully grow the tree for exploring the vast prompt space. We finally need to select
the best trace and node (i.e., prompt) for the final evaluation. Multiple alternative solutions can
be leveraged for this output strategy, e.g., one could opt for the best node in the best path with
the highest reward, or directly choose the leaf node with the largest number of visiting times. For
simplicity and empirical purposes, we use the first strategy to select the output prompt, which works
the best in our experiments.

3       E XPERIMENTS
Tasks and Datasets. We curate 12 tasks from three domains for thorough experiments: 6 BIG-
Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022); 3 domain-expert tasks, including NCBI (Doğan et al.,
2014), Biosses (Soğancıoğlu et al., 2017), and Med QA (Jin et al., 2021); and 3 general NLU tasks,
including TREC (Voorhees & Tice, 2000), Subj (Pang & Lee, 2004), and CB (De Marneffe et al.,
2019). More task and dataset details are in Appendix A.1.
Baselines and Implementations. We compare PromptAgent with three types of baselines: human
prompts, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompts, and recent prompt optimization methods: (1) Human
prompts are human-designed instructions usually originating from the datasets. We have a few-
shot version of human prompts with examples from Suzgun et al. (2022) for BBH tasks and ran-
domly sampled examples from the training set for others. (2) CoT prompts are Chain-of-Thought
prompts with reasoning steps. We use the CoT prompts from Suzgun et al. (2022) for BBH tasks
and construct CoT prompts for other tasks. We uses “Let’s think step by step” for CoT (ZS) (Kojima
et al., 2022). (3) Prompt optimization methods include GPT Agent and Automatic Prompt Engineer
(APE) (Zhou et al., 2022). GPT Agent represents the recent surge of interest in LLM-powered au-
tonomous agents (Weng, 2023), such as Auto-GPT 3 . Such agents are expected to autonomously per-
form planning and self-reflection to solve most human requests, including optimizing task prompts.
We then leverage one of the powerful ChatGPT Plugins (OpenAI, 2023a) with GPT-4, AI Agents 4
for prompt optimization. Lastly, APE (Zhou et al., 2022) is one of the most recent prompt optimiza-
tion methods that proposes a Monte Carlo search-based method to iteratively propose and select
    3
        https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT
    4
        https://aiagentslab.com/


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Prompting performance on BBH tasks. ZS: Zero-Shot, FS: Few-Shot. We select six chal-
lenging tasks from BBH (Suzgun et al., 2022), requiring domain knowledge (e.g., Geometry) or
reasoning (e.g., Causal Judgement). Our method outperforms in 5/6 tasks, with only CoT surpass-
ing in Object Counting. On average, our accuracy exceeds others by at least 9%.
               Penguins   Geometry    Epistemic   Object Count.    Temporal     Causal Judge.     Avg.
Human (ZS)       0.595       0.227        0.452       0.612          0.720           0.470       0.513
Human (FS)       0.595       0.315        0.556       0.534          0.408           0.620       0.505
CoT (ZS)         0.747       0.320        0.532       0.542          0.734           0.610       0.581
CoT              0.747       0.540        0.720       0.960          0.626           0.650       0.707
GPT Agent        0.696       0.445        0.406       0.502          0.794           0.520       0.561
APE              0.797       0.490        0.708       0.716          0.856           0.570       0.690
PromptAgent      0.873       0.670        0.806       0.860          0.934           0.670       0.802

Table 2: Prompt performance on specialized and general NLU tasks. Specialized tasks are three
biomedical tasks explicitly asking for domain knowledge for prompting. General NLU tasks are
used to demonstrate the generality of our method. Ours significantly outperformed in all tasks.
                             Domain-specific Tasks                       General NLU Tasks
                  NCBI (F1)     Biosses     Med QA      Avg.      Subj     TREC       CB        Avg.
  Human (ZS)         0.521       0.550        0.508    0.526      0.517      0.742   0.714      0.658
  Human (FS)         0.447       0.625        0.492    0.521      0.740      0.742   0.429      0.637
  CoT (ZS)           0.384       0.425        0.508    0.439      0.656       0.63   0.750      0.679
  CoT                0.376       0.675        0.542    0.531      0.670      0.784   0.643      0.699
  GPT Agent          0.125       0.625        0.468    0.406      0.554      0.736   0.339      0.543
  APE                0.576       0.700        0.470    0.582      0.696      0.834   0.804      0.778
  PromptAgent        0.645       0.750        0.570    0.655      0.806      0.886   0.911      0.868

prompts. More implementation details are in the Appendix: PromptAgent implementation is in A.3;
the hyperparameter settings are in A.3, and the search baseline implementations are in A.4.

3.1   R ESULTS AND A NALYSES
Comparison with various prompting baselines. Table 1 & 2 present a comprehensive comparison
of expert-level prompts generated by PromptAgent against the baselines across 12 tasks. Observing
BBH tasks from Table 1, PromptAgent significantly outperforms all baselines overall and achieves
28.9%, 9.5%, and 11.2% relative improvement over baselines - human prompts (ZS), CoT, and
APE, respectively. It is noteworthy that CoT prompts are especially effective in BBH tasks than
other tasks, similar to findings from Suzgun et al. (2022), because BBH tasks often require strictly
formatted solutions that can be readily induced by the step-by-step CoT reasoning, e.g. Object
Counting. However, PromptAgent still outperforms CoT by a great margin in all tasks (except Object
Counting), indicating that our optimized expert-level prompt can lead to a bigger improvement over
few-shot CoT reasoning (even under the zero-shot prompt setting). Regarding optimization methods,
while GPT Agent has planning and self-reflection capability, its planning is only used for a single
turn of prompt rewriting with limited exploration in prompt space. APE, on the other hand, shows
a greater scale of searching ability, but its exploration is based on Monte Carlo search, without
planning and error-based reflections. Both deficits of GPT Agent and APE suggest the necessity of
strategic planning in PromptAgent to explore the prompt space and deliver expert-level prompts.
Table 2 presents results on domain-specific and general NLP tasks. The former encompasses a
broad spectrum of biomedical tasks, such as information extraction, sentence similarity, and ques-
tion answering. Crafting prompts for these tasks needs extensive domain knowledge and heavy
LLM prompt engineering instincts, where straightforward human prompts and CoT prompts are in-
effective. Iterative-sampling-based optimization methods, like APE, are promising to incorporate
domain knowledge. However, PromptAgent surpasses APE significantly by +7.3% on average, sug-
gesting PromptAgent can better induce effective domain knowledge to produce expert-level prompts
and close the knowledge gap between novice and expert prompt engineers. For general NLP tasks,
the efficacy and generality of PromptAgent are further emphasized, outperforming both CoT and
APE by margins of +16.9% and +9%, respectively. This implies the nontrivial expert gap, even for
general NLP tasks, underscoring the imperative for expert prompts in diverse applications.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Method                                                Epistemic
           0.85                                       Greedy-S
                                                                            0.900

           0.80                                       Greedy-L                                                0.82      0.82    0.82
                                                      APE                   0.800                            0.790     0.790   0.794    0.81
           0.75                                       Ours                                         0.776
                                                                                                    0.76                               0.770
Accuracy
           0.70                                                             0.720
                                                                            0.708


                                                                 Accuracy
           0.65                                       Task                  0.650          0.613
                                                     penguins
           0.60                                      biosses                0.600           0.60

                                                     geometry                                                          Average Train Path
           0.55                                                                                                        Average Test Path
                                                     causal                 0.500                                      Human instruction
           0.50                                      subj                                                              CoT
                                                                            0.452 0.43
                                                                                                                       APE
                   50     75     100   125    150                           0.400
                                                                                    0       1       2         3         4       5       6
      Exploration Efficiency (# of Explored Prompts)                                                 Depth
              (a) Performance vs. Exploration Efficiency                                 (b) Convergence Analysis
Figure 4: (a) Exploration efficiency analysis. A proper balance of exploration and exploitation is
crucial for search and planning. We compare the number of explored prompts between our method
and three strong baselines. Ours achieves the best trade-off of performance and exploration (clus-
tering in the top-left corner). (b) Convergence curves for Epistemic task. We visualize the mean and
variance of the training and testing performance along the paths. We can observe that both curves
increase at first and become stable after depth 3, suggesting a stable learning process


Prompt generalization. We further conduct experiments to investigate whether our optimized
prompts can be generalized to other base LLMs. This emphasizes the robustness and transferabil-
ity of expert-level prompts, which are urgently favorable and underpinning two key facts: (a) the
domain insights and nuanced guidance in expert prompts can be seamlessly transferred across pow-
erful LLMs, reinforcing the universal applicability of expert prompts, and (b) each task is optimized
only once, leading to better computational efficiency. It is crucial to note that the primary goal of
PromptAgent is to optimize prompts for state-of-the-art LLMs to achieve expert-level prompting,
while less advanced and smaller LLMs, like GPT-2 or LLaMA, may not adeptly grasp the subtleties
of these expert-level prompts, potentially causing significant performance drop. We evaluate our
existing optimized prompt on one model more potent (GPT-4) and one less powerful (PaLM 2) com-
pared to GPT-3.5. Figure 10 shows the aggregated results when we directly apply the optimized
prompts from GPT-3.5 to GPT-4 and PaLM 2 (chat-bison-001) across all 12 tasks. We adopt the
human and APE prompts as baselines. For certain tasks, we may employ slightly different prompts
than those referenced in Table 1 to make PaLM 2 generate reasonable responses instead of persistent
null answers. It is worth highlighting that when a stronger base LLM as GPT-4 is deployed, ex-
pert prompts manifest further enhancements, either on par with or outperforming Human and APE
prompts in almost all tasks (11/12) (The only exception, Temporal, seems to be a solved task by
GPT-4 with almost perfect accuracy). This underscores the untapped potential of expert prompting,
especially with the evolution of LLMs in the future. When transferring expert prompts to a weaker
LLM as PaLM 2, its performance drops dramatically across all tasks unsurprisingly. Nonetheless,
we still observe PromptAgent exceeds both baselines on 7/12 tasks, with great improvements on
domain-specialized tasks, such as NCBI, demonstrating the usefulness of domain insights from ex-
pert prompts. Detailed numbers can be found in Appendix Table 10.
Ablation on search strategies. To investigate the effect of strategic planning in PromptAgent sys-
tematically, we conduct an ablation study by comparing multiple alternative search strategies to
MCTS, i.e., one-step Monte Carlo sampling (MC), depth-first greedy search (Greedy), and Beam
search (Beam). Implementation details about search variants are specified in Appendix A.4. We use
the same action generation and state transition as in PromptAgent and only replace the MCTS plan-
ning with each search method. We also restrict the three baselines to explore the same number of
prompts. A subset of tasks is selected from the three domains to compare the above search variants.
Table 9 shows that both Greedy and Beam greatly improve the MC baseline, suggesting the neces-
sity of structured iterative exploration in our framework. When maintaining the same exploration
efficiency, we observe comparable overall performance for Beam and Greedy. However, neither
method strategically explores the prompt space since they operate in a strictly forward direction,
lacking the capability to foresee future outcomes and backtrack to past decisions. In contrast, the
strategic planning for MCTS allows PromptAgent to navigate complex expert prompt spaces more


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    Prompt: Extract the disease or condition from the sentence, if any
                                                                    is mentioned.
      Error Feedback: The language model should                     F1 score (test): 0.521
      differentiate between diseases and the genes or other
      factors associated with those diseases. Consider
      different forms or variations of disease names,               Prompt: Identify and extract all diseases or conditions mentioned
      including abbreviations or short forms.                       in the sentence, taking care to distinguish between diseases and
                                                                    any associated factors like genes. … Any variations or
                                                                    abbreviations of disease names should also be included. …
      Error Feedback: The model misunderstood the                   F1 score (test): 0.609
      difference between diseases and associated factors
      like proteins or pathways. Clarify the definition of
      disease and condition entities, stressing the exclusion       Prompt: You're tasked with identifying and extracting diseases or
      of associated factors like genes or proteins.Specify          conditions as mentioned in the sentence, while carefully excluding
      that common biological terms or genetic locations             any associated factors such as genes, proteins, or pathways. …
      (like locus) should not be mistaken as part of a              For clarity, the term 'locus' is not part of any disease name but
      disease specific name.                                        represents a specific location in the genome.
                                                                    F1 score (test): 0.622

      Error Feedback: The model wrongly identified "PAH"
      as a disease, while it's actually a gene. The model           Prompt: You're tasked with extracting diseases or conditions …
      misunderstood the part "excluding any associated              avoid incorporating any associated elements such as inheritance
      factors such as genes, proteins, or pathways".                patterns (like autosomal dominant), genes or gene loci (like
      Explicitly emphasize the need to exclude associated           PAH), proteins, or biological pathways. … Consider both specific
      factors like inheritance pattern (for example,                diseases and broader categories, and remember diseases and
      autosomal dominant), genes (like PAH), proteins, or           conditions can also appear as common abbreviations or
      pathways when identifying diseases or conditions.             variations. Provide the identified diseases or conditions in this
                                                                    format: {entity_1,entity_2,....}. … Note that the term 'locus' should
                                                                    be recognized as a genomic location and not a disease name.
                                                                    F1 score (test): 0.645


Figure 5: The MCTS state-action transition trajectory of the highest average reward path in NCBI.
The initial state is s0 with a human-written prompt. At each state transition step, a new prompt
is crafted by adjusting the prior state based on error feedback. Highlighted colors indicate similar
domain-specific insights. The last state integrates the information from the entire trajectory, elevat-
ing the F1 score from 0.521 to 0.645.

effectively, which significantly surpasses all search ablations on all tasks and gets a relative 5.6%
overall improvement over the best baseline.
Exploration efficiency analysis. One of the key advantages of PromptAgent is that it can efficiently
explore the prompt space via strategic planning. Exploration efficiency is also vital to make the com-
putation cost of the search manageable. We thus analyze the exploration efficiency by comparing
PromptAgent with some search baselines, including Greedy Search and APE from the previous sec-
tion. Specifically, the exploration efficiency is measured by the number of prompts explored during
the search. We plot its relationship with the task performance in Figure 4a. The Greedy-S and
Greedy-L are Greedy Search with different explored prompts. The APE explores 150 prompts in
each task. The figure shows that points of PromptAgent are clustered around the top left corner, in-
dicating a superior performance with higher accuracy but fewer explored nodes (higher exploration
efficiency). Notably, while increasing the number of prompts in Greedy Search may enhance per-
formance, it demands higher exploration cost and still does not surpass PromptAgent. Also, without
principled guidance, directionless searches like APE cannot effectively boost performance, even
with larger exploration. Therefore, to maintain exploration efficiency and superior performance,
strategic planning is crucial in PromptAgent and worthy of further research investment in future
works. The detailed hyperparameter settings are in Appendix A.4
Convergence analysis. To delve deeper into the learning process of PromptAgent, we examine
the evolution of expert prompts throughout the tree planning process. We monitor and visualize
performance changes with respect to tree depth. As illustrated in Figure 4b for the Epistemic task,
we assess the performance across all nodes and aggregate both training and testing performance
(reward) at each depth level. The plotted trajectories represent the evolution of average performance,
illustrating a consistent improvement and gradually surpassing all baseline methods. Convergence
plots for other tasks and hyperparameter settings are provided in Appendix E and Appendix A.3.
A recurring pattern observed, similar to that in Figure 4b, indicates an upward trend in the initial
iterations, suggesting a robust learning dynamic of PromptAgent to iteratively refine and enhance
expert prompts.
Qualitative analysis. To further vividly show how PromptAgent iteratively converts error feedback
(action) into better prompts (states), we conduct a qualitative analysis on the optimized trace from
MCTS planning. As shown in Figure 5, we present the first four states and three action-state tran-
sitions of the best reward path for the NCBI task (Doğan et al., 2014). We highlight the domain
insights by colors in both actions and states, where the same color indicates similar insights. As we
can see, starting from a human-written prompt as s0 , PromptAgent proposes various insightful error


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


feedback (action) and effectively merges them into a new prompt (state) with improved performance.
Specifically, throughout several transitions, the definition of a disease entity becomes increasingly
refined, and task-specific details are integrated. The final state benefits from the accumulated infor-
mation along the path, resulting in an expert prompt and an improved test F1 score.
Additional ablation studies. We conduct ablation studies of the hyperparameters including opti-
mizer model, base model, exploration weight c, and iteration number in Appendix B

4   R ELATED W ORKS
Prompt optimization. Automatically discovering optimal prompts has emerged as a central chal-
lenge in the era of LLMs. For open-sourced LLMs, one can leverage their gradients to either train
additional parameters, such as soft prompts (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022), or search for discrete prompts via gradient-based search (Shin et al., 2020;
Wen et al., 2023) or reinforcement learning (Deng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). However, such
methods are infeasible for closed-sourced LLMs, which requires gradient-free prompt optimiza-
tion. Iteratively sampling and selecting is a typical method (Zhou et al., 2022). Numerous methods
emphasize diversifying the prompt candidates - examples include edit-based methods like deleting
or swapping phrases (Prasad et al., 2023), back translation (Xu et al., 2022), evolutionary opera-
tions (Guo et al., 2023; Fernando et al., 2023), or more relevantly, LLM rewriting based on natural
language feedback (Zhou et al., 2022; Pryzant et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). There are also ex-
plorations into alternate sampling procedures like Monte Carlo search (Zhou et al., 2022), Gibbs
sampling (Xu et al., 2023) or Beam search (Pryzant et al., 2023). Nevertheless, PromptAgent fun-
damentally differs from all the above methods in two ways. First, while primary search algorithms
have been investigated (Zhou et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Pryzant et al., 2023), we are the first
to introduce strategic planning into prompting optimization research and incorporate fine-grained
domain insights.
Augmenting LLMs with self-reflection and planning. Despite their remarkable capabilities, mod-
ern LLMs exhibit certain limitations, such as long-term coherence (Malkin et al., 2022), lacking an
internal world model (Hao et al., 2023a), etc. Thus, augmenting LLMs has drawn extensive atten-
tion recently (Mialon et al., 2023; Ozturkler et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023b; Jojic et al., 2023). Two
common strategies are LLM self-reflection and planning. Self-reflection encourages the LLM to in-
trospect its outputs and suggest more refined solutions (Jang, 2023; Pan et al., 2023). This has been
leveraged to enhance a variety of applications, from complex computer tasks (Shinn et al., 2023),
text generation (Welleck et al., 2022) to reasoning (Paul et al., 2023). planning with LLMs sheds
light on enhancing these models, which is an essential ability for intelligent agents to take a sequence
of actions in achieving specific goals (McCarthy et al., 1963; Bylander, 1994). One line of research
is to prompt and evaluate LLMs on planning tasks directly (Liu et al., 2023). Another closer line
of research is to augment the strategic reasoning ability of LLMs with planning-based algorithms,
e.g. Tree of Thoughts (ToT) applies DFS/BFS, while both CoRe (Zhu et al., 2022) and RAP (Hao
et al., 2023a) utilize MCTS to navigate richer reasoning paths. Yet, in contrast to existing endeavors
in LLM augmentation, PromptAgent is the first novel framework for synergistically marrying the
spirits of self-reflection and planning specifically tailored for prompt optimization.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce PromptAgent, a novel prompt optimization framework capable of au-
tonomously crafting expert-level prompts for a given task. Expert-level prompting distinguishes
itself from traditional prompt engineering by its effectiveness of seamlessly integrating domain in-
sights and closing the knowledge gap for domain experts. To achieve this, central to PromptAgent
is the novel perspective of viewing prompt optimization as a strategic planning problem, lever-
aging the power of MCTS planning to strategically and efficiently traverse the complex prompt
space. PromptAgent incorporates domain-specific knowledge from tasks into the newly gener-
ated prompts through a trial-and-error manner based on the self-reflection abilities of LLMs. We
tested the PromptAgent on 12 diverse tasks spanning three distinct domains. The prompts optimized
by PromptAgent consistently exhibited expert-level characteristics, enriched with domain-specific
details and guidance. These prompts significantly outperformed both human-written, Chain-of-
Thought prompting and other optimized method baselines. Further in-depth analyses revealed su-
perior transferability, exploration efficiency, and quality for our expert prompts, paving the way for
future prompt engineering to unlock the sophisticated task understanding of state-of-the-art LLMs.

                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L IMITATION D ISCUSSION

While PromptAgent demonstrates significant promise in optimizing expert prompts across a diverse
range of tasks, its application to highly specialized domains, particularly where domain knowledge
of the optimizer is limited (Bhayana et al., 2023; Azizi et al., 2023), presents unique challenges.
Our current implementation, employing GPT-4 as the optimizer, effectively addresses a wide array
of tasks, including those in the BIG-bench, biomedical, and NLP domains. However, the scope and
depth of knowledge within LLMs, like GPT-4, are inherently tied to the state of LLMs and the data
they have been pre-trained on (Yin et al., 2023). This raises concerns in domains where data is
sparse or protected, such as in healthcare under HIPAA regulations 5 .
While addressing these limitations is beyond the current paper’s scope, we propose a range of strate-
gies to enhance the adaptability of PromptAgent in domains where employing GPT-4 as the opti-
mizer LLM may not be ideal. These include but are not limited to, adapting GPT-4 in specialized
domains using highly tailored knowledge prompts to better trigger domain knowledge; leveraging
retrieval techniques to supplement domain knowledge; implementing a quality control mechanism
for error feedback; integrating a hybrid optimizer that combines the broad capabilities of general
LLMs with specialized domain LLMs; and engaging with human experts to provide domain-specific
guidance in the optimization process. Moreover, data augmentation techniques using synthetic or
anonymized datasets, particularly for sensitive domains, are also promising to enrich the domain ex-
pertise of LLMs while maintaining compliance with privacy standards. Future research should focus
on refining these strategies to mitigate the current limitations, broadening the scope and impact of
PromptAgent in the evolving landscape of expert-level prompt applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions. We
are grateful to Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Qiyue Gao, and other members of UCSD MixLab for their valuable
discussions. We also thank Weijia Xu for discussing the baseline details of Reprompting (Xu et al.,
2023).


R EFERENCES
Zahra Azizi, Pouria Alipour, Sofia Gomez, Cassandra Broadwin, Sumaiya Islam, Ashish Sarraju,
  AJ Rogers, Alexander T Sandhu, and Fatima Rodriguez. Evaluating recommendations about atrial
  fibrillation for patients and clinicians obtained from chat-based artificial intelligence algorithms.
  Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology, pp. e012015, 2023.

Rajesh Bhayana, Satheesh Krishna, and Robert R Bleakney. Performance of chatgpt on a radiology
  board-style examination: Insights into current strengths and limitations. Radiology, pp. 230582,
  2023.

Tom Bylander. The computational complexity of propositional strips planning. Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 69(1-2):165–204, 1994.

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Mandy Simons, and Judith Tonhauser. The commitmentbank: In-
 vestigating projection in naturally occurring discourse. In proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung,
 volume 23, pp. 107–124, 2019.

Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yihan Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song,
 Eric Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Rlprompt: Optimizing discrete text prompts with reinforcement
 learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 3369–3391, 2022.

Rezarta Islamaj Doğan, Robert Leaman, and Zhiyong Lu. Ncbi disease corpus: a resource for
  disease name recognition and concept normalization. Journal of biomedical informatics, 47:1–
  10, 2014.
   5
       https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel.
  Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.16797, 2023.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
  prompt optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532, 2023.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023a.
Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Toolkengpt: Augmenting frozen language
  models with massive tools via tool embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11554, 2023b.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Eric Jang. Can llms critique and iterate on their own outputs?     evjang.com, Mar 2023. URL
  https://evjang.com/2023/03/26/self-reflection.html.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What dis-
  ease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.
Ana Jojic, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. Gpt is becoming a turing machine: Here are some ways
  to program it. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14310, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 3045–3059, 2021.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation.
  In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 4582–4597, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.353. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.353.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023.
Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. Coherence boosting: When your pretrained lan-
  guage model is not paying enough attention. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8214–8236, 2022.
John McCarthy et al. Situations, actions, and causal laws. Comtex Scientific, 1963.
Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
OpenAI, Sep 2023a. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plugins.
OpenAI.   Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023b.             URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Batu Ozturkler, Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. Thinksum: Probabilistic reasoning
  over sets using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01293, 2022.
Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang
  Wang. Automatically correcting large language models: Surveying the landscape of diverse self-
  correction strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03188, 2023.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. A sentimental education: sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
  rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 271–es, 2004.
Debjit Paul, Mete Ismayilzada, Maxime Peyrard, Beatriz Borges, Antoine Bosselut, Robert West,
  and Boi Faltings. Refiner: Reasoning feedback on intermediate representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.01904, 2023.
Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
  struction search for prompting large language models. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of
  the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3827–3846, 2023.
Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt
  optimization with” gradient descent” and beam search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03495, 2023.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
  Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
  4222–4235, 2020.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Gizem Soğancıoğlu, Hakime Öztürk, and Arzucan Özgür. Biosses: a semantic sentence similarity
  estimation system for the biomedical domain. Bioinformatics, 33(14):i49–i58, 2017.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks
 and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Ellen M Voorhees and Dawn M Tice. Building a question answering test collection. In Proceed-
  ings of the 23rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
  information retrieval, pp. 200–207, 2000.
Zhen Wang, Rameswar Panda, Leonid Karlinsky, Rogerio Feris, Huan Sun, and Yoon Kim. Mul-
  titask prompt tuning enables parameter-efficient transfer learning. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Sean Welleck, Ximing Lu, Peter West, Faeze Brahman, Tianxiao Shen, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin
  Choi. Generating sequences by learning to self-correct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00053, 2022.
Yuxin Wen, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
  Hard prompts made easy: Gradient-based discrete optimization for prompt tuning and discovery.
  arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2302, 2023.
Lilian Weng. Llm-powered autonomous agents. lilianweng.github.io, Jun 2023. URL https:
  //lilianweng.github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/.
Hanwei Xu, Yujun Chen, Yulun Du, Nan Shao, Wang Yanggang, Haiyu Li, and Zhilin Yang. Gps:
  Genetic prompt search for efficient few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8162–8171, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weijia Xu, Andrzej Banburski-Fahey, and Nebojsa Jojic. Reprompting: Automated chain-of-thought
 prompt inference through gibbs sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09993, 2023.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
Zhangyue Yin, Qiushi Sun, Qipeng Guo, Jiawen Wu, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Do large
  language models know what they don’t know? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18153, 2023.
Tianjun Zhang, Xuezhi Wang, Denny Zhou, Dale Schuurmans, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Tempera:
  Test-time prompt editing via reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Xinyu Zhu, Junjie Wang, Lin Zhang, Yuxiang Zhang, Ruyi Gan, Jiaxing Zhang, and Yujiu Yang.
  Solving math word problem via cooperative reasoning induced language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.16257, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A.1   TASKS AND DATASETS .

To fully demonstrate the expert-level prompt op-               Table 3: Data split
timization of PromptAgent, we curate 12 tasks
from three domains for thorough experiments:         Task                  Train   Test
BIG-Bench Hard (BBH), domain-expert, and gen-        Bigbench
eral NLU tasks. BBH tasks (Suzgun et al., 2022)      Penguins              70        79
are a set of challenging BIG-Bench tasks (Sri-       Geometry              150      200
vastava et al., 2023) that are beyond the capa-      Epistemic             500     500
bilities of current LLMs, in which we select 6       Object counting       300     500
BBH tasks based on their requirement for do-         Temporal              300     500
main knowledge (i.e., geometric shapes, epis-        causal judgement      90      100
temic, and causal judgment) and multi-step rea-
soning (i.e., penguins in a table, object counting   Domain   Knowledge
and temporal sequences). Moreover, we select         NCBI                  2000     940
                                                     Biosses               60        40
three domain-specific tasks in the biomedical do-
                                                     Med QA                2000     500
main, which can explicitly benefit from expert-
level prompting, including NCBI (Doğan et al.,      General NLP
2014), Biosses (Soğancıoğlu et al., 2017), and     Subj                  400     1000
Med QA (Jin et al., 2021). Last but not least, to    TREC                  400      500
show that PromptAgent can further improve tra-       CB                    125       56
ditional NLP tasks, we select three well-known
NLU tasks, i.e., TREC (Voorhees & Tice, 2000), Subj (Pang & Lee, 2004), and CB (De Marneffe
et al., 2019).
Dataset Split. For datasets with predefined testing sets, we use them directly as our testing set.
However, if the set exceeds 1000 examples, we limit it to the top 1000. If no default testing set
is provided, we shuffle the data and allocate approximately half for testing purposes. The remain-
ing data forms the training set, from which batches are sampled. Additionally, a smaller subset is
reserved for reward calculation. The size of this subset is dictated by the size of the training set,
typically ranging between 60 to 200 examples, with a default of 150 if the training set is larger than
150 examples. The data split is in Table 3.

A.2   I NPUT F ORMULATION

We form our model input in the following format:
                 Prompt + Task Prefix + Question + Task Suffix + Answer Format
The ”Prompt” is our optimization target; the ”Task Prefix” (Optional) is the task-specific back-
ground intro (For example, a table of background data in the Penguins); the “Question” is the main
body of the task’s question; the ”Task Suffix” (Optional) includes the options (For example, yes/no,
entailment/non-entailment, or A, B... in tasks with multiple choices); and the ”Answer Format”
(Optional) is designed for answer caption from the model’s response. The input format is in Table 11.

A.3   P ROMPTAGENT I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

PromptAgent (Ours). PromptAgent performs MCTS planning within the prompt space, requiring
both terminal state conditions and a reward function. A terminal state is achieved when the path
length hits depth limit. The reward function is determined by the base model’s performance on the
held-out set. For computational efficiency to avoid unnecessary exploration, we also apply an early-
stopping method after depth is larger than 2: if the state’s reward is less than a min threshold or
larger than a max threshold, we then reach an early-stopping state. Specifically, min threshold is the
average of the rewards of its parent node and the root node, while max threshold is the maximum of
all the current nodes, encouraging shorter paths.
      1. Initialization. The PromptAgent-MCTS algorithm starts with an initial prompt as the root
         node. For BBH tasks, we directly adopt the task “description” from the original datasets


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         as the initial prompts, except that Object Counting’s default description doesn’t follow the
         format of instruction. We crafted the initial prompts for the rest of the tasks according to
         their task objectives or question-answer formats. The root node will be evaluated to obtain
         the reward before the first expansion.
      2. MCTS Iterations. The agent will perform 12 MCTS iterations. During the selection
         step, starting from the root node, the best child node will be added to the path according
         to its UCT value (Equation 1), and the exploration weight c in UCT is 2.5. During the
         expansion step, expand width batches (batch size is 5) of examples will be sampled from
         the training set, and each batch will be fed to the base model to collect the errors. If there
         is no error, this sample-forward loop will iterate until an error is found. The errors will be
         formatted using error string (illustrated in Table 11) and inserted into error feedback
         (illustrated in Table 11, Meta-prompt 1 in Figure 3) to summarize errors by the optimizer.
         state transit prompt (illustrated in Table 11, Meta-prompt 2 in Figure 3) contains the
         expanding node’s prompt, the trajectory of prompts (list of prompts from the root of the
         expanding node on the currently selected path), and the error summarization, which is fed
         into the optimizer to generate num samples new prompts (nodes). The new nodes will be
         evaluated and added as the expanding node’s children if they are not terminal nodes. Each
         expansion will generate expand width × num samples new prompts. The simulation step
         will recursively expand the last node in the path and pick the one with the highest reward
         to add to the path. When the last node satisfies the terminal condition or early-stopping
         condition, the simulation is stopped. During the back-propagation, from the last node to
         the root, the cumulative rewards (the sum of rewards from the node to the leaf/terminal
         node) will be appended to the node’s cumulative reward list, the average of which will be
         the node’s Q (Equation 2). We have three hyperparameter settings: Standard, Wide, and
         Lite in Table 4. In the Standard and Lite experiments, both have an expand width of 3 and
         num samples of 1, but their depth limit are 8 for Standard and 4 for Lite. Wide experiment
         has expand width is 3 and num samples = 2 to generate more nodes in each expansion
         step, but with a depth limit of 6 to limit the total number of explored prompts. We select
         the best setting for each task based on the final rewards.
      3. Output strategy. Each MCTS iteration will output one path from the root node to the leaf
         node, and there are tens of nodes generated after the searching process. We select the path
         with the highest average reward, then pick the prompt with the highest reward in the path as
         the final output prompt. We employ this strategy because the path with the highest average
         reward represents the best overall search trajectory. Also, the best prompt might not always
         be the last node on the optimal path, given that it may be a terminal state by reaching the
         depth limit.

                  Table 4: Hyperparameter settings for PromptAgent Experiments

                         Experiment Name         Standard      Wide     Lite
                         depth limit                   8         6       4
                         expand width                  3         3       3
                         num samples                   1         2       1

Hyperparameters and default settings. For all datasets, we use the original testing set by default
if publicly available; otherwise, we use the development set for testing. If there is no official train-
ing/testing split, such as BBH tasks, we sample a reasonably large set for stable testing. As stated
in Section 2.1, we also split a portion of training samples for calculating the reward. The details of
the dataset split can be found in Appendix Table 3. Unless further specified, for the base LLM to
be optimized, we target the decently powerful one and use GPT-3.5 as the default base LLM. For
the optimizer LLM, we need one with a good self-reflection ability and use GPT-4 as the default
optimizer LLM. We set the temperature as 0.0 for base LLM to make predictions and 1.0 in other
contexts. When implementing PromptAgent, we set the number of iterations for MCTS τ as 12,
and the exploration weight c in Equation 1 as 2.5. During the expansion step, we generate an action
based on the errors from a batch of training samples (batch size is 5). We sample 3 batches, and for
each batch, we generate multiple new prompts.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4    BASELINES I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We illustrate the details for various baselines in our experiments.
Monte Carlo (MC). MC performs one-step sampling multiple times and selects the best one as
the optimized prompt. It uses the same prompt sampling method as PromptAgent, but limits the
searching depth to one. In the search ablation study, we sampled 72 new prompts in each task.
Beam Search (Beam). Beam also uses the same expand function as PromptAgent. Each node,
except the root, will be expanded into 3 new nodes, and the beam width is 3, meaning that there will
be 9 nodes in each depth of the search tree, and the best 3 nodes will be kept for the next expansion.
The root will be expanded into 9 new nodes. The search depth is 8, so there will be 72 nodes or new
prompts in total.
Greedy Search (Greedy). Greedy is based on the Beam Search, but the beam width is one, so
the algorithm turns into a depth-first greedy search. We conducted 2 experiments, Greedy-S and
Greedy-L, in Figure 4a, with the same search depth of 8 but different expand widths. The Greedy-
S’s expand width is 3, with 34 prompts in total. The Greedy-L has an expand width of 9 and 72
nodes in total, which is also referred to as the Greedy baseline in Table 9.
APE (Zhou et al., 2022). We employ the iterative APE with one iteration as our baseline, as
suggested by the original paper (Zhou et al., 2022). When generating new prompts, a mini-batch
comprising 5 data pieces is sampled as Input-Output examples for APE. Specifically, for Initial Pro-
posal Step, by default, 10 data batches are sampled, with each batch being used to generate 10 new
prompts. This results in a total of 100 candidate prompts during the initial step. (Due to the longer
processing time of Med QA, only 25 candidates are generated for it in this phase.) Subsequently, the
five prompts with the highest evaluation scores are chosen for the iterative proposal step. For Iter-
ative Proposal Step, similar to the initial phase, 10 batches of data are sampled for each proposed
prompt, resulting in a total of 50 candidate prompts in this step. Following this, the prompt with the
top evaluation score is chosen as the optimized prompt.

A.5    MCTS A LGORITHM FOR P ROMPTAGENT

Algorithm 1 PromptAgent-MCTS(s0 , pθ , rθ , pϕ , d, L, τ, c)
  Inputs:
      Initial prompt (state) s0 , state transition function pθ , reward function rθ , action generation function pϕ ,
      number of generated actions d, depth limit L, iteration number τ , exploration weight c (Equation 1)
  Initialize:
      State to action mapping A : S 7→ A, children mapping ch : S × A 7→ S, rewards r : S × A 7→ R,
      State-action value function Q : S × A 7→ R, visit-time counter N : S 7→ N
  for n ← 0, . . . , τ − 1 do
      for t ← 0, . . . , L − 1 do
          if A(st ) is not empty then                     q                                               ▷ selection
                                                             ln N (st )
              at ← arg maxa∈A(st ) Q(st , a) + c ·          N (ch(st ,a))
              st+1 ← ch(st , at ), rt ← r(st , at ), N (st ) ← N (st ) + 1
         else                                                                                ▷ expansion and simulation
              for i ← 1, . . . , d do
                  Sample ait ∼ pϕ (a|st ), sit+1 ∼ pθ (s|st , ait ), and rti ← rθ (st , ait )
                  Update A(st ) ← {ait }di=1 , ch(st , ait ) ← sit+1 , and r(st , ait ) ← rti
              end for
              at ← arg maxait ∈A(st ) rti (st , ait )
              st+1 ← ch(st , at ), rt ← r(st , at ), N (st ) ← N (st ) + 1
         end if
         if st+1 is an early-stopping state then break
     end for
     T ← the actual number of steps
     for t ← T − 1, . . . , 0 do                                                                    ▷ back-propagation
         Update Q(st , at ) with {rt , rt+1 , . . . , rL } based on Equation 2
     end for
  end for


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
B.1   A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF O PTIMIZER M ODEL

Table 5 shows the results on two biomedical tasks and one general NLU task of ablating the op-
timizer LLM with GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. Note that the default base model is GPT-3.5. The first
row directly prompts GPT-3.5 with the initial prompt. The second and third rows use GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4 for the optimizer LLM, respectively. As we can see, when replacing GPT-4 with GPT-3.5,
which contains much less domain knowledge, we still obtained substantial gains over the initial
prompt baseline. While the performance is lower than GPT-4 as expected, the drop is tolerable and
marginal, especially in the domain-specific task, NCBI, with only about 3 point drop. Such results
indicate the robustness of the overall PromptAgent framework to strategically search for high-quality
domain insights, instead of solely relying on the knowledge of optimizer LLM.

Table 5: Ablation study of optimizer model: Prompt performances of using both GPT-3.5 as base
and optimizer LLM (second row), and using GPT-3.5 as base model and GPT-4 as optimizer (third
row).

                  Optimizer        NCBI (F1)     Biosses (Acc.)    Subjective (Acc.)
                  Initial Prompt      0.521             0.550             0.517
                  GPT-3.5             0.615             0.675             0.747
                  GPT-4               0.645             0.750             0.806



B.2   A BLATION EXPERIMENT OF BASE M ODEL

The choice of the base model is very flexible in the PromptAgent framework, which could be GPT-
3.5, GPT-4, PaLM, or other LLMs. However, using a weaker LLM as the base model, such as PaLM
2 (chat-bison-001), could lead to a performance drop, partially due to the weaker understanding
of expert prompts. This can be indirectly observed from the generalization experiment, where we
transfer GPT-3.5-based prompts to PaLM 2 with a performance drop. We conduct new experiments
in Table 6 to directly observe the effect of using PaLM 2 as the base model. As we mentioned
in the paper, PaLM 2 is weaker than GPT-3.5, but we can see PromptAgent can still improve its
performance greatly. Table 6 shows the results in three tasks using different base models, PaLM 2
and GPT-3.5, both against GPT-4 as the optimizer. The first row shows the worse initial performance
using PaLM 2, indicating its weaker understanding of human prompts. After using PromptAgent
to optimize PaLM 2 in the second row, we observe significant improvement over the first row,
indicating the effect of PromptAgent to optimize weaker LLMs.

                                Table 6: Ablation study of base model.

                     Prompt and Base Model           Penguins     Biosses    CB
                     Initial Prompt (PaLM2)             0.215     0.500     0.571
                     Optimized Prompt (PaLM2)           0.443     0.600     0.839
                     Initial Prompt (GPT-3.5)           0.595     0.550     0.714
                     optimized Prompt (GPT-3.5)         0.873     0.750     0.911


B.3   A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF E XPLORATION W EIGHT

Exploration weight p   c: In the paper, we choose c = 2.5 in Equation 1 because the formula of the
exploration rate is c · ln N (st )/N (ch(st , a′t )), so we set some values of the visited times of parent
node N (st ) and child node N (ch(st , a′t )). We find c = 2.5 can make the change of this value at
a reasonable scale, when the N (st ) and N (ch(st , a′t )) increase. We also show new experiments in
Table 7, showing that when c is small (1.0), the MCTS will only have one path, while c is large (4.0),
the MCTS will almost generate a new path in each iteration. Both of them are out of balance; c is
small, so the prompt space is not well explored; while c is large, each path won’t be visited multiple
times to update the reward; we thus use c = 2.5 as a reasonable setting.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Ablation study of exploration weight c: Weight for balancing exploration vs. exploitation.

                    c           CB                Biosses              Penguins
                    1.0   0.768 (27 nodes)    0.650 (30 nodes)     0.759 (27 nodes)
                    2.5   0.911 (45 nodes)    0.750 (36 nodes)     0.700 (55 nodes)
                    4.0   0.857 (66 nodes)    0.700 (55 nodes)     0.835 (75 nodes)


B.4   A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF I TERATION N UMBER

Like many other empirical studies, we select hyperparameters based on intuitions and preliminary
experiments. We now show additional hyperparameter selection experiments on iteration number
and the exploration weight c.
Iteration: In the paper, we select the iteration based on our experience that a small number of
iterations can’t explore the prompt space well, but too many iterations are not necessary because
they may have a potential problem of overfitting on the training set. We add new experiments in
Table 8 to test various choices of the iteration number, including iterations of 8, 12, and 16. The
iteration of 8 is too small, which leads to a drop in performance, and the iteration of 16 is too large
for the overfitting issue, leading to a marginal drop.

                        Table 8: Ablation study of iteration number of MCTS.

                              Iteration      CB    Biosses       Penguins
                              8           0.804       0.625       0.722
                              12          0.911       0.750       0.873
                              16          0.893       0.725       0.835



B.5   A BLATION EXPERIMENT OF SEARCH METHODS

Table 9: Ablation study on search methods. MC: Monte Carlo search, Greedy: greedy depth-first
search, Beam: beam search. Testing tasks are representative of three task domains from BBH (Suz-
gun et al., 2022), domain-expert, and general NLU. Our method consistently outperforms all other
ablated search algorithms across every task we evaluated.

                                      MC      Beam      Greedy     MCTS (Ours)
                          Penguins   0.772    0.823      0.810        0.873
                          Biosses    0.575    0.675      0.700        0.750
                          Geometry   0.490    0.610      0.545        0.670
                          Causal     0.650    0.610      0.660        0.670
                          Subj       0.692    0.765      0.778        0.806
                          Average    0.635    0.697      0.698        0.754



B.6   D ETAILED PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON PROMPT GENERALIZATION EXPERIMENTS


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Prompt generalization results. While we optimize GPT-3.5 as the default base LLM, its
optimized prompts are transferable to other base LLMs like GPT-4 and PaLM 2 (chat-bison-001).
GPT-4 sees further enhancement with our prompts, beating baselines in 11/12 tasks. Weaker LLMs
like PaLM 2 may have challenges with our advanced prompts but still surpass baselines in 7/12 tasks.
Overall, ours can significantly beat baselines with different base LLMs.

                           GPT-3.5                    GPT-4                      PaLM 2
  Tasks           Human      APE     Ours    Human      APE     Ours    Human      APE     Ours
  Penguins         0.595    0.747    0.797    0.772    0.848    0.962    0.430     0.443   0.456
  Geometry         0.227    0.490    0.670    0.495    0.445    0.680    0.290     0.215   0.360
  Epistemic        0.452    0.708    0.806    0.734    0.848    0.848    0.470     0.392   0.588
  Object Count.    0.612    0.716    0.860    0.830    0.852    0.888    0.290     0.378   0.320
  Temporal         0.720    0.856    0.934    0.980    0.992    0.982    0.540     0.522   0.620
  Causal Judge.    0.470    0.570    0.670    0.740    0.740    0.770    0.440     0.440   0.430
  NCBI (F1)        0.521    0.576    0.645    0.588    0.428    0.697    0.016     0.025   0.177
  Biosses          0.550    0.700    0.750    0.700    0.775    0.800    0.500     0.300   0.600
  Med QA           0.508    0.470    0.570    0.770    0.758    0.774    0.284     0.274   0.276
  Subj             0.517    0.696    0.806    0.867    0.805    0.879    0.496     0.537   0.499
  TREC             0.742    0.834    0.886    0.716    0.764    0.876    0.380     0.400   0.230
  CB               0.714    0.804    0.914    0.911    0.893    0.911    0.571     0.643   0.732
  Average          0.552    0.685    0.776    0.759    0.762    0.839    0.392     0.381   0.441


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    TASK I NPUT AND M ETA P ROMPT F ORMAT
In this section, we will demonstrate the Meta formats and some model input examples.


                                    Table 11: Meta Formats.

    Format Name       Meta Format
    input format      {prompt}
                      {task prefix}
                      {question}
                      {task suffix}
                      {answer format}
     error string     <{index}>
                      The model’s input is:
                      {question}
                      The model’s response is:
                      {response}
                      The correct label is: {label}
                      The model’s prediction is {prediction}
     error feedback   I’m writing prompts for a language model designed for a task.
                      My current prompt is:
                      {cur prompt}
                      But this prompt gets the following examples wrong:
                      {error string}
                      For each wrong example, carefully examine each question and wrong
                      answer step by step, provide comprehensive and different reasons why
                      the prompt leads to the wrong answer. At last, based on all these rea-
                      sons, summarize and list all the aspects that can improve the prompt.
     state transit    I’m writing prompts for a language model designed for a task.
                      My current prompt is:
                      {cur prompt}
                      But this prompt gets the following examples wrong:
                      {error string}
                      Based on these errors, the problems with this prompt and the reasons
                      are:
                      {error feedback}
                      There is a list of former prompts including the current prompt, and each
                      prompt is modified from its former prompts:
                      {trajectory prompts}
                      Based on the above information, please write {steps per gradient} new
                      prompts following these guidelines:
                      1. The new prompts should solve the current prompt’s problems.
                      2. The new prompts should consider the list of prompts and evolve
                      based on the current prompt.
                      3. Each new prompt should be wrapped with <START>and <END>.
                      The new prompts are:


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    TASK I NPUT E XAMPLES
In this section, we show some input examples in several tasks for the base model. Specifically, our
tasks fall into three categories: multi-choice selection, name entity recognition, and direct answer
matching. As representative examples, we select Penguins in A Table, NCBI, and Subjective to
illustrate the input format.


          Prompt:      Task Prefix:       Question:          Task Suffix:    Answer Format


                                             Penguins In A Table


               Answer questions about a table of penguins and their attributes.
               Here is a table where the first line is a header and each subsequent line is a
               penguin:

               name, age, height (cm), weight (kg)
               Louis, 7, 50, 11
               Bernard, 5, 80, 13
               Vincent, 9, 60, 11
               Gwen, 8, 70, 15

               For example: the age of Louis is 7, the weight of Gwen is 15 kg, the height of
               Bernard is 80 cm.

               We now add a penguin to the table:
               James, 12, 90, 12
               And here is a similar table, but listing giraffes:

               name, age, height (cm), weight (kg)
               Jody, 5, 430, 620
               Gladys, 10, 420, 590
               Marian, 2, 310, 410
               Donna, 9, 440, 650
               How many penguins are there in the tables?
               Options:
               (A) 1
               (B) 2
               (C) 3
               (D) 4
               (E) 5

               At the end show the answer option bracketed between <answer> and
               </answer>.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Prompt:       Task Prefix:          Question:            Task Suffix:        Answer Format


                                                       NCBI



          Extract the disease or condition from the sentence, if any is mentioned.
          ['Our', 'results', 'support', 'linkage', 'of', 'vWS', 'within', 'a', 'region', 'of', 'tightly',
          'linked', 'markers', 'and', 'do', 'not', 'favour', 'locus', 'heterogeneity', 'of', 'the',
          'disease', 'trait', '.']
          Output the answer in this format:{entity_1,entity_2,....}. If no disease entities are
          present, please output an empty list in this format: {}.


                                                   Subjective


          Please perform Subjectivity Classification task. Given the sentence, assign a label
          from ['subjective','objective']. Return label only without any other text.
          Text: `` dreamcatcher `` tells the story of four young friends who perform a heroic
          act - and are changed forever by the uncanny powers they gain in return .
          Is the preceding text objective or subjective?
          Options:
          - Objective
          - Subjective


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E   C ONVERGENCE OBSERVATION DETAILS

                                                CB                                                                           TREC
              0.825                                    0.83                                  0.80                                              0.80
                                                                                                             Average Reward Path                        0.79
              0.800                                                                          0.78            Best Reward Path                          0.777
                                        0.79                                                                                  0.77             0.768
              0.775                                            0.778                         0.76
                                                                       0.752                                                           0.75
              0.750                            0.748 0.749                                   0.74
                               0.738            0.74
     Reward


                                                                                    Reward
                                0.73                                                                                 0.72
              0.725                                                                          0.72
              0.700                                                                          0.70
              0.675                                                                          0.68           0.68
              0.650                              Average Reward Path                         0.66
                       0.63                      Best Reward Path                                   0.65
              0.625                                                                          0.64
                         0       1       2       3       4       5      6                             0         1        2     3        4       5       6
                                               Depth                                                                         Depth
                              Bigbench: Causal Judgement                                                   Bigbench: Geometric Shapes
                                                        0.69                                                                           0.53        0.52
                                                                                                                     0.51
              0.68                                     0.680                                 0.50                             0.50
                                                                                                                                       0.476 0.49 0.487
                               0.67     0.67                    0.67                         0.45                                            0.453
                                       0.661                                                                        0.438 0.436
              0.66                              0.66           0.656
                                                                                             0.40
     Reward


                                                                                    Reward
                                               0.643                    0.64
              0.64                                                                           0.35           0.342

                                                                                             0.30           0.30
              0.62
                                                  Average Reward Path                        0.25                                  Average Reward Path
              0.60 0.60                           Best Reward Path                                0.21                             Best Reward Path
                                                                                             0.20
                     0          1       2        3       4       5       6                          0           1        2     3        4       5       6
                                               Depth                                                                         Depth
                         Bigbench: Temporal Sequences                                                           Bigbench: Epistemic
              0.950            0.94                    0.95                                                                                 0.87
                                                                       0.93
              0.925                             0.92         0.918                                                           0.82     0.82 0.824 0.808
                                               0.913                                         0.8                                                  0.79
              0.900                                    0.899 0.91 0.906                                             0.76
              0.875                    0.87                                                  0.7
     Reward


                                                                                    Reward


              0.850
              0.825                                                                          0.6           0.596
              0.800                                                                                         0.56
              0.775                              Average Reward Path                         0.5                               Average Reward Path
              0.750 0.75                         Best Reward Path                                  0.43                        Best Reward Path
                      0         1        2       3      4       5       6                            0      1        2         3        4       5       6
                                               Depth                                                                         Depth
                             Bigbench: Penguins In A Table                                                                    Subj
              0.90                                      0.90            0.90                 0.85                                                      0.84
                                                       0.889
                                                                                                             Average Reward Path
              0.88                                             0.879
                                                                       0.884                 0.80            Best Reward Path                   0.79 0.787
                                       0.875
                                        0.87 0.87               0.87                                                                           0.777
                                                                                             0.75                                       0.75
              0.86                                                                                                                     0.732
                              0.848
                               0.84                                                          0.70                   0.692  0.69
     Reward


                                                                                    Reward


              0.84                                                                                                   0.68 0.680
              0.82                                                                           0.65           0.631
                                                                                                             0.62
                                                                                             0.60
              0.80
                                                 Average Reward Path                         0.55
              0.78                               Best Reward Path
                      0.77                                                                          0.51
                                                                                             0.50
                        0       1       2        3      4       5       6                             0         1        2     3        4       5       6
                                               Depth                                                                         Depth

Figure 6: Convergence plots with the “Wide” setting. expand width = 3, num samples = 2, and
depth limit = 6. The Average Reward Path is the average reward of paths, and the blue area is the
variance. The Best Reward Path is the path with the highest average reward, where the best node is
selected as the node with the highest reward on the Best Reward Path.



                                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Bigbench: Penguins In A Table                                                TREC
                                          0.87                                                             0.75
              0.86                                0.851     0.86                  0.74
              0.84                       0.840              0.837
                                                   0.83                           0.72
              0.82              0.81
                                                                                                  0.70
     Reward


                                                                         Reward
              0.80                                                                0.70                             0.697    0.700
                                                                                                          0.692
              0.78
                                                                                  0.68           0.682
              0.76
              0.74                                                                0.66
                                           Average Reward Path                                              Average Reward Path
              0.72 0.71                    Best Reward Path                            0.65                 Best Reward Path
                                                                                  0.64
                      0          1         2        3        4                           0         1        2        3        4
                                         Depth                                                            Depth

                            Bigbench: Causal Judgement                                        Bigbench: Geometric Shapes
                              Average Reward Path 0.71                                                              0.48
              0.70            Best Reward Path                                    0.45
                                                                                                                             0.43
                                                                                                           0.41
              0.68                                0.674                           0.40                                      0.391
                                 0.67                                                                              0.372
     Reward


                                                                         Reward
              0.66              0.654                                             0.35
                                                                                                  0.33
              0.64                        0.63              0.637                 0.30                    0.298
                                                                                                 0.276
              0.62
                                                                                  0.25                      Average Reward Path
              0.60 0.60                                                                0.21                 Best Reward Path
                                                                                  0.20
                     0           1         2        3        4                           0         1        2        3        4
                                         Depth                                                            Depth

                                        Biosses                                                  Bigbench: Epistemic
                                         0.67
              0.65              0.65
                                                                                  0.80         Average Reward Path 0.80
                                                           0.624                  0.75         Best Reward Path
              0.60                                                                0.70           0.70              0.694     0.70
                                                  0.588
                               0.564                                                                                        0.664
                                                                                  0.65           0.644
     Reward


                                                                         Reward


              0.55
                                         0.533                                                            0.609
                                                                                  0.60
                                                                                                           0.57
              0.50                                                                0.55

              0.45                                                                0.50
                                           Average Reward Path
                     0.42                  Best Reward Path                       0.45 0.44
                       0         1         2       3         4                           0        1        2        3         4
                                         Depth                                                           Depth

                                        Med QA                                                            Subj
              0.62                       0.62                                     0.68                             0.68
              0.60                                                                0.66                    0.66               0.66
              0.58                                                                0.64                    0.635             0.636
                                                                                                                   0.630
                                                           0.567                  0.62
              0.56
     Reward


                                                                         Reward


                                         0.548    0.548                           0.60
              0.54              0.54                                                              0.59
                                                                                  0.58           0.576
              0.52             0.515                                              0.56
              0.50                         Average Reward Path                    0.54                      Average Reward Path
              0.48 0.48                    Best Reward Path                       0.52 0.52                 Best Reward Path
                     0           1         2       3         4                           0        1        2        3         4
                                         Depth                                                           Depth


Figure 7: Convergence plots with the “Lite” setting. expand width = 3, num samples = 1, and
depth limit = 4. The Average Reward Path is the average reward of paths, and the blue area is the
variance. The Best Reward Path is the path with the highest average reward, where the best node is
selected as the node with the highest reward on the Best Reward Path.



                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    CB                                                                                       TREC
                                                                                   0.87                  0.725                                                                0.72
                               Average Reward Path                                                                      Average Reward Path 0.71
              0.85             Best Reward Path                                                          0.700          Best Reward Path
                                                                                   0.820                                                                                     0.693
                                                                                                                                                             0.686
              0.80                                                   0.79                                0.675       0.68 0.67                0.68
                                                                    0.781                                                            0.67                            0.666
                                                                            0.76                                                                      0.66
              0.75                                                                                       0.650                                                        0.65
     Reward


                                                                                                Reward
                                               0.700                                                     0.625
              0.70
                                         0.667 0.67 0.67                                                 0.600
              0.65 0.65                   0.63                                                           0.575
                         0.61 0.607
              0.60             0.59                                                                              0.56
                                                                                                         0.550
                       0 1 2 3                       4      5        6       7       8                             0 1          2        3      4       5      6       7       8
                                                   Depth                                                                                     Depth

              0.67
                             Bigbench: Causal Judgement                                                            Bigbench: Geometric Shapes
                                                                                    0.67                                                                                     0.67
                               Average Reward Path
              0.66             Best Reward Path 0.66                                                                                0.63
                                                                                                         0.6                                                          0.61
                                                                                                                           0.57                                            0.585
              0.65                                                                                                                                   0.560           0.558
                                                                                                                                                      0.54
              0.64                                                                                                                                           0.521
                                                                                                                                                              0.51
                                                                                                         0.5                                  0.49
                                                                                                                                             0.477
     Reward


                                                                                                Reward
              0.63
                      0.62               0.62                                                                      0.417
                                                                                                                    0.41
              0.62                                                                                       0.4
              0.61                      0.608                0.611
                                                                                                         0.3
              0.60                                                                                                                             Average Reward Path
                                                                                                                0.23                           Best Reward Path
              0.59
                       0                   1                    2                    3                            0 1       2        3         4       5      6        7       8
                                                   Depth                                                                                     Depth

              0.775
                                                Biosses                                                                    Bigbench: Epistemic
                                           0.77                                                          0.80                                                        0.81 0.80
              0.750                                 0.75
                                                                                                         0.75       0.75
                                           0.7270.721                                                                                        0.73                    0.735 0.725
              0.725                                                                                                                                         0.71
                                                                                                         0.70                       0.69              0.70 0.686
                                                                                                                                                     0.689
              0.700           0.70 0.70                                                                                    0.67
                             0.688                         0.686                                         0.65
     Reward


                                                                                                Reward


              0.675                0.679
                                                                   0.667
                                                           0.65                    0.650                 0.60
              0.650
                                                                           0.637                         0.55
              0.625
                                                     Average Reward Path                                 0.50                                  Average Reward Path
              0.600
                    0.58                             Best Reward Path                                    0.45 0.45                             Best Reward Path
              0.575
                      0 1           2          3     4      5        6       7      8                           0 1         2        3         4       5      6        7      8
                                                   Depth                                                                                     Depth

              0.62
                                               Med QA                                                                                        Subj
                               Average Reward Path 0.61                                                                    0.72              0.72 0.72
                                                                                                                                                                              0.73
                                                                                                                                                                             0.727
              0.60             Best Reward Path                                                                                                   0.713
                                                                                                         0.70                                                        0.70
              0.58                        0.57
              0.56                                        0.56 0.558      0.560                                                                              0.67
                                                                     0.55 0.55
                                                   0.541 0.542                                           0.65                       0.65
     Reward


                                                                                                Reward


              0.54                                  0.53                                                            0.64
                             0.53 0.53
              0.52
                                                                                                         0.60
              0.50
              0.48
                                                                                                         0.55                                  Average Reward Path
              0.46 0.45                                                                                         0.53                           Best Reward Path
                      0       1    2        3        4      5        6      7       8                             0 1       2        3         4       5      6        7      8
                                                   Depth                                                                                     Depth


Figure 8: Convergence plots with the “Standard” setting. expand width = 3, num samples = 1, and
depth limit = 8. The Average Reward Path is the average reward of paths, and the blue area is the
variance. The Best Reward Path is the path with the highest average reward, where the best node is
selected as the node with the highest reward on the Best Reward Path.



                                                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   O PTIMIZED P ROMPTS FROM P ROMPTAGENT

Table 12: Prompt comparison for the Geometric Shapes task, including normal human prompt,
APE-optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight
different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, So-
lution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach        Optimized Prompt                                                            Acc.
    Human           Name geometric shapes from their SVG paths.                                 0.227
    APE             ”Determine the shape each SVG path element is drawing, then pair it         0.490
                    with the corresponding letter from the available choices. In this case, C
                    symbolizes hexagon, G is for pentagon, I signifies sector, and B stands
                    for heptagon.”
    PromptAgent     In this task, you are tasked with interpreting SVG paths to determine       0.670
                    the geometric figure they represent. The paths are delineated by com-
                    mands: ’M’ (move to), ’L’ (line to), and ’A’ (arc). An ’M’ command
                    initiates a path, potentially fragmenting a path into sub-paths, but
                    it’s crucial to not immediately view each ’M’ as the starting point
                    of a disconnected figure; often, they may continue the same geomet-
                    ric shape, manifesting as different sections within it. ’L’ commands
                    constitute line segments thus forming the boundaries of the figure.
                    ’A’ commands generate arcs, and depending on their sequence, can
                    shape circles, sectors, elliptical figures, or other geometrical shapes
                    through a continuous line of action. Note that an ’A’ command fol-
                    lowed by an ’L’ could lead to specific shapes like sectors. Examine
                    the sequence and interplay of ’M’, ’L’, and ’A’ commands, as they to-
                    gether mold the final geometric figure and significantly govern its con-
                    tinuity. Potential shapes to be identified can range from simple lines
                    to complex polygons. ’None of the above’ is only a valid response if
                    otherwise stated in the task. As you formulate your answer, substan-
                    tiate it with a clear explanation that encompasses the functionality of
                    each command, their collective effect, sequence, and their correlational
                    aspects. In scenarios with multiple ’M’ commands, refrain from ar-
                    bitrarily breaking up the shape into disconnected figures; instead,
                    visualize them contributing to different sections of the same shape.
                     Accurately count ’L’ commands as they define the figure’s sides, even
                    when an ’M’ command is present. For figuring out the entire geometric
                    shape, meticulously examine all its components and commands, keep-
                    ing an unbroken perception of the shape’s progression, especially with
                    multiple ’M’ commands. Before finalizing your answer, recount the
                    sides and arcs accurately - such a double-check ensures flawless identi-
                    fication of the geometric figure.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: Prompt comparison for the Penguins In A Table task, including normal human prompt,
APE-optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight
different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, So-
lution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach        Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
    Human           Answer questions about a table of penguins and their attributes.              0.595
    APE             Carefully scrutinize the provided table or tables. Understand the query       0.747
                    in relation to the information given. Pinpoint the pertinent data and carry
                    out the vital computations or comparisons to determine the right answer
                    from the given choices.
    PromptAgent     As you delve into a dataset of penguins, assess essential attributes like     0.873
                    names, ages, and gender. Decode the significance of each attribute in
                    the context of every penguin while keeping in mind that the dataset
                    may be modified, including addition or removal of penguins. When
                    such modifications are made, immediately revise your understanding,
                    redo your computations, and ensure that your subsequent calculations
                    consider these changes. The crux of your task is to identify relation-
                    ships and patterns within the attributes, giving special attention to the
                    names and ages of the penguins.
                    For complex tasks, break them down into manageable chunks ensuring
                    no essential detail is missed. When a change is made to the dataset,
                    recompute your values taking into consideration these changes, paying
                    extra attention to cumulative computations. Ensure that your under-
                    standing of ’more than’, ’less than’, and ’equal to’ is precise and
                    that you correctly interpret these in context of the question.
                    Put into place a verification mechanism to authenticate the accuracy
                    of your solutions, stating out your understanding of the query and the
                    assumptions you have made to resolve it. Bear in mind that tasks
                    may require you to combine the dataset with additional external in-
                    formation, this may include understanding age disparities outside
                    explicit lifespan parameters, identifying common names linked to
                    gender, or recognizing names associated with famous individuals.
                    Document your matters of interest meticulously and maintain rigorous
                    accuracy levels in your calculations to prevent errors.
                    Stay nimble-footed in reshaping your analytical approach based on each
                    new query. This might include uncovering numerical patterns, compre-
                    hending inherent data natures, or liaising with external sources for a
                    more thorough understanding. Most importantly, prior to making a
                    comparison within attributes such as age or height, conduct a thor-
                    ough investigation of all values under that attribute.Understand the
                    premise of each question before springing to deductions, and remember,
                    any change in the dataset denotes a new starting point for the following
                    computational steps to maintain accuracy.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Prompt comparison for the Epistemic Reasoning task, including normal human prompt,
APE-optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight
different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, So-
lution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach        Optimized Prompt                                                             Acc.
    Human           Determine whether one sentence entails the next.                             0.452
    APE             Determine whether the hypothesis is directly implied by the premise          0.708
                    or not. If the premise’s statement is a direct claim or conviction of the
                    individual mentioned in the hypothesis, choose ’entailment’. However,
                    if the premise is formed on the belief or supposition of someone other
                    than the subject in the hypothesis, opt for ’non-entailment’.
    PromptAgent     Your task is to critically analyse the primary sentence, known as the        0.806
                    ’premise’, with the objective of determining whether it unequivocally
                    supports the truth value of the subsequent sentence or ’hypothesis’.
                    The relationship between the premise and hypothesis can be classi-
                    fied as ’Entailment’ or ’Non-Entailment’. Label it as ’Entailment’ if
                    the premise provides robust evidence substantiating the truth of the
                    hypothesis without requiring additional context. If, however, the cor-
                    roboration of the hypothesis by the premise is not entirely explicit, se-
                    lect ’Non-Entailment’.
                    Deciphering the semantics within the sentences is crucial for your fi-
                    nal decision. Terms such as ’assumes’, ’believes’, ’thinks’, ’feels’,
                    ’suspects’, and their likes should be respected for their capacity to
                    introduce uncertainty and subjectivity, and not perceived as conclu-
                    sive proof of the hypothesis, regardless of whether they form part of
                    nested beliefs or not. Also, a detailed premise does not necessarily
                    negate a more generalized hypothesis. For example, a premise that
                    mentions a ’full face mask’ correlates to a hypothesis that states a
                    ’mask’.
                    During your evaluation, maintain a keen focus on factual and logical
                    reasoning, always bearing in mind that personal beliefs or experiences
                    should be incorporated into your review only if they are inherently con-
                    nected to the factual content of the statements. However, these should
                    be understood as subjective truths in the context of the individual’s
                    perspective and should not be taken as objectively verifiable truths.
                    Upon deciding between ’Entailment’ or ’Non-Entailment’, articulate
                    your explanations in a concise manner, warranting that you desist
                    from making precipitous conclusions or unsupported assumptions. Your
                    judgement should be firmly anchored in the logical and factual ties ex-
                    isting within the premise and hypothesis, renouncing any incidental in-
                    ferences or personal interpretations.
                    Exercise restraint in passing verdicts on the truth value or validity
                    of personal beliefs, unless they have a direct bearing on the factual
                    correlation between the premise and the hypothesis. During your es-
                    timation, mindfully weigh the extent of uncertainty introduced by ex-
                    pressions of belief or suspicion against the imperative for factual preci-
                    sion when establishing the entailment.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 15: Prompt comparison for the Object Counting task, including normal human prompt, APE-
optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We high-
light different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification,
Solution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

     Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
     Human          Count the overall number of all items.                                        0.612
     APE            Calculate the overall total of all items even those spoken in groups.         0.716
     PromptAgent    Carefully analyze the given information. Catalog each item mentioned          0.86
                    and denote any explicitly defined quantities. If an item - quantity is
                    not stated, assume it as a single unit. However, for an item with a
                    specified quantity, make sure to count each unit separately and in-
                    clude it in your total count. If collective terms or categories are identi-
                    fied, break them down into their individual components and reasonably
                    associate each with its stated count. Proceed to calculate a comprehen-
                    sive total for such categories ensuring the sum includes all individual
                    units, not the number of subsets or types. Remember that each item
                    has its unique count, but items related or falling under a common
                    category should be tabulated as such, with their individual quanti-
                    ties precisely contributing to the final count. Avoid making assump-
                    tions about the nature or categorization of items and adhere to com-
                    monly accepted definitions and classifications. Review your work to en-
                    sure accuracy and to avoid mistakes in counting. Modify your strategy
                    if required by considering items within varying categories, types,
                    or subtypes. Eventually, summarize the count indicating the specific
                    quantity for each identified item or category and a total count of units,
                    not categories, or provide a comprehensive overview as explicitly re-
                    quested.

Table 16: Prompt comparison for the Temporal Sequences task, including normal human prompt,
APE-optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight
different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, So-
lution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

     Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
     Human          Answer questions about which times certain events could have oc-              0.72
                    curred.
     APE            Identify the period when the individual was unnoticed and had the pos-        0.856
                    sibility to visit the specified place before its closing time.
     PromptAgent    By examining the series of daily activities of an individual, pinpoint        0.934
                    when they were free and when they were busy. Use these open slots
                    to dictate when they could possibly engage in other activities. Upon
                    waking up, a person does not instantly become occupied. Take into
                    account any potential restrictions or closed times and use these as
                    an indicator that the event cannot take place during these hours.
                    An overlap of activities is unallowable, so ensure there is no over-
                    lap while creating a timeline. Cross-check the free time slots with the
                    functioning hours of the potential event to accurately derive the most
                    likely time interval for the event to take place.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 17: Prompt comparison for the Causal Judgment task, including normal human prompt, APE-
optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We high-
light different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification,
Solution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

     Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                                    Acc.
     Human          Answer questions about causal attribution.                                          0.47
     APE            ”For each situation, decide if the result was caused deliberately or not.           0.57
                    If the individual or party behind the event was aware of the potential
                    result and chose to go ahead, select ’A’. If they didn’t intend the result
                    to happen, even if they knew it could possibly occur, select ’B’.”
     PromptAgent    Respond to inquiries about causal attribution, focusing on the entity or            0.67
                    entities specifically highlighted in the question. Carefully investigate
                    multi-factorial causes that may operate simultaneously and inde-
                    pendently, and discern the underlying intentions behind an individ-
                    ual’s actions. Differentiate between immediate and incidental origins
                    and identify the contribution of each factor in creating the outcome.
                    Examine the interplay of causes within the immediate situation and
                    larger systemic frameworks. Maintain uncompromising adherence to
                    the details provided within the context and restrain from making as-
                    sumptions unsupported by the evidence presented. Always consider
                    the complexity of multiple causes contributing to a single effect and
                    resist attributing the effect to a singular cause. Recognize the possi-
                    bility of synergy amongst causes and its resultant effects.


Table 18: Prompt comparison for the NCBI task, including normal human prompt, APE-optimized
prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly describe the
task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-specific insights,
achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually handcrafted by do-
main specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight different aspects
of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, Solution Guidance,
Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                                 F1 score.
    Human          Extract the disease or condition from the sentence, if any is mentioned.          0.521
    APE            If any disease or condition is mentioned in the sentence, extract it.             0.576
    PromptAgent    You’re tasked with extracting diseases or conditions from the given sen-          0.645
                   tence, remember to be cautious and avoid incorporating any associated
                   elements such as inheritance patterns (like autosomal dominant),
                   genes or gene loci (like PAH), proteins, or biological pathways. The
                   task does not entail making assumptions or inferences about the disease
                   names based on other advanced biological terms in the context. Con-
                   sider both specific diseases and broader categories, and remember
                   diseases and conditions can also appear as common abbreviations or
                   variations. Provide the identified diseases or conditions in this format:
                   {entity 1,entity 2,....}. If there are no diseases or conditions present, out-
                   put an empty list in this form: {}. Note that the term ‘locus’ should be
                   recognized as a genomic location and not a disease name.



                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 19: Prompt comparison for the Biosses task, including normal human prompt, APE-optimized
prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly describe the
task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-specific insights,
achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually handcrafted by do-
main specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight different aspects
of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, Solution Guidance,
Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach        Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
    Human           This is a biomedical sentence similarity task. Please carefully read          0.55
                    the following sentences and rate the similarity of two input sentences.
                    Choose between ’not similar’, ’somewhat similar’ and ’similar’
    APE             ”Examine the two given sentences and assess their content similarity.         0.7
                    Choice A (not similar) should be selected if the sentences discuss en-
                    tirely different topics or concepts. Choose option B (somewhat similar)
                    if they have some common points but also contain differences. Select
                    option C (similar) if the sentences primarily convey the same message
                    or could be used in place of one another.”
    PromptAgent     For this task, you are asked to perform a biomedical sentence similarity      0.75
                    evaluation. Examine the two input sentences and evaluate their similar-
                    ity, not only taking into account common terms or concepts but also
                    the complex scientific language, specific processes, and unique sub-
                    ject matter they delve into. Consider not only the subject matter but
                    also the intended purpose like whether they both describe a process,
                    report a finding, or detail a method or technique. Rate the similarity
                    as ’not similar’ if their subject matter or emphasis is distinct, ’somewhat
                    similar’ if they discuss related topics or share some details but are not
                    entirely identical, and ’similar’ if the sentences precisely mirror each
                    other in topic and conclusions. Remember, this task requires more than
                    a cursory scan of keywords - focus on the nuanced meanings, pay at-
                    tention to the degree at which the discussed concepts or processes are
                    general or specific, and strive for a comprehensive understanding of the
                    contents.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 20: Prompt comparison for the Med QA task, including normal human prompt, APE-
optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We high-
light different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification,
Solution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

     Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                               Acc.
     Human          Please use your domain knowledge in medical area to solve the ques-            0.508
                    tions.
     APE            ”For every presented clinical situation, scrutinize the symptoms and           0.47
                    specifics given. From the options A-E, choose the one that best pin-
                    points the cause or diagnosis of the stated condition.”
     PromptAgent    Leveraging particularly your comprehensive medical expertise, handle           0.57
                    each presented scenario as you would a complicated puzzle requiring
                    careful, unbiased assessment. Each nugget of information - from pa-
                    tient age, gender, lifestyle, symptoms, lab results, and past medical
                    history, to recent activities that may be relevant to their condition, plays
                    an equally important role in shaping your judgement.
                    Becoming cognizant of the fact that medical conditions can mani-
                    fest uniquely in different individuals is crucial; avoid precipitating
                    conclusions merely on the basis of stereotypical symptoms. Instead,
                    employ a deep understanding of the variety of medical conditions to
                    critically evaluate each symptom’s relevance, ensuring that undue bias
                    is not allocated to particular symptoms over others.
                    Particularly, pay attention to common symptoms over rare ones unless
                    otherwise indicated. Break down assumptions and consider the most
                    likely cause in a given context. Do not overlook the importance of
                    demographic details and their correlation with symptoms, espe-
                    cially when a symptom hints at a particular physiological state, like
                    menopause.
                    Through meticulous examination, ensure you grasp the nuances in each
                    query’s context, with keen focus on the developmental stages in chil-
                    dren and the specific challenges they entail. Capture the timelines of
                    symptoms, understanding that often, a diagnosis relies significantly on
                    the onset and duration of these symptoms.
                    Once conclusions begin taking shape, undertake an exhaustive cross-
                    verification exercise with the available multiple choice answers. Eval-
                    uate these options for relevance and decide their probability on the
                    specifics of the given case. Abstain from dismissing potential answers
                    at first glance, but rather advocate for an intensive assessment of all.
                    Approach scenarios similar to solving a complex jigsaw puzzle. Each
                    distinct symptom, lab result, past medical history, and timing forms
                    an integral component that lends weight to a deeper comprehen-
                    sion of the patient’s present condition. The endgame extends beyond
                    merely achieving precision and a comprehensive enquiry but ensures
                    that your conclusions do not yield overgeneralization or oversimplifica-
                    tion towards the diagnosis and treatment therein.
                    Examine closely every symptom in relation to the disease and dif-
                    ferentiate those that are side effects of treatment. Be cautious when
                    multiple symptoms present simultaneously, to avoid confusion. The
                    imprint of your insight should reflect a holistic understanding of the
                    case, zooming into the most probable diagnosis or treatment strategy
                    that suits the breadth of data at disposal.



                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 21: Prompt comparison for the Subjective task, including normal human prompt, APE-
optimized prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly
describe the task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-
specific insights, achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually
handcrafted by domain specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We high-
light different aspects of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification,
Solution Guidance, Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

     Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
     Human          Given the text, choose between ’subjective’ and ’objective’.                  0.517
     APE            Determine whether the provided text is stating facts and details (Objec-      0.696
                    tive) or expressing personal views, emotions, or choices (Subjective).
     PromptAgent    Examine the given text and decide whether it is ’subjective’ or ’objec-       0.806
                    tive’. Define the narrative as ’subjective’ if it seems to be significantly
                    swayed by the author’s personal emotions, viewpoints, or beliefs.
                    Conversely, ’objective’ narratives should impartially depict facts or
                    scenarios, devoid of personal prejudices, preconceived beliefs, and
                    the author’s own convictions. It is essential to understand that emo-
                    tionally-dense language, vivid descriptions or depiction of charac-
                    ters’ emotional states do not always hint at subjectivity. They may
                    just serve to represent situations authentically without conveying the
                    author’s personal standpoint. Unconventional punctuation, dialogues
                    or queries do not inherently contribute to authorial subjectivity.
                    Draw a clear distinction between the author’s and characters’ subjec-
                    tivity; misinterpreting a character’s subjectivity as the author’s personal
                    bias is a common pitfall. The priority is to extract the author’s tendency
                    within the narrative, rather than focusing on the characters. Utilize these
                    directives to critically analyze the text.


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 22: Prompt comparison for the TREC task, including normal human prompt, APE-optimized
prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly describe the
task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-specific insights,
achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually handcrafted by do-
main specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight different aspects
of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, Solution Guidance,
Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                              Acc.
    Human          Tag the text according to the primary topic of the question. Choose from      0.742
                   (A) Abbreviation, (B) Entity, (C) Description and abstract concept, (D)
                   Human being, (E) Location, (F) Numeric value
    APE            ”Tag the text according to the primary topic of the question. Select ’Hu-     0.834
                   man being’ (D) if the question revolves around a person. Opt for ’De-
                   scription and abstract concept’ (C) if the question requires an explana-
                   tion or description of a concept. Choose ’Location’ (E) if the question
                   is about a specific place. If the question refers to a particular object or
                   thing, then select ’Entity’ (B). If the question involves data or a length
                   of time, opt for ’Numeric value’ (F). Disregard ’Abbreviation’ (A) since
                   it’s not related to any of the questions.”
    PromptAgent    For the question given above, determine the type of response it is aim-       0.886
                   ing to elicit, then assign the most fitting label from the following: (A)
                   Abbreviation, (B) Tangible and Intangible Entity (including distinct
                   terms, theories, inventions, phenomena), (C) Description and Ab-
                   stract Concept (concerning explanations, clarifications, theoretical
                   ideas), (D) Individual and Collective Humans (encompassing distinct
                   persons, the creators of certain works, groups, organizations), (E)
                   Location, or (F) Numeric Value (containing numeric figures, dates,
                   timings, quantities). The key is the answer-type the question is seeking,
                   not other elements in the question. Your assigned label should prioritize
                   the primary response over additional details. If a solo label does not
                   closely address the entire answer intent of the question, then you may
                   assign more than one. The label should reflect the assumed answer’s
                   nature, not the mere question’s content or incidental features. Place the
                   label you consider most fitting for the question’s main intention.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 23: Prompt comparison for the CB task, including normal human prompt, APE-optimized
prompt, and expert-level prompt optimized by PromptAgent. Both baselines mostly describe the
task, while our expert prompt is composed of more complex structures and domain-specific insights,
achieving superior performance. Bold text denotes domain knowledge usually handcrafted by do-
main specialists, but here automatically discovered by PromptAgent. We highlight different aspects
of expert prompt with colors, including Task Description, Term Clarification, Solution Guidance,
Exception Handling, Priority & Emphasis, Formatting. (Best view with colors)

    Approach       Optimized Prompt                                                             Acc.
    Human          Read carefully the following premise and hypothesis, and determine the       0.714
                   relationship between them. Choose from ’contradiction’, ’neutral’ and
                   ’entailment’.
    APE            ”Ascertain the link between the premise and the hypothesis. If the hy-       0.8036
                   pothesis happens to be a rational outcome or inference from the premise,
                   label it as an ’entailment’. If the hypothesis presents a contrasting sce-
                   nario or clashes with the premise, categorize it as a ’contradiction’. In
                   case the hypothesis neither disputes nor is it derived from the premise,
                   term it as ’neutral’.”
    PromptAgent    Your task is to delve deeply into the provided premise and hypothesis.       0.911
                   Highlight explicit, central information and important entities mentioned
                   in the dialogue while considering multiple ways the same thought could
                   be delivered through language. Acknowledge that a hypothesis might
                   reflect, rephrase, or reiterate ideas from the premise, possibly in
                   a simplified manner. However, remember that mere verbatim repe-
                   tition does not automatically signal ’entailment’. The reiteration in
                   the hypothesis should represent a pivotal idea in the premise for it to
                   be categorized as entailment. If the hypothesis asserts something di-
                   ametrically opposed to what’s stated in the premise, mark it as a
                   ’contradiction’. Reserve ’neutral’ for scenarios where the premise
                   and the hypothesis appear disconnected or do not exhibit any clear
                   relationship. Be vigilant while dealing with ambiguities, and strive to
                   decode them in the context of the hypothesis. Do not allow nuanced
                   or hypothetical statements distract from identifying the primary idea
                   in the hypothesis. Know that your classifications, ’entailment’, ’contra-
                   diction’, or ’neutral’, should mirror the essential relationship derived
                   strictly from the premise and the hypothesis, without the influence of
                   personal opinions or conclusions. Prioritize understanding the core in-
                   tention and context of the conversation over mere repetition of words or
                   phrases.


                                                   35
