Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S YNTAX E RROR -F REE AND G ENERALIZABLE T OOL
U SE FOR LLM S VIA F INITE -S TATE D ECODING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         For reviewers’ convenience, we highlight the revised parts like this sentence.
         Large language models (LLMs) have shown promising capabilities in using exter-
         nal tools to solve complex problems. However, existing approaches involve either
         fine-tuning on tool demonstrations, which does not generalize to new tools without
         additional training, or providing tool documentation in context, limiting the num-
         ber of tools. Both approaches often generate syntactically invalid tool calls. In this
         paper, we propose T OOL D EC, a finite-state machine-guided decoding algorithm
         for tool-augmented LLMs. T OOL D EC eliminates tool-related errors for any tool-
         augmented LLMs by ensuring valid tool names and type-conforming arguments.
         Furthermore, T OOL D EC enables LLM to effectively select tools using only the in-
         formation contained in their names, with no need for fine-tuning or in-context doc-
         umentation. We evaluated multiple prior methods and their T OOL D EC-enhanced
         versions on a variety of tasks involving tools like math functions, knowledge graph
         relations, and complex real-world RESTful APIs. Our experiments show that
         T OOL D EC reduces syntactic errors to zero, consequently achieving significantly
         better performance and as much as a 2x speedup. We also show that T OOL D EC
         achieves superior generalization performance on unseen tools, performing up to
         8x better than the baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Augmenting large language models (LLMs) with external tools (Mialon et al., 2023) enables them to
solve complex problems. Current LLMs can utilize retrievers (Shen et al., 2023; Gupta & Kembhavi,
2022; Schick et al., 2023), RESTful APIs (Qin et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023), program interpreters
(Chen et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023), and various other tools. The performance of a tool-augmented
LLM depends on three key decisions—when to use a tool, which tool to use, and how to invoke a
tool. Existing approaches learn to make these decisions through fine-tuning or in-context learning.
However, these approaches still generate erroneous tool calls. For example, in-context learning can
easily generate non-existent tool names that are not in the tool inventory because non-existent tools
may also look plausible as the next token (Song et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023). Fine-tuned models,
though usually call tools by correct names, often pass invalid arguments to the right tool functions
(Hao et al., 2023), just as in-context learning does. Furthermore, prior approaches do not generalize
to unseen tools well. Fine-tuning approaches need additional training data and further fine-tuning to
adopt new tools. In-context learning approaches require tool documentation in the prompts.
To address these issues, we propose T OOL D EC, a decoding algorithm guided by a finite-state ma-
chine (FSM) to ensure LLMs invoke tools properly. Our core insight is to explicitly represent states
during LLM decoding. Each state is associated with a valid set of tokens corresponding to tool
names and tool arguments. T OOL D EC transitions from state to state as decoding progresses. At
each decoding step, T OOL D EC samples from a subset of tokens allowed by the current state. The
FSM that gives guidance to T OOL D EC is constructed from tool documentation and API signature
so that the machine precisely represents the grammar of tool calls. In this way, T OOL D EC is able
to always generate syntactically correct tool calls. Figure 1 illustrates that an LLM enhanced by
T OOL D EC is able to generate the right function call multiply with precise arguments (“3.14”
and “123”) and therefore, it gets the correct result returned by the tool. More examples comparing
T OOL D EC and other tool LLMs can be found in Appendix A.3.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: The comparison between the LLM tool use paradigms. Finite-state decoding is able to
eliminate syntax errors, adopt new tools without new data and in-context documentation.

    Paradigm                          Syntax Error-Free        Data-Free Generalization       No Tool Docs in Context
    Fine-tuning                                ✗                            ✗                               ✓
    In-context learning                        ✗                            ✓                               ✗
    Finite-state decoding (ours)               ✓                            ✓                               ✓


                           Available Tools: multiply(a, b) computes the product of numbers a and b.
                           Question: The diameter of a circle is 123, π ≈ 3.14, what's its perimeter?


                           LLM                     LLM + Tool, without ToolDec             LLM + ToolDec

            Its perimeter is pi        Its perimeter is            Its perimeter is           Its perimeter is multiply
            x 123 = 196                product(3.14,123)           multiply(pi, 123)          (3.14,123)=386.22
         Generated Wrong Answer          Non-Existent Tool         Invalid Tool Argument         Correct Tool Call


Figure 1: LLMs using external tools. LLMs without tools cannot multiply, so they just generate
a probable next token. Tool-augmented LLMs can access external tools like multiply, but they
may call a non-existent tool like product and pass invalid arguments like the string “pi”. Our
proposed T OOL D EC always generates tool calls without syntax errors.

Furthermore, T OOL D EC generalizes to new tools that never appeared before much more effi-
ciently. Unlike prior approaches which require fine-tuning or in-context descriptions of new tools,
T OOL D EC automatically constructs a finite-state machine from a tool’s API signature (its name and
argument types) and adds it to the existing FSM. T OOL D EC is then able to call new tools with-
out fine-tuning or in-context demonstration. While pre-trained language models can generate tool
names when prompted to, they often hallucinate plausible tool names that are not in the inventory.
T OOL D EC does not do that. In Figure 1, both product and multiply sound plausible for the
scenario, but only multiply is a given tool. Since T OOL D EC only calls existent tools, it won’t
hallucinate a plausible yet non-existent tool and can rely on the tool names to find the right tool.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose T OOL D EC, a finite-state decoding algorithm to empower LLMs to use tools prop-
  erly. T OOL D EC enjoys two advantages: its generated tool calls are guaranteed to be syntactically
  correct and it generalizes to unseen tools efficiently.
• We empirically verify T OOL D EC’s superior performance compared to prior strong baselines on
  four diverse datasets from different domains. Our extensive experiments show T OOL D EC elim-
  inates all syntax errors and hallucinated tool names, resulting in better accuracy and as much as
  50% less inference time. Our results also indicate that T OOL D EC is more than 8x better than
  baselines on mathematical reasoning with 9 unseen tools and 7x better than knowledge question
  answering with 204 unseen tools.


2      R ELATED W ORK

Fine-tuning language models to use tools. Language models can be fine-tuned to use tools with
data that contain interleaving text and tool use. Earlier studies make language models use a single
tool like a retrieval module (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Guu et al., 2020) or a search engine (Nakano
et al., 2021) by fine-tuning. Recent advances in tool-augmented language models that use multiple
tools (Schick et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022) also fine-tune language models to use tools including
QA models, translation models, calculators, and search engines. ToolkenGPT (Hao et al., 2023)
proposes to use several special tokens to represent tools and only tunes the embeddings of the tokens
so that new tool adoption can be more efficient. However, fine-tuning approaches for tool use still
need new data and extra fine-tuning to adapt a model to new tools. We list the differences between
finite-state decoding and the previous two paradigms in Table 1.


                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In-context learning for tool use. Language models can learn from in-context examples (Brown
et al., 2020) and follow instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022). This makes it possible to simply put
the descriptions of tools in the prompt and ask language models to use them. Recent works have
used this possibility to use neural models (Shen et al., 2023), RESTful APIs (Qin et al., 2023; Song
et al., 2023), program interpreters (Chen et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023) and many other tools to
solve problems. In-context learning does not need extra model tuning to use new tools. However,
the description and documentation of new tools still need to be in the prompt, which increases
computation cost and limits the context budget for the model to actually reason about the task.
Constrained decoding and finite-state machines. Previous constrained decoding methods mainly
focus on lexical constraints (Anderson et al., 2017). They reduce the large search space of lexically
constrained decoding with finite-state machines (Anderson et al., 2017), grouping together simi-
lar candidates (Hokamp & Liu, 2017), and better search algorithms (Miao et al., 2019; Lu et al.,
2021; 2022). However, lexical constraints are not expressive enough to regulate tool calls. While
finite-state machines have to be weighted and probabilistic to deal with the soft constraints in nat-
ural language (Eisner, 2002; Rastogi et al., 2016), the constraints for syntactic tool calls are hard
constraints that are much easier for FSMs. Therefore, we propose T OOL D EC to meet the syntactic
constraints of a valid tool call.


3     T OOL D EC : LLM T OOL U SE VIA F INITE -S TATE D ECODING

A syntactically correct tool call needs to refer to an existent tool name and pass type-conforming
arguments. Motivated by the fact that it is straightforward to verify the syntax of a tool call using
a finite-state machine (FSM), we propose T OOL D EC, a constrained decoding algorithm guided by
an FSM. During each decoding step, the model samples from a subset of the vocabulary that only
contains syntactically correct tokens. The FSM that specifies the token subsets can be automatically
constructed from the tool documentation. We describe the implementation details of the automatic
construction pipeline in Appendix A.9 For example, in Figure 2, an FSM is constructed for functions
add, exp, square and sqrt. Table 2 shows how T OOL D EC answers the question “the side of a
square is 5, what’s its area?” using the FSM. With the guidance from the FSM, T OOL D EC achieves
the following goals:
    • Switching Modes. Switch between “text mode” when the model is free to generate any text
      and “tool mode” when the model can only generate valid tool calls.
    • Generating Tool Names. At the beginning of a tool call, only generate correct existent tool
      names from a pre-defined list of tools.
    • Passing Arguments. Only pass type-conforming arguments to the tool.

3.1    F INITE -S TATE D ECODING
                                                      Σ - {<T>}       Int       Int
                                                                  (
                                                                  s2        ,
T OOL D EC is guided by a finite-state                                 FSM     FSM
                                                        s0
machine (FSM). An FSM is a 5-tuple                          add                   )         {+,-}
                                                     <T>                Int )           s10         s11
(S, V, g, s0 , R), consisting of a finite state                   s3 (
                                                                       FSM
                                                              exp
set S, an alphabet V , a transition function            s1                           [1-9]     [1-9]
                                                                     (  Int )
g : S × V → S, an initial state s0 and a set                      s5
                                                      sq               FSM              s12  [0-9]
of accepting states R. In our case, S and                    uare
                                                                     (  Int
g are constructed from the tool signature.               s4   rt  s6
                                                                       FSM
V is the token vocabulary of the language                                 )
model. R corresponds to pre-defined to-
kens that can determine the LM has com-
pleted the task, like ‘<EOS>’.                  Figure 2: A finite-state machine for T OOL D EC con-
                                                structed for math functions add, exp, square, sqrt
At each decoding step t, T OOL D EC main- that take integers as arguments. The names of the tools
tains a current state s. It can only generate are represented with a trie structure. “IntFSM” is a sub-
the tokens permitted by the FSM, i.e. the module that parses integers.
tokens for which g(s, ·) is defined. These
permitted tokens are a subset of V and we denote them as Vs . After generating one token a,
T OOL D EC transits to another state g(s, a) specified by the FSM transition function. The permit-
ted tokens for each state can be the full vocabulary, or a valid subset corresponding to tool names


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 2: How T OOL D EC uses the FSM in Figure 2 to answer the question “the side of a square is
5, what’s its area?”. At each time step, the state in the machine corresponds to a set of valid next
tokens. We zero out all other tokens and re-normalize the next token distribution, forcing the LLM
to only sample valid tokens.


   Step    Generated Text             Current State g         Valid Next Tokens          Next Token         Next State
   t       Its                        s0                      whole vocab.               ‘area’             s0
   t+1     Its area                   s0                      whole vocab.               ‘is’               s0
   t+2     Its area is                s0                      whole vocab.               ‘<T>’              s1
   t+3     Its area is <T>            s1                      ‘add’, ‘exp’, ‘sq’         ‘sq’               s4
   t+4     Its area is <T>sq          s4                      ‘uare’, ‘rt’               ‘uare’             s5
   t+5     Its area is <T>square      s5                      ‘(’                        ‘(’                s10
   t+6     Its area is <T>square(     s10                     ‘+’,‘-’,‘1’-‘9’            ‘5’                s12
   t+7     Its area is <T>square(5    s12                     ‘0’-‘9’, ‘)’               ‘)’                s10
   t+8     Its area is <T>square(5)   s10                     whole vocab.               -                  -



and argument types. At each step t, we do not directly sample from the next token distribution
P (xt |x1..t−1 ) calculated by the LLM. Instead, we zero out the probabilities of invalid tokens for
which the transition function is undefined, and normalize the probabilities,
                                        (     P (x =a|x    )
                                                        t      1..t−1
                                            P                    ′            ,   g(s, a) is defined,
                                                 a′ ∈Vs P (xt =a |x1..t−1 )
               P̃ (xt = a|x1..t−1 , s) =                                                                .
                                            0,                                            otherwise

The next token a is then sampled from the modified distribution P̃ (xt |x1..t−1 , s). With the next
token, we move on to the next decoding step and transition the current state s to the next state
g(s, a). The pseudo-code of this algorithm is listed in Appendix A.1.

3.2   C ONSTRUCTING FSM S THAT G UARANTEE S YNTACTICALLY C ORRECT T OOL C ALLS

Switching Modes. We use two states in the FSM to represent whether the language model is in text
mode or tool mode. The text mode is denoted by the initial state s0 , during which the model is free
to generate any token in its vocabulary, i.e. Vs0 = V . The tool mode is denoted by state s1 . The
model needs to output the special token <T> to switch from text mode to tool mode. Starting at
s1 is a smaller FSM that describes the grammar of tool calls. Note that T OOL D EC can be applied
to models with different mode-switching schemes. For some models like ToolkenGPT (Hao et al.,
2023) and toolformer (Schick et al., 2023), when to use a tool is decided by the model itself using
special tokens, just like in Table 2. For others like ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2023), the planning is done
explicitly using an external planner similar to that in ReAct (Yao et al., 2023). For those models,
T OOL D EC switches between s0 and s1 according to the external planner.
Generating Tool Names. Once the model is at state s1 , the next step would be to generate a new
tool call. To generate a correct tool call, the model needs to output the correct name for the tool and
a correct list of arguments. Many tools have long names that need multiple tokens to represent. For
example, the tool square in Figure 2 consists of two tokens— ‘sq’ and ‘uare’. Therefore, we need
to construct an FSM for multi-token tool names.
                                                                              s2
We use a trie (Fredkin, 1960) to construct the FSM for
tool names. In Figure 2, the trie for tool names consists                add      10
                                                                                      s7
                                                                              s3
of states s1 , . . . , s6 . A trie is a rooted tree in which each       exp      and
edge represents a token. A tree node represents a string                              s8
                                                                  s1          s5
that’s the concatenation of the path from the root to this              uare
                                                                     sq
node. In our example, s4 represents “sq” and s5 repre-
                                                                        s4 rt s6
sents “square”. To construct a trie, we insert all the strings
into it one by one. Inserting a string into a trie means go-
ing from the root down the path made by the string and Figure 3: Adding two more tools exp-
creating new nodes when the next step in the path does not 10 and expand into the trie, repre-
exist. For example, we show how two more tools names, sented by the two blue states s7 and s8 .
exp10 and expand can be added to the trie in Figure 3.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Generating Syntactically Valid Tool Arguments. Tool arguments have specified types. Like ar-
guments in a program, they need to follow certain grammar rules. These rules can be specified by
finite-state machines. For example, the “IntFSM” in Figure 2 depicts a finite-state machine that only
accepts integer literals. For all arguments of a tool, we chain their corresponding FSMs together and
use the last state corresponding to the tool name as the initial state of this FSM chain. Note that in
practice, it’s not necessary to explicitly construct this FSM. Any grammar checker that tells the set
of valid next tokens suffice.

3.3    G ENERALIZING TO U NSEEN T OOLS

Why T OOL D EC generalizes to new tools. The generalization ability of T OOL D EC is based on
two assumptions: i) LLMs already know the plausible-sounding tool names in different scenarios;
ii) the tool names in the tool inventory are meaningful and indicative of their usage. For example,
we can describe one tool-related scenario with the prompt “I would like to compute the area of a
square with the tool”. In this scenario, the first assumption guarantees that “power”, “multiply”,
“times”, “square” are among the likely next tokens predicted by the LLM. The second assumption
guarantees that the actual name of the tool in our inventory looks like “power”, “multiply”, “times”,
“square”, instead of random strings such as “jeboglpspr”. With these assumptions, T OOL D EC can
select the existent tool names from the plausible-sounding tool names predicted by the LLM.
What if the second assumption does not hold? The first assumption is dependent on the ability
of the underlying LLM. The second assumption is reasonable because of the naming convention of
variables well established in the software engineering industry (Weinberger et al., 2013) and open-
source community (Torvalds et al., 2001).
 Even when the tool functions are not named or poorly named, LLMs themselves can be utilized
to create semantically meaningful function names. In this case, we can prompt LLMs with the doc-
umentation or description of the tool’s functionality and the heuristics for meaningful tool names.
The prompts we used are listed in Appendix A.6.


4     E XPERIMENT I: T OOL D EC E LIMINATES S YNTAX E RRORS

In this section, we show that T OOL D EC can eliminate syntax errors while generating tool calls. We
select two recent baselines, ToolLLM and ToolkenGPT, representative of the in-context learning
and the fine-tuning paradigm, to showcase T OOL D EC’s ability. Since the tool-use settings for the
two baselines are different and cannot be applied to one another, we test T OOL D EC’s performance
separately for the two baselines using the benchmarks from the original papers. Through extensive
experiments, we show that T OOL D EC can completely eliminate syntactic errors, resulting in better
accuracy and shorter inference time.

4.1   BASELINES AND B ENCHMARKS

ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2023). ToolLLM is an in-context learning approachIt utilizes an instruction-
tuned LLaMA-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) to use tools. Given the natural language instruction
of a tool-dependent task, an API retriever first retrieves a small subset of relevant functions. Tex-
tual description and schema of these relevant functions are made available in the context. Then,
ToolLLM goes through a multi-step reasoning process using the functions to produce a final answer.
ToolLLM is evaluated on ToolEval, a dataset proposed in the same paper. ToolEval contains tasks
that involve a massive set (10,000+) of publicly available REST APIs. We use the most difficult
subsets of ToolEval to evaluate our method—I2-Category and I3-Instruction. They contain tasks
that need complex and unseen tools from multiple categories (such as geolocation, date/time, and
others) to solve. On average, a task in these subsets need more than 7 tools to solve. ToolEval
has two main metrics: Pass Rate measures the percentage of tasks for which the model reaches an
answer within limited reasoning steps. Win Rate utilizes an automatic evaluator powered by an
LLM following a pre-defined set of criteria for a better path. It compares the quality and correctness
of the models’ answers to the reference answers from ChatGPT. Qin et al. (2023) finds that the


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


automatic evaluator has a high correlation of 75.8% with human annotators. Other than these two
metrics, we also measure Tool Error Rate, the proportion of tasks that have at least one tool-related
error.
ToolkenGPT (Hao et al., 2023). ToolkenGPT is a fine-tuning approach to tool use. ToolkenGPT
represents each tool as a special token and optimizes only the embedding of the tool tokens for tool
use. During inference, ToolkenGPT invokes a tool once the corresponding special token is predicted.
During a tool call, it passes arguments by learning from in-context demonstrations. ToolkenGPT
uses LLaMA-33B (Touvron et al., 2023) as its base model.
We evaluated T OOL D EC’s performance on FuncQAmulti (Hao et al., 2023). This dataset tests LLMs’
ability in numerical reasoning tasks with 68 math problems. Then, LLMs are required to produce
a numerical answer using a few of the 13 arithmetic operations as tools (e.g. multiply, power,
lcm). The accuracy is determined by measuring the percentage of problems for which a correct
answer is produced, with a 0.1% error tolerance. On average, a problem in FuncQAmulti requires
2.78 tool calls to solve. Following Hao et al. (2023), we report results of other baselines, including
ChatGPT without tools, LLaMA with chain-of-thought and tools, LLaMA with ReAct and tools.

4.2     I NTEGRATING T OOL D EC WITH THE BASE M ODELS

ToolLLM+T OOL D EC. Following Qin et al. (2023), we use ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) to plan the
tool calls of ToolLLM. This conforms to the second case of mode switching in Section 3.2. There
are three parts in the FSM for ToolLLM. First, a format FSM that enforces the “Thought, Action,
Action Input” syntax of ReAct. After decoding “Action:”, this FSM transitions to the beginning
state of the function name FSM, which guarantees that a decoded function name is always valid.
We also constructed a JSON-based function argument FSM. We allowed LLMs to reason for 5 steps
before it must call the finish action to be considered “pass”.
ToolkenGPT+T OOL D EC. Since ToolkenGPT uses special tokens to call tools, T OOL D EC is only
applied to guarantee the syntax of arguments. In this experiment, our FSM guarantees that every
argument is a valid number, and arguments are separated by commas. It also guarantees that the
actual number of arguments passed to a function is exactly the number needed by it. We compared
T OOL D EC to two variants of the baseline in Hao et al. (2023), one with backtrace and one without.
Backtrace tries to avoid failed tool calls by allowing the LLM to go back and try the next probable
token, in place of the failed tool call. To evaluate T OOL D EC, we report the average inference time
per problem and tool error rates in addition to accuracy.

4.3     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

T OOL D EC enhances in-context learning tool LLMs. Table 3 shows T OOL D EC’s performance on
ToolEval. T OOL D EC achieved 55% win rate on I2-Category and 60% win rate on I3-instruction. As
a drop-in replacement of the original decoding algorithm, T OOL D EC eliminated all three types of
tool-related errors and achieved the best win rate and pass rate, even beating ChatGPT.
The high tool error rate of the baselines suggests that even after instruction fine-tuning, ToolLLM
still lacks the ability of accurately invoke external tools from the tool documentation. This inability
is more exposed when there is a large variety of tools available, as in I3-Instruction. Furthermore,
these errors significantly impacted the model’s ability to complete tasks.


Table 3: Results on ToolEval. T OOL D EC-enhanced ToolLLM outperformed baselines ToolLLM in
all metrics. T OOL D EC eliminated all tool errors and was even able to beat ChatGPT slightly.

                                             I2-Category                      I3-Instruction
                                    Pass ↑   Win ↑    Tool Error ↓   Pass ↑    Win ↑      Tool Error ↓
      ChatGPT                       39.0%    -           8.0%        29.0%    -          7.0%
      ToolLLM                       32.0%    44.0%       39.0%       18.0%    44.0%      47.0%
      ToolLLM + Fuzzy Matching      38.0%    48.0%       19.0%       23.0%    49.0%      23.0%
      ToolLLM + T OOL D EC (ours)   42.0%    55.0%       0.0%        34.0%    60.0%      0.0%


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We present the error rates of each error type on two benchmarks in Figure 4. For ToolLLMs, name
error, i.e. calling a non-existent tool, was the most common syntactic error in a tool call. T OOL D EC
completely eliminated all three errors.
With function name hallucination being the
most prevalent tool-related error, a better base-        14%                              ToolLLM
                                                                           13.0%          +Fuzzy Matching
line is to mitigate it with fuzzy matching by suf-       12%                              +ToolDec


                                                         Proportion of Tool Calls
fix. We present the results of the baseline with
                                                         10%
fuzzy matching as ToolLLM + Fuzzy Match-
ing, and without as ToolLLM. This mitigation              8%
increased pass rate but had little impact on win          6%
rate, as evident in Table 3, because wrong APIs
                                                          4% 4.1%3.4%
could often be chosen when a model was un-
                                                          2%                                    1.9%
able to precisely call the wanted tool. Over-                                   1.0%
all, our experiments on ToolLLM demonstrate                           0.0%           0.0%  0.1%      0.0%
                                                          0%
                                                              ReAct Syntax Name Error Argument Error
T OOL D EC is highly effective on in-context
learning LLMs. Through the next baseline, Figure 4: Error rates of three types of tool-related
ToolkenGPT, we show that T OOL D EC is also errors relative to the total number of tool calls.
beneficial to fine-tuned tool LLMs.                T OOL D EC reduced all tool-related errors to zero.

T OOL D EC enhances fine-tuning tool LLMs. Table 4 shows the results on FuncQAmulti . We mea-
sure the clock inference time of TookenGPT baselines and our method using the same model check-
point, same environment, and same codebase. Although ToolkenGPT eliminates the possibility of
calling non-existent tool names by fine-tuning a special token embedding, it can still suffer from
other syntactic errors, which is demonstrated by the 27.9% tool error rate. As a drop-in replace-
ment, T OOL D EC increased ToolkenGPT’s accuracy while being much faster in inference. Although
ToolkenGPT + backtrace achieved slightly better accuracy than T OOL D EC, it used 2x more time
to try different tools. T OOL D EC is much faster than ToolkenGPT baselines because the baselines
waste a lot of time for the erroneous tool calls and retrying, while T OOL D EC has no syntactic
errors. We show some examples that demonstrate this phenomenon in Appendix A.5. Note that
since T OOL D EC eliminated all tool errors, there were no failed tool calls for backtrace to retry.
The results underscore tool-related errors’ relevancy and T OOL D EC’s applicability to both recent
in-context learning and fine-tuning tool-augmented LLMs.

Table 4: Results on FuncQAmulti . ToolkenGPT combined with T OOL D EC eliminated all tool errors.
Compared to ToolkenGPT without backtrace, T OOL D EC was better in both accuracy and inference
time. Compared to ToolkenGPT with backtrace, T OOL D EC achieved a comparable accuracy with
only half the time.

                                                    Accuracy ↑                      Time ↓   Tool Error ↓
                 0-shot ChatGPT w/o tools           9%                              -        -
                 LLaMA w/ tools + CoT               3%                              -        -
                 LLaMA w/ tools + ReAct             6%                              -        -
                 ToolkenGPT                         10.3%                           7.76s    27.9%
                 ToolkenGPT + Backtrace             14.7%                           10.39s   0.0%
                 ToolkenGPT + T OOL D EC (ours)     13.2%                           5.95s    0.0%



5   E XPERIMENT II: T OOL D EC E NABLES G ENERALIZABLE T OOL S ELECTION
In Experiment II, we show how T OOL D EC generalizes to unseen tools without additional training
data and tool documentation. We compare T OOL D EC with two strong baselines—ToolkenGPT
(Hao et al., 2023) as a representative fine-tuning approach, and RestGPT (Song et al., 2023) as
a representative in-context learning approach. We conducted experiments on three benchmarks—
FuncQA (Hao et al., 2023) and KAMEL (Kalo & Fichtel, 2022), and RestBench (Song et al., 2023).
These benchmarks require diverse tool sets from very different domains, including math reasoning,
knowledge question answering and real-world web services. In all three domains, our results show
that T OOL D EC is able to efficiently generalize to new tools without fine-tuning on extra data.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   F INE -T UNING BASELINE : T OOLKEN GPT

ToolkenGPT is a fine-tuning approach to tool use that learns a special token for every tool. To
generalize to new tools, ToolkenGPT still needs additional data and extra fine-tuning involving the
use of new tools. We demonstrate that T OOL D EC, once fine-tuned on a given set of seen tools,
doesn’t need additional data and further fine-tuning to adopt unseen tools. We compare T OOL D EC
and the baselines by tuning them on the same subset of tools, denoted as “seen tools”, and then
evaluate their performance on “unseen tools”.
To guarantee a fair comparison, We mimic ToolkenGPT’s planning method to solve the “when to use
tools” problem. Specifically, we fine-tune the embedding of a single special token <T> to represent
all tools, reducing the size of extra vocabulary to 1. Once <T> is generated, a tool call begins.
We prompt LLM to generate a tool name. The generation of this tool name is guided by an FSM
constructed from a list of all available tools. This tool name is then plugged back into the context to
start the generation of arguments. We show an example of this process in Appendix A.2.
We selected a small subset of “seen tools” out of all available tools and tuned the embedding only
with demonstrations of the tools in the selected subset. We fine-tuned the baseline using the same
subset. Then, we evaluated our method and the baselines on tasks that involve unseen tools in the
subset to demonstrate T OOL D EC’s generalization ability.
Benchmark on Math Functions. We use FuncQA multi-hop questions to evaluate our method.
Tools in FuncQA, such as permutate, gcd, power are mathematical functions that strictly limits
on their arguments to be numbers in certain ranges. We select 4 out of 13 tools as the seen subset to
tune the baseline and evaluate different approaches on the remaining 9 unseen tools.
Benchmark on Knowledge Graph Relations. To further investigate T OOL D EC’s generalizability
on a larger set of tools, we also evaluate on KAMEL (Kalo & Fichtel, 2022), a question-answering
dataset containing a total of 234 knowledge relations that resemble the characteristics of APIs (e.g.
number of children). More examples can be found in Appendix A.4. The tools in KAMEL
are many more than those in FuncQA. They are also more complex and diverse because their number
of arguments varies from 1 to 3, and their types include strings, locations, dates, numbers and other
ad-hoc types. We select 30 out of 234 tools as the seen subset and evaluate on 4 different evaluation
sets, with 30, 60, 100, and 234 tools, respectively. Following Hao et al. (2023), we use prompting,
few-shot, and zero-shot as extra baselines. Prompting relies on the internal knowledge of LLM,
since no tool was provided. Few-shot demonstrates tool use through few-shot examples. Zero-shot
provides descriptions of available tools in context. We make sure that the baselines and T OOL D EC
share the same set of seen tools. We use the accuracy of tool calls as a metric, which is determined
by the proportion of responses that invoke the correct knowledge relation.


5.2   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING BASELINE : R EST GPT

RestGPT (Song et al., 2023) is an in-context learning approach that learns tool use from in-context
tool documentation. We demonstrate the generalization ability of T OOL D EC-enhanced RestGPT by
showing that RestGPT with T OOL D EC can achieve better accuracy without in-context documenta-
tion than the RestGPT baseline with documentation. Since T OOL D EC needs access to the next token
distribution, we use Vicuna-based (Zheng et al., 2023) RestGPT as the baseline. For our method,
we remove all tool documentation from the prompt, leaving only the instructions for reasoning.
Benchmark on APIs for Real-World Web Services. We evaluate on RestBench (Song et al., 2023).
It consists of tasks in real-world scenarios including TMDB, a website for movie information, and
Spotify, an online music player. These tasks directly come from real-user instructions and require
multiple tools in the form of RESTful APIs to solve. RESTful APIs are the de facto standard for web
services (Li et al., 2016) that use HTTP methods to manipulate resources. The ground truth solutions
are annotated by humans in the form of tool call chains. We evaluate our method and the baseline on
TMDB, which consists of 55 RESTful APIs. Since HTTP methods such as GET and POST do not
have explicit tool names, we use an LLM to rewrite these APIs to follow this format. The prompts
we used are in Appendix A.6. The robustness of rewriting is ablated in Appendix A.8. We use the
correct path rate (CP%) proposed by the original paper as the metric to measure accuracy. Correct
path rate is the proportion of outputs that contain the correct tool call path annotated by humans.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 5: Results on RestBench. The baseline needs a much longer prompt with in-context tool
documentation to learn tool use, while our method does not. Yet, our method still has a much higher
correct path ratio (CP%) than the baseline.

                                                                                            CP% ↑        Prompt Size ↓
                                RestGPT with In-Context Documentation                       15.0%        1974
                                RestGPT + ToolDec w/o Documentation                         23.0%        880


                    0.14                                                         0.5
                    0.12                                                         0.4                               ToolDec
                                                                                                                   ToolkenGPT
                    0.10
         Accuracy


                                                                      Accuracy
                                                       ToolDec
                                                                                 0.3                               Few-shot
                                                       ToolkenGPT
                    0.08                                                                                           Zero-shot
                                                                                                                   Prompting
                                                                                 0.2
                    0.06
                    0.04                                                         0.1
                           0             3          6             9                    0     30     70                        204
                               Number of Unseen Tools in Test Set                          Number of Unseen Tools in Test Set
                                       (a) FuncQA                                                  (b) KAMEL

Figure 5: Results on KAMEL and FuncQA. As the number of unseen tools increased, all baselines
experienced a significant performance drop. But T OOL D EC kept a similar high performance though
it had only seen a small subset (30 out of 234 on KAMEL and 4 out of 13 on FuncQA) of tools.


5.3   E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Generalization to Unseen Math Functions. In Figure 5a, we present the results on FuncQA. While
both achieved similar accuracies on tasks involving only seen tools, ToolkenGPT failed to generalize
to unseen tools, resulting in a significant performance drop. On the other hand, T OOL D EC was able
to maintain a comparable accuracy even on unseen tools and significantly outperformed ToolkenGPT
on total accuracy. For an ablation on the effectiveness of mode switching, see Appendix A.7.
Generalization to Unseen Knowledge Graph Functions. We present our results on KAMEL in
Figure 5b. As the number of available tools increased, the two ICL methods suffered from the
context length limit (Hao et al., 2023) and experienced a significant drop in accuracy. ToolkenGPT,
fine-tuned on the first 30 tools, was also unable to generalize to more tools. Prompting kept a stable
low accuracy because it did not rely on in-context tool documentation. On the other hand, T OOL D EC
was able to maintain its accuracy even when the amount of unseen tools reached 204.
Generalization to Unseen Web Services. The results on RestBench are in Table 5. T OOL D EC
enabled the model to use web-service APIs without in-context documentation, reducing the prompt
size from 1974 tokens to only 880 tokens. Nevertheless, T OOL D EC still significantly outperformed
the baseline in terms of correctness indicated by correct path ratio (CP%), raising it by 8 points.
These results suggest T OOL D EC can improve the generalizability of in-context learning tool use in
real-world web applications.
Results from all three settings indicate that not only does T OOL D EC help fine-tuning tool LLMs
generalize without extra training data, it also helps in-context learning tool LLMs generalize without
in-context documentation. This capability of T OOL D EC has been proven in three different domains.


6     C ONCLUSION

This paper presents T OOL D EC, a novel decoding algorithm guided by finite state machines designed
to enhance Large Language Models (LLMs) by integrating external tools and ensuring their invo-
cation is syntax-error-free.Experiments demonstrate that T OOL D EC eliminates tool-related syntax
errors, improves accuracy, and saves inference time across various benchmarks. It also exhibits the
ability to generalize to unseen tools in multiple domains without additional fine-tuning data. The
advancements by T OOL D EC open avenues for research in developing more sophisticated models
adaptable to a wider range of tools and applications without additional training data, leading to
more versatile and robust LLMs capable of solving a broader spectrum of complex problems.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. Guided open vocabu-
  lary image captioning with constrained beam search. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 936–945, Copenhagen, Denmark,
  September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1098. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D17-1098.

Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
  can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting:
 Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv e-prints, pp.
 arXiv–2211, 2022.

Jason Eisner. Parameter estimation for probabilistic finite-state transducers. In Proceedings of the
  40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–8, 2002.

Edward Fredkin. Trie memory. Communications of the ACM, 3(9):490–499, 1960.

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.

Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. ArXiv, abs/2211.11559, 2022.

Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
  PMLR, 2020.

Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Toolkengpt: Augmenting frozen language
  models with massive tools via tool embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11554, 2023.

Chris Hokamp and Qun Liu. Lexically constrained decoding for sequence generation using grid
  beam search. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1535–1546, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1141. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/P17-1141.

Jan-Christoph Kalo and Leandra Fichtel. Kamel : Knowledge analysis with multitoken entities in
  language models. Automated Knowledge Base Construction, 2022.

Li Li, Wu Chou, Wei Zhou, and Min Luo. Design patterns and extensibility of rest api for networking
   applications. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 13(1):154–167, 2016.

Ximing Lu, Peter West, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi.
  Neurologic decoding:(un) supervised neural text generation with predicate logic constraints. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4288–4299, 2021.

Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras,
  Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neurologic a* esque decoding: Constrained text
  generation with lookahead heuristics. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-
  ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  pp. 780–799, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
Ning Miao, Hao Zhou, Lili Mou, Rui Yan, and Lei Li. Cgmh: Constrained sentence generation by
  metropolis-hastings sampling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 33, pp. 6834–6842, 2019.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023.
Pushpendre Rastogi, Ryan Cotterell, and Jason Eisner. Weighting finite-state transductions with
  neural context. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference of the North American chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: human language technologies, pp. 623–633, 2016.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face, 2023.
Yifan Song, Weimin Xiong, Dawei Zhu, Wenhao Wu, Han Qian, Mingbo Song, Hailiang Huang,
  Cheng Li, Ke Wang, Rong Yao, Ye Tian, and Sujian Li. Restgpt: Connecting large language
  models with real-world restful apis, 2023.
Linus Torvalds et al. Linux kernel coding style. Also available as https://www. kernel. org/doc/Doc-
  umentation/CodingStyle, 2001.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023.
Benjy Weinberger, Craig Silverstein, Gregory Eitzmann, Mark Mentovai, and Tashana Landray.
  Google c++ style guide. Section: Line Length. url: http://google-styleguide. googlecode.
  com/svn/trunk/cppguide. xml# Line Length, 2013.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     P SEUDO -C ODE OF THE D ECODING A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Finite-State Machine Guided Decoding for Language Models
Input:
  A DFSM defined by (S, V, g, s0 , R);
  A language model M that produces the distribution of the next token given a prefix string;
  An initial string of tokens x1..k , which represents the prompt from the user.
Output: A string of tokens.
  s ← s0
  while s ̸∈ F do
      Vs ← {a|a ∈ V ∧ g(s, a) is defined}
      P (xk+1 |x1..k ) ← M (x(1..k )P (x=a|x )
                               P              1..k
                                                ′        ,    a ∈ Vs
                                  a′ ∈Vs P (x=a |x1..k )
      P̃ (x = a|x1..k , s) ←
                               0,                          otherwise
      x ∼ P̃ (x|x1..k , s)
      xk+1 ← x
      k ←k+1
      s ← g(s, x)
  end while
  return x1..k


A.2     G ENERALIZING T OOLKEN GPT TO U NSEEN N EW T OOLS


  Math                                                       Knowledge QA

  Q: Rectangle A has a length of 3.64 cm, its                Q: How many participants had 1975-76
  width is 1.23 cm shorter than the length, the              Albanian Superliga?
  area of A is?


    A: The length of A is 3.64 cm, the width is 3.64-        A: The 1975-76 Albanian Superliga had <T>
    1.23=<T>



    A: The length of A is 3.64 cm, the width is 3.64-        A: The 1975-76 Albanian Superliga had
    1.23=(performing the math operation named:               (obtained by calling function: number_of_par
    subtract)                                                ticipants)



    A: The length of A is 3.64 cm, the width is 3.64-        A: The 1975-76 Albanian Superliga had
    1.23=<subtract>(                                         <number_of_participants>(


Figure 6: Once a tool call begins, T OOL D EC injects a special prompt (blue text) into context to
generate the tool name.


                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3     E XAMPLES OF T OOL D EC E LIMINATING T OOL - RELATED E RRORS

In this section, we show examples of T OOL D EC preventing tool-related errors on various baselines.
Baselines are displayed in the left column and T OOL D EC is showed on the right.


  Function Name Error
   Question: I want to surprise my friends with some funny Chuck Norris memes and jokes at
   our weekly game night.

   Tools: jokes_random_from_chuck_norris, jokes_search_from_chuck_norris,
   get_random_joke_from_world_of_jokes, search_gifs_from_humor_jokes_and_memes


   Thought: Fetching a Chuck Norris meme              Thought: Fetching a Chuck Norris meme
   Action: gifs_from_humor_jokes_and_memes            Action: search_gifs_from_humor_jokes_and_memes
   Action Input: {“query”: “funny”}                   Action Input: {“query”: “Chuck Norris”}



   Error: No such function name                       Response: {'images': [{'url’: 'https://media.tenor.c…


  Function Argument Error
   Question: I'm working on a school project and need to convert a YouTube video to MP3.
   Provide the download link for the MP3 file of the video with ID 'UxxajLWwzqY' using the
   YouTube MP3 API. Also, generate a random QR just for testing.

      Tools: get_mp3_from_youtube_mp3, get_qr_code_from_tvb_qr_code
                                                 …
   Thought: Generating a random QR code               Thought: Generating a random QR code
   Action: get_qr_code_from_tvb_qr_code               Action: get_qr_code_from_tvb_qr_code
   Action Input: {“is_id”: “'UxxajLWwzqY”}            Action Input: {}



   Error: Unexpected keyword argument                 Response: \\ufffdPNG\\r...


  ReAct Syntax Error
   Question: I'm feeling a bit down and need a good laugh. Can you find me a hilarious
   programming meme and a funny manatee joke to brighten up my day?

                                                 …
   Action Input: Finish                               Action: Finish
   Action Input: {“final_answer”: “’…”}               Action Input: {“final_answer”: “’…”}


   Error: Unable to parse response                    Finish with Answer: Here's a hilarious…



Figure 7: T OOL D EC can prevent function name error, function argument error, and invalid ReAct
syntax on ToolLLM.



                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Improper End Token
   Question: A right triangle has a base of length 8.9 and a height length 9.8. What is the
   length of the hypotenuse of the triangle?

   Answer: ...The length of the hypotenuse is
                                                                       Answer: ...The length of the hypotenuse is
   <sqrt>(175.25).\n\nQ: A right triangle...
                                                                       <sqrt>(175.25)=13.24


      “).” is not parsed by ToolkenGPT as the end of an argument list. ToolDec forces the correct end token “)=”


 Illegal Symbol
   Question: A Ferris wheel has a diameter of 40 meters and takes 1 minutes to complete one
   revolution. If you are at the top of the Ferris wheel, how high above the ground are you after
   12 s? (take pi as 3.14)


   Answer: The circumference of the Ferris wheel is                    Answer: The circumference of the Ferris wheel is
   <multiply>(40, pi)=error: name ‘pi’ is not defined                  <multiply>(40, 3.14)=125.6…


      Figure 8: T OOL D EC can eliminate the common tool-related errors for fine-tuned models.


A.4     E XAMPLES OF KAMEL R ELATIONS

                                      Table 6: Examples of KAMEL Relations

 Relation Name                                        Description
 broadcasted places(station)                          gets the places where a radio station is broadcasted to
 main topics(title)                                   gets the main topics of a book or magazine
 competition disciplines(name)                        gets the disciplines a person is competing in
 team membership(name)                                gets the list of teams a person was a member
 location(name)                                       gets the country where a location is located
 creative work type(title)                            gets the type or format of a creative work
 membership(name)                                     gets the groups or organizations a person was a member
 employer(name)                                       gets the employers of a person
 floors above ground(name)                            gets the number of floors above the ground of a building
 workplaces(name)                                     gets the workplaces of a person
 start year(title)                                    gets the year when a TV show or a movie started airing
 positions played(name)                               gets the positions played by a sports player
 number of participants(event name)                   gets the number of participants in a sporting event
 taxon rank(species name)                             gets the taxonomic rank of a given species name


A.5      E XAMPLES SHOWING HOW T OOL D EC SAVES COMPUTATION FROM T OOLKEN GPT

 We show three examples in Table 7 to demonstrate why T OOL D EC can be more efficient in infer-
ence than ToolkenGPT.
In Example 1, ToolkenGPT without Backtrace fails to end the argument list for <sqrt> with the
proper )= tokens. As a result, it does not enter tool mode to evaluate the function and thinks the
model is still completing the argument list, leaving the model confused and generating questions
on its own as seen in the few-shot prompts, wasting computation. In contrast, T OOL D EC enforces


                                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Different examples demonstrating that T OOL D EC is more efficient than ToolkenGPT be-
cause T OOL D EC does not make syntactic errors.

                                                 Example 1
 ToolkenGPT                The length of the hypotenuse is <sqrt>(175.25).\n\nQ: A right triangle has a base
                           of length 10.5 and a height length 11.2. What is the length of the hypotenuse of the
                           triangle?\nA:...
 T OOL D EC                The length of the hypotenuse is <sqrt>( 175.25 )= 13.24.
                                                 Example 2
 ToolkenGPT                The profit after 3 years is 535323 * (1 - 0.03) ˆ 3 = <power>( 535323, 1- 0.03-
                           ) 3 535323 *(0.97)ˆ3 535323 * 0.97 * 0.97 * 0.97 = 535323 * 0.943 =<multi-
                           ply>(535323, 0.943)=
 T OOL D EC                The profit after 5 years is 535323 * (1 + 0.238) ˆ 5 = <power>( 535323, 1.238 ) =
                           12360228.17
                                                 Example 3
 ToolkenGPT+Backtrace
 Attempt 1                 ln(n + 2.2) = <ln>3.89, so n + 2.2 = <e>3.89, so n = <e>3.89 - 2.2
                           =<power>(<e>, 3.89-2.2 )=
 Attempt 2                 =<remainder>(<e>3.89,2.2 )=
 Attempt 3                 ...
 ...
 T OOL D EC                ...<remainder>(<e>3.89,2.2)=


the grammar of the argument list and produces the correct answer without extra erroneous outputs,
saving many tokens. In contrast, ToolDec enforces the grammar of the argument list and produces
the correct answer without extra erroneous outputs, saving many tokens.
In Example 2, ToolkenGPT ignores the tool call <power> it already generated and continues to
incorrectly use the ˆ symbol for exponentiation operation while generating the argument list instead
of another tool call. In contrast, T OOL D EC is able to enforce the correct grammar and avoid wasting
computation.
In Example 3, ToolkenGPT with Backtrace attempts multiple times to solve the problem and every
time it fails, it tries again. Multiple attempts lead to a significant increase in computation.



A.6    P ROMPT E XAMPLE FOR W RITING T OOL NAMES

 Below is the prompt we used on ChatGPT to write tool names for the tools whose names are not
indicative of their functionality:
You will be provided with a list of function descriptions. Based on the description, come up with a
descriptive name for each of the function. The primary subject should come first (e.g. movie, person)
followed by the descriptor. Here are some examples:
picture keyword
video popular
hotel top rated
Make sure that you KEEP THE ORIGINAL ORDER.
Get the keywords that have been added to a movie
Get a list of the current popular TV shows on TMDb
Get the primary person details by id
Get the user reviews for a movie


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 8: The effectiveness of successfully decoding <T> evaluated on FuncQA and ToolkenGPT.

                                                 F1 ↑         Recall ↑   Precision ↑
                                4 seen tools     0.962        0.974      0.950
                                9 unseen tools   0.860        0.813      0.836

Table 9: Different sets of tool names all lead to much better correct path ratio than the baseline, in-
dicating the robustness of our renaming pipeline. † is the exact same set of tool names that produced
the results in Table 5.

                                  Baseline   Name Set 1†         Name Set 2      Name Set 3   Name Set 4
       Correct Path%              15%        23.0%               30.0%           23.0%        32.0%
       Edit distance to Set 1     -          0                   2.54            3.63         3.70


A.7    E FFECTIVENESS OF M ODE S WITCHING

 To generalize to new tools, it is crucial for T OOL D EC to be able to know when to switch to
“tool mode”, i.e., decoding <T>. To evaluate its effectiveness, we evaluate the base model to which
T OOL D EC is applied by prompting it with the ground truth prefixes whose next token is <T>. We
consider it a true positive if the model is able to sample <T> as the next token. The results are re-
ported in Table 8. The high F1 scores indicate that once the model switching mechanism in the base
model (llama) is effective, even for unseen tools.

A.8    ROBUSTNESS TO (R E ) WRITING T OOL NAMES

 T OOL D EC depends on meaningful tool names for generalization. When the tool names are not ac-
cessible or meaningless, we rewrite them according to their documentation with LLMs, as we did
for RestGPT in Table 5. To evaluate how randomness in LLM sampling affects the name rewriting
process, we repeat it for 4 times to obtain 4 different sets of names and compare them with the first
set. Their correct path ratios (CP%) and the average distances of the names to the first name set are
reported in Table 9. Different sets of names show fluctuation in their performance, however, they are
uniformly better than the baseline (RestGPT).

A.9    AUTOMATICALLY C ONSTRUCTING THE FSM S

A finite state machine can be automatically constructed for any tool that follows a regular grammar.
We assumed that the syntax grammar of a tool is documented in a machine-readable format, for
example, in the OpenAPI specification.
For tool name, we tokenized the name of all available tools and constructed a trie. The next token
probability mask can then be pre-computed at each state, allowing O(1) filtering. As the number
of tools increases (for example, in Figure 5b, toolset size reaches 234), the trie could automatically
expanded by adding more nodes to the tree. We included our implementation in Code Listing 1 and
at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/tooldec_rebuttal/fsm.py.
Similar to tool names, the grammar of tool arguments can be enforced by parsing their signa-
ture/schema. For example, in Table 3, the FSM for REST APIs is constructed by recursively parsing
a JSON Schema generated from its OpenAPI documentation. The FSM can transition across the
required keys of a JSON object in a fixed order to guide the generation. For each type of value (e.g.
string, number, boolean), a sub-FSM is constructed and re-used to enforce the syntax. The detailed
implementation can be found in the supplementary material. The code for constructing argument
FSMs can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/tooldec_rebuttal/
argument_fsm.py.


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Code Listing 1: Python code for building tool name FSM
from collections import deque
import torch


class TrieNode:
    def __init__(self):
        self.children = {}
        self.end_of_word = False
        self.mask = None


class FunctionNameFSM():
    def __init__(self, functions, tokenizer, end_tokens):
        self.tokenizer = tokenizer
        self.end_tokens = end_tokens
        self._build_trie(functions)
        self._compute_mask()

     def _build_trie(self, functions):
         self.root = TrieNode()
         tokenized_func = [self.tokenizer.encode(s, bos=False, eos=False)
                                              for s in functions]
         for tokens in tokenized_func:
             node = self.root
             for token in tokens:
                 if token not in node.children:
                     node.children[token] = TrieNode()
                 node = node.children[token]
             node.end_of_word = True

     def _compute_mask(self):
         queue = deque()
         queue.append(self.root)
         while len(queue) > 0:
             node = queue.popleft()
             node.mask = torch.zeros((32000), dtype=bool)
             node.mask[list(node.children.keys())] = 1
             if node.end_of_word:
                 node.mask[self.end_tokens] = 1
             queue.extend(node.children.values())

     def __call__(self, logits):
         logits[-1, ˜self.root.mask] = -1e5
         return logits

     def push(self, token):
         token = int(token)
         self.root = self.root.children[token]


                                             17
