Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ROUND -A-V IDEO : Z ERO - SHOT G ROUNDED V IDEO
E DITING USING T EXT- TO - IMAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS
 Hyeonho Jeong & Jong Chul Ye
 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
 {hyeonho.jeong,jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr


Figure 1: Ground-A-Video achieves multi-attribute editing, video style transfer with attribute change, and text-
to-video generation with pose guidance, all in a time-consistent and training-free fashion. The boxes in the
right-bottom images visualize the series of pose guidance.

                                                A BSTRACT
          Recent endeavors in video editing have showcased promising results in single-
          attribute editing or style transfer tasks, either by training text-to-video (T2V)
          models on text-video data or adopting training-free methods. However, when
          confronted with the complexities of multi-attribute editing scenarios, they ex-
          hibit shortcomings such as omitting or overlooking intended attribute changes,
          modifying the wrong elements of the input video, and failing to preserve regions
          of the input video that should remain intact. To address this, here we present a
          novel grounding-guided video-to-video translation framework called Ground-A-
          Video for multi-attribute video editing. Ground-A-Video attains temporally con-
          sistent multi-attribute editing of input videos in a training-free manner without
          aforementioned shortcomings. Central to our method is the introduction of Cross-
          Frame Gated Attention which incorporates groundings information into the latent
          representations in a temporally consistent fashion, along with Modulated Cross-
          Attention and optical flow guided inverted latents smoothing. Extensive exper-
          iments and applications demonstrate that Ground-A-Video’s zero-shot capacity
          outperforms other baseline methods in terms of edit-accuracy and frame consis-
          tency. Further results and code are available at http://ground-a-video.github.io.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Coupled with massive text-image datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022), diffusion models (Sohl-
Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b) have revolutionized text-to-image (T2I)


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generation, making it increasingly accessible to generate high-quality images from text descriptions.
Additionally, the domain has seen profound expansion into several subfields, including controlled
generation and real-world image editing. On the other hand, the endeavor to extend the success
to the video domain poses a significant computational hurdle. Attaining time-consistent and high-
quality results necessitates training on expensive video datasets—an endeavor beyond the means of
most researchers, particularly given the absence of publicly available, generic text-to-video models.
As such, pioneering approaches exhibit promise in text-to-video generation (Ho et al., 2022b;a)
and video editing (Esser et al., 2023) by repurposing T2I diffusion model weights for extensive
video data training. Specifically, in pursuit of cost-effective video generation, Wu et al. (2022)
suggests fine-tuning the T2I model on a single video, which enables generating variations of the
video. Similar to the practice of manipulating attention maps within the realm of image editing
(Hertz et al., 2022; Tumanyan et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2023), various methods guide the denoising
process by self-attention maps (Ceylan et al., 2023), cross-attention maps (Liu et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023), or both (Qi et al., 2023), which are obtained during the input video inversion stage.
Recently, to incorporate the denoising process with additional structural cues, ControlNet (Zhang &
Agrawala, 2023) has been transferred to video domain, achieving structure-consistent output frames
in video generation (Khachatryan et al., 2023a) and translation (Hu & Xu, 2023; Chu et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023).
Nonetheless, in the scenario of fine-grained video editing involving multiple attribute changes, i.e.
∆τ ={τa  τa′ , τb  τb′ , τc  τc , . . . , ∅ τnew }, where τ represents a specific attributed indexed by
subscript, they encounter issues of degraded frame consistency, severe semantic misalignment (Park
et al., 2023), or both, as depicted in Fig. 2-Left and Sec. E. In specific, instances of neglecting in-
tended attribute edits (τa  τa ), modifying the wrong elements (τa  τb′ ), mixing two separate edits
(τa  τa′ ·τb′ ), and struggling to preserve regions that should remain unchanged (τc  τc′ ) are ob-
served. This is because in the existing models, the Cross-Attention layer is the single domain where
the complex semantic changes wield their influence, where the list of intricate changes being entan-
gled as a form of “one-sentence target prompt” makes the problem worse.
The key to address this issue lies in spatially-disentangled layout information, comprising bounding
box coordinates and textual captions, namely ‘groundings’. Groundings disentangle the complex
semantic combination by localizing each semantic element with precise location. Recently, ground-
ing has been successfully employed to text-to-image generation tasks. Li et al. (2023b) and Yang
et al. (2023) finetune existing T2I models to adhere to grounding conditions using box-image paired
datasets, while Xie et al. (2023) achieves training-free box-constrained image generation by inject-
ing binary spatial masks into the cross-attention space. However, unlike the literature on single-
image synthesis, guiding video generation process with groundings alone could significantly detri-
ment frame consistency. One major problem is that localizing the bounding box is insufficient for
the smooth frame transition (Fig. 2-right), which calls the need for additional structural guidance.
Consequently, we propose to integrate two distinct modalities: 1) spatially-continuous conditions,
including depth and optical flow maps, are employed to maintain consistent structure across frames;
2) spatially-discrete conditions, specifically ‘groundings’, enable precise localization and editing
of each attribute within the source video. The principal contributions of Ground-A-Video are
summarized as follows:
       • To our knowledge, we present the first groundings-driven video editing framework, also
         marking the first instance of integrating both spatially-continuous and discrete conditions.
       • We propose a novel Modulated Cross-Attention mechanism which efficiently enables in-
         teractions between differently optimized unconditional embeddings.
       • To further enhance consistency, we suggest smoothing inverted latent representations using
         optical flow information, which can be employed following any type of inversion.
       • Extensive experiments and applications demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in
         achieving time-consistent and precise multi-attribute editing of input videos.


2   BACKGROUND

Stable Diffusion. Distinct from traditional diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), Stable Diffusion
(SD) functions within a low-dimensional latent space, which is accessed via VAE autoencoder E, D
(Kingma & Welling, 2013). More precisely, once the latent representation z0 is obtained by com-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Left: Failure cases of multi-attribute video editing by various methods, driven by the target text “A
squirrel is eating an orange on the grass, under the aurora.” Ground-A-Video’s successful result for the same
task is shown in the second row of Fig. 1. Right: Input video reconstruction with and without ControlNet.


pressing an input image f ∈ RH×W ×3 through the encoder E, i.e. z0 = E(f ), diffusion forward
process gradually adds Gaussian noise to z0 to obtain zt through Markov transition with the transi-
tion probability:
                                          p
                    q(zt |zt−1 ) = N (zt ; 1 − βt zt−1 , βt I) , t = 1, . . . , T ,             (1)
where the noise schedule {βt }Tt=1 is an increasing sequence of t and T is the number of diffusion
timesteps. Then, the backward denoising process is given by the transition probability:
                       pθ (zt−1 |zt ) = N (zt−1 ; µθ (zt , t), σt2 I) ,   t = T, . . . , 1 .               (2)
Here, the mean µθ (zt , t) can be represented using the noise predictor ϵθ which is learned by the
                                                                                      2
minimization of the MSE loss with respect to θ: Ef,τ,ϵ∼N (0,I),t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, τ )∥2 , where ϵ refers
to the zero mean unit variance Gaussian noise vector, and τ = ψ(T ) is the embedding of a text T .
Specifically, a prevalent approach in diffusion-based image editing is to use the deterministic DDIM
scheme (Song et al., 2020a) to accelerate the sampling process. Within this scheme, the noisy latent
zT can be transformed into a fully denoised latent z0 :
                       s             s               s        
                           αt−1           1 − αt−1      1 − αt
                zt−1 =          zt +              −            ϵθ , t = T, . . . , 1 ,          (3)
                            αt              αt−1          αt

where αt is a reparameterized noise scheduler.
Null-text Optimization. To augment the effect of text conditioning, Ho & Salimans (2022) have
presented the classifier-free guidance technique (cfg), where the noise prediction by ϵθ is also carried
out unconditionally, namely by ‘null text’. Then the null-conditioned prediction is extrapolated with
the text-conditioned prediction to produce the classifier-free guidance prediction:
                       ϵ̃θ (zt , t, τ, ∅) = w · ϵθ (zt , t, τ ) +(1 − w) · ϵθ (zt , t, ∅) ,
                                                | {z }                     | {z }                          (4)
                                               conditional prediction      unconditional prediction


where ∅ = ψ(“ ”) denotes the embedding of a null text and w denotes the guidance scale. However,
when coupled with cfg featuring large guidance scale w ≫ 1, DDIM inversion accumulates errors
during the denoising process, resulting in flawed image reconstruction. In order to fix these errors,
Mokady et al. (2023) optimizes the embeddings of a null text. First, DDIM inversion trajectory
{zt∗ }Tt=0 and the predicated backward trajectory {z̄t }Tt=0 are computed. Then, at each timestep
                                                                                              ∗    2
starting from T , unconditional embeddings {∅t }Tt=1 are tuned towards minimizing z̄t−1 − zt−1     2
                                                                                                     .

3     M ETHOD
3.1   G ROUND -A-V IDEO : OVERVIEW

Given a series of source video frames f 1:N and a list of intended edits ∆τ , our goal is to accurately
edit various attributes of the source video while avoiding unwanted modifications, in a zero-shot
yet time-consistent manner. Fig. 3 illustrates the overall architecture of Gound-A-Video to achieve


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this. Initially, we automatically acquire grounding information through GLIP (Li et al., 2022). The
groundings and the source prompt are manually refined to form target groundings and target prompt,
commonly following ∆τ . On the other branch, the input frames undergo individual DDIM inversion
and null optimization, followed by optical flow-based smoothing to form smoothed latent features.
The smoothed latents are separately fed into the inflated SD and ControlNet, which are modified
with a sequence of attentions to achieve the temporal consistency of the video editing. The inflated
ControlNet takes an additional input of depth maps. Subsequently, the target groundings are directed
to the Cross-Frame Gated Attentions of the SD model, while the target prompt and optimized null-
embeddings are channeled into the Modulated Cross Attentions of both SD and ControlNet models.
In Sec. 3.2, we discuss our inflated SD with per-frame inversion approach and proposed attention
mechanisms (Modulated Cross-Attention & Cross-Frame Gated Attention). In Sec. 3.2, we intro-
duce the inflated ControlNet to incorporate a spatially-continuous prior of input video: a sequence
of depth maps. Lastly in Sec. 3.4, we present optical flow guided smoothing which is applied to the
inverted latent features before they are fed into the SD and ControlNet models, to further improve
the consistency across frames.


Figure 3: Left: Input preparation. We automatically obtain video groundings of input video frames f 1:N
via GLIP. This is followed by a handcraft editing phase for both the groundings and the source prompt. The
input frames undergo individual inversion and null optimization, followed by optical flow-based smoothing.
Furthermore, ControlNet input d1:N are obtained via ZoeDepth estimator. Right: Denoising process. The
smoothed latents z 1:N are fed into the inflated SD and ControlNet. The target grounding tokens U 1:N are
directed to Cross-Frame Gated Attention, while context vectors {τ 1:N , ∅1:N } are directed to Modulated Cross
Attention. The series of attentions in inflated SD’s transformer blocks includes Spatial-Temporal Attention,
Cross-Frame Gated Attention, and Modulated Cross Attention, whereas Cross-Frame Gated Attention layers
are not appended in inflated ControlNet. If a binary mask, the intersection of common outer spaces of target
bounding boxes, exists, it is utilized for inpainting before each denoising step. This process helps preserve
regions that are not the target of editing (see Sec. 4.4). For brevity, we omitted timestep t in all variables.


3.2   I NFLATED S TABLE D IFFUSION BACKBONE

Attention Inflation with Spatial-Temporal Self-Attention. To exploit pretrained SD which is
trained without temporal considerations, recent video editing methods (Wu et al., 2022; Qi et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023) commonly inflate Spatial Self-Attention along the temporal frame axis.
In a similar vein, Ground-A-Video enables inter-frame interaction by refactoring the Spatial Self-
Attention into Spatial-Temporal Self-Attention while retaining the pretrained weights. In specific,
for the latent representation zti of source frame f i , query features are derived from spatial fea-
tures of zti , while key and value features are computed from spatial features of concatenated latents
[zt1 , . . . , ztN ]. Specifically, this process can be written by the following mathematical representation:
             Q = W Q · zti , K = W K · [zt1 , . . . , ztN ],       V = W V · [zt1 , . . . , ztN ],
where W Q , W K , W V are projection matrices.
Per-frame Inversion with Modulated Cross-Attention. Although model inflation, such as the
Spatial-Temporal Attention discussed above or the Sparse-Causal Attention in (Wu et al., 2022),
can contribute to preserving global semantic consistency across frames, prior research on the model
inflation (Liu et al., 2023) has shown that it adversely degrades the generation quality of the original
SD model, leading to imprecise reconstruction. This occurs because Spatial Self-Attention parame-
ters are employed to compute frame correlations, which have not been taught during the pre-training.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, the inflated SD model falls short for the approximate inversion. To mitigate this issue, they
fine-tune the attention projection matrices on the input video.
In contrast, our pipeline adopts a per-frame approach to video inversion using the original, non-
inflated SD model without any training. In this process, for each of the N frames within the video
f 1:N , we carry out DDIM inversion and null-text inversion (Sec. 2) individually to obtain inverted
latents zT1:N and optimized null-embedding trajectories {∅1:N }Tt=1 . The latents zT1:N are then sub-
jected to Optical flow guided latents smoothing (Sec. 3.4), before proceeding to the denoising pro-
cess. Additionally, to guide the separately optimized embeddings {∅1:N }Tt=1 to restore the temporal
correlation, we reengineer the Cross-Attention mechanism within the transformer blocks of SD that
calculates correspondence between latent pixels and context vectors. Specifically, when performing
cfg (Eq. equation 4), unlike conditional prediction where context vectors τ 1:N are uniform across
frames, unconditional prediction employs unique context vectors ∅1:N . Since even minor variations
in the context vectors across frames adversely impact the global frame consistency (see Fig. 5), we
propose reprogramming the Cross-Attention mechanism into Modulated Cross-Attention, which
                                                           T
can be formulated as Attn(Q, K, V ) = Softmax( QK       √ V ) , with
                                                         d

                            W K c it               if cond              W V c it                  if cond
Q = W Q · zti , K =                                           , V =                                              .
                            W K c1t , . . . , cN
                                               t   if uncond            W V
                                                                               c1t , . . . , cN
                                                                                              t      if uncond
                                                                                                             (5)
Here, zti denotes a spatial latent feature of frame f i at timestep t, while ‘cond’ and ‘uncond’ refer
to conditional and unconditional predictions, respectively. In the process of computing the uncon-
ditional prediction branch of cfg (Eq. (4)), the proposed modulation produces attention maps that
correlate with the similarity between zti and the merged null-embeddings [c1t , . . . , cN    t ], thus opening
a path for interaction between variant context vectors.
Video Groundings with Cross-Frame Gated Attention. Li et al. (2023b) proposed GLIGEN that
achieves open-world grounded text-to-image generation via continual learning. In specific, they
extend the SD model by adding a gated self-attention layer and fine-tuning this layer to incorporate
layout information, while freezing the original SD weights. Ground-A-Video adopts GLIGEN’s
gated attention module and refactor the operation to accommodate the video-grounding in a time-
consistent fashion, which has not been explored before.
Following the same notations, we denote the semantic information associated with the i-th ground-
ing entity as ei and a set of bounding box coordinates for the i-th grounding entity as li . Next, we
define the concept of ‘grounding’ for a single image, expressed as g= [(e1 , l1 ) , ..., (eM , lM )] with
M denoting the number of entities to ground. Expanding from image space                  to video
                                                                                                  space, we ag-
gregate groundings across N frames of the input video, yielding g 1:N = g 1 , ..., g N . Subsequently,
we disentangle the complex editing objectives and introduce handcraft modifications, transitioning
ei to e′i for i=1, . . . , M , resulting in g ′1:N —the revised grounding input for our model. For exam-
ple, consider the first frame’s grounding, denoted as g 1 , within the input video in Figure 3, which
takes the form of [(‘rabbit’, (0.0, 0.0, 0.7, 0.9)) , . . . , (‘table’, (0.0, 0.8, 1.0, 1.0))]. Then, the editing
objectives ∆τ ={τrabbit  τkangaroo , . . . , τtable  τsnow } transforms grounding g 1 to grounding
input g ′1 , which is written as [(‘kangaroo’, (0.0, 0.0, 0.7, 0.9)) , . . . , (‘snow’, (0.0, 0.8, 1.0, 1.0))] .
The prepared grounding input requires post-processing prior to proceeding to the reverse diffu-
sion. The semantic information eji is directed to the CLIP text encoder, where it is transformed
into text tokens. Meanwhile, the layout information lij is encoded using Fourier embedding, follow-
ing Mildenhall et al. (2021), to produce layout tokens. The text tokens and layout tokens are then
projected to the single ‘grounding’ space using an MLP, resulting in grounding tokens:
                                   uji = MLP([ECLIP (eji ), Fourier(lij )]).
                                              | {z } | {z }                                                  (6)
                                                    text token   layout token


Given the grounding tokens for frame i and an intermediate latent representation of frame i at time t,
denoted as zti , our goal is to project the grounding information onto the visual latent representation.
However, frame-individual projection leads to temporal incoherence as, for example, the same text
conditioning for ‘kangaroo’ is projected differently onto the i-th latent zti and the j-th latent ztj unless
zti is identical to ztj . Therefore, we propose the Cross-Frame Gated Attention which globally


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 T
integrates grounding features onto the latent representation via TS(Softmax( QK
                                                                              √ V )) with:
                                                                               d
  Q = W Q · [zti , U i ],   K = W K · [zt1 , U 1 , . . . , ztN , U N ],   V = W V · [zt1 , U 1 , . . . , ztN , U N ],
where U i = [ui1 , . . . , uiM ] for the grounding tokens from equation 6, and the operation TS denotes
the token slicing, which ensures that the output shape of the proposed attention operation remains
consistent with the input shape.


3.3   I NFLATED C ONTROL N ET
ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) starts with a trainable copy of SD UNet, purposefully de-
signed to complement the SD. The trainable branch is then fine-tuned to accommodate task-specific
visual conditions, extending the input of ϵθ (zt , t, c) to (zt , t, c, d), where d represents the addi-
tional conditions such as depth maps or edge maps. This combined locked-copy and trainable-copy
framework preserves the original synthesis capabilities of SD while enabling precise control over
the structural attributes of the generated images.
To incorporate structural guidance into the video generation process, we employ inflated ControlNet
architecture and depth condition. Initially, we estimate depth maps from the source video, converting
d to d1:N , and apply the Self-Attention inflation and Cross-Attention modulation (Sec. 3.2) on
ControlNet while retaining the fine-tuned weights. During the denoising stage, the residual latent
          1:N
features zres  ∈ RN ×h×w×c of ControlNet are first scaled by ‘ControlNet Scale’ hyperparameter,
then transmitted to the inflated SD UNet, as illustrated in Figure 3. The scaling parameter regulates
the degree of structural preservation between the input and output (see Fig. 8, 26).

Algorithm 1 Optical Flow guided Inverted Latents Smoothing
  Require: Number of frames N , Source video frames f 1:N , Timesteps T , Text-Image Diffusion
  Model (SD), Optical flow estimator (RAFT), Threshold for magnitude difference Mthres
  zT1:N ← − DDIM INV(f 1:N , T , SD)                       ▷ run inversion (e.g. DDIM inversion)
  for all i = 2, 3, ..., N do
       mapiopt ← − RAFT(f i−1 , f i )                                  ▷ obtain optical flow map
            i
       mapmag ←   − normalize(∥mapiopt ∥))                            ▷ compute magnitude map
       mapimask ←  − mapimag < Mthres                 ▷ obtain binary mask denoting static region
            i                         i
       mapmask = downsample(mapmask )                          ▷ downsample to latent-level size
       zTi = zTi−1 ∗ mapimask + zTi ∗ (1 − mapimask )                    ▷ flow guided smoothing
  end for
  Return zT1:N                                                     ▷ temporally smoothed latents


3.4   O PTICAL F LOW G UIDED I NVERTED L ATENTS S MOOTHING
As a video consists of a temporal series of images with a considerable overlap of nearly identical
pixels, contemporary video compression techniques (Hu et al., 2021; 2022) harness motion infor-
mation to mitigate temporal redundancy instead of saving individual pixels for every frame of a
video. Inspired by this, Chen et al. (2023) introduces pixel-level residuals of the source video into
the diffusion process, while Hu & Xu (2023) leverages motion prior to prevent the regeneration of
redundant areas for frame consistency.
In our framework, latent codes of the input video are individually computed by performing inversion
on each frame through the T2I model. Hence, the approach of aggregating these latent representa-
tions and directly feeding them into the denoising process is suboptimal with respect to preserving
consistency on static regions. Also inspired by the video codecs, we propose to refine the inverted
latents, guided by optical flow information extracted from the input video frames, which accurately
captures the motion changes across frames. The pseudo algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Specifically, we first acquire an optical flow map mapiopt between the consecutive frames (f i−1 , f i )
using an optical flow estimation network. This flow map is represented as a two-channel image,
with each channel capturing vertical and horizontal motion movement. Subsequently, we incorpo-
rate the two different motion channels into a one-channel magnitude map mapimag by calculating
the Euclidean distance at each pixel location, followed by channel-wise normalizations. The result-
ing mapimag represents the comprehensive motion prior between f i−1 and f i . After thresholding


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Qualitative comparison with baseline methods: Our results exhibit superior temporal consistency, no
mutated body parts, accurate structural preservation, and the highest Edit-Accuracy without omitting or mixing
components of edits. Best viewed at high zoom levels.


mapimag on pre-configured threshold Mthres , which generates a binary mask (mapimask ), we per-
form smoothing on inverted latents (zTi−1 , zTi ) using the obtained mask. This processing guarantees
that static regions share the same pixel values between frames.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We leverage pretrained weights of Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) and ControlNet-
Depth (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) in addition to self gated attention weights from GLIGEN (Li
et al., 2023b). We use a subset of 20 videos from DAVIS dataset (Pont-Tuset et al., 2017). Generated
videos are configured to consist of 8 frames, unless explicitly specified, with a uniform resolution of
512x512. We benefit from BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023a) for the automated generation of video caption-
ings. We then feed-forward video frames and captionings to GLIP (Li et al., 2022) model to obtain
bounding boxes of the target objects. For the applications of video style transfer, bounding box coor-
dinates are uniformly set as [0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0] which covers the whole frame. RAFT-Large network
(Teed & Deng, 2020) and ZoeDepth (Bhat et al., 2023) are employed for estimating optical flow
maps and depth maps, respectively. In the Appendix (Sec. D), we provide a detailed configuration
of hyperparameters related to the forward and reverse diffusion processes.

4.2   BASELINE C OMPARISONS
Qualitative Evaluation. We offer a visual comparison against various state-of-the-art video edit-
ing approaches in Fig. 4. ControlVideo (CV) (Zhang et al., 2023) stands out as the most relevant
work to ours, as it introduces a training-free video editing model that is also conditioned on Con-
trolNet. Control-A-Video (CAV) (Chen et al., 2023) translates a video with ControlNet guidance
as well, with a first-frame conditioning strategy. Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu et al., 2022) efficiently
fine-tunes their inflated SD model on the input video. To ensure a fair evaluation, as TAV is not
provided structural guidance, we apply their inflation logic to ControlNet and fine-tune the inflated-
SD-ControlNet on the input video. Gen-1 (Esser et al., 2023) presents a video diffusion architecture
with additional structure and content guidance specifically designed for video editing. It’s worth not-
ing that CAV and Gen-1 train their models with video datasets and that the methods with ControlNet
uniformly employed depth guidance for a fair comparison.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quantitative Evaluation. We evaluate the proposed method against aforementioned baselines using
both automatic metrics and a user study. The results are outlined in Tab 1.
(a) Automatic metrics. We use CLIP (Radford Method Text-Align Frame-Con Edit-Acc Preserve-Acc Frame-Con
et al., 2021) for automatic metrics. For textual         TAV    0.810   0.959   2.99    3.13      3.05
alignment (Hessel et al., 2021), we calculate av-        CAV    0.801   0.955   2.25    2.50      2.88
                                                         CV     0.822   0.963   2.36    2.02      2.08
erage cosine similarity between the target prompt Gen-1 0.833           0.939   2.41    2.51      2.56
and the edited frames. For frame consistency, we         Ours   0.837   0.970   4.13    4.24      4.01
compute CLIP image features for all frames in Table 1: Summary of quantitative evaluations using
the output video then calculate the average co- CLIP (Left) and user study (Right).
sine similarity between all pairs of video frames.
As shown in Tab. 1, our method outperforms baselines in both textual alignment and temporal con-
sistency. (b) User study. We surveyed 28 participants to evaluate accuracy of editing and consistency
of frames in the edited videos, utilizing a rating scale ranging from 1 to 5. Specifically, to measure
editing accuracy, we divided the evaluation into two questions: i.“Were all the elements in the in-
put video that needed to be edited accurately edited?” ii.“Were the elements in the output video that
needed to be preserved accurately preserved?” Tab. 1 shows that our method surpasses the baselines
in all three aspects, particularly with a significant lead in Edit-Accuracy and Preserve-Accuracy.


Figure 5: Left: Comparison of Modulated Cross-Attention with the original Cross-Attention, in the context of
individually optimized null-embeddings. Right: Comparison of Cross-Frame Gated Attention against original
frame-independent gated mechanism and the absence of a gated attention layer. The rightmost case shows edit-
ing with frame-independent groundings can yield subpar results compared to editing without any groundings.


4.3   A BLATION S TUDIES
Attentions. We compare the use of the original Cross-                                 Text-Align Frame-Con
Attention with the Modulated Cross-Attention in Fig. 5-Left.        w/o Modulated CA    0.835       0.967
The results reveal variations in unconditional context vectors       w/o Groundings     0.802       0.960
                                                                   w/o Cross-Frame GA   0.829       0.956
lead to distinct appearances of the subject within a video and        w/o ControlNet    0.823       0.948
the Modulated mechanism promotes the coherency of the sub-           Full components    0.837       0.970
ject’s appearance. In Fig. 5-Right, we compare our proposed Table 2: Quantitative assessments on
Cross-Frame Gated Attention to scenarios with no gated at- pipeline components using CLIP.
tention (no grounding conditions) and with the direct applica-
tion of GLIGEN’s Gated Attention. The example of ‘Iron man’ illustrates the semantic edit of ‘man
  Iron man’ is neglected in the absence of groundings guidance and that frame-independent Gated
Attention causes discrepancy in the appearance of the shoulder area of ‘Iron man’ The ‘yellow car’
example reveals that grounding guidance can result in inferior results compared to the generation
with no grounding conditions at all, if not applied in a cross-frame manner. These results under-
score the pivotal role of Cross-Frame Gated Attention in both edit-accuracy and time-consistency.
Moreover, we provide a quantitative analysis detailing the impact of each module in Tab.2.
ControlNet. We ablate the utilization of ControlNet-Depth. Fig. 2- and Fig. 6-Right depict in-
stances of inaccurate reconstruction of the input video. ControlNet’s structure guidance is necessi-
tated to draw accurate structure of ‘rabbit’ and ‘penguin’ inside the bounding boxes, respectively. To
further validate the usage of ControlNet, we conducted a quantitative analysis to assess the impact
of the proposed inflated ControlNet, as presented in Table 2.
Optical Flow Smoothing. To assess the impact of optical flow-guided inverted latents smoothing,
we ablate the smoothing using three threshold values: 0 (no smoothing applied), 0.2 and 0.6. As
revealed in Fig. 6, our flow-guided smoothing effectively eliminates artifacts within static regions
and enhance consistencies. To find optimal threshold value, we computed Frame Consistencies using
thresholds of 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4. Notably, the 0.2 threshold resulted in superior frame consistency
(0.970 for threshold 0.2 > 0.968 for threshold 0.3, 0.964 for threshold 0.4).


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Left: Editing outcomes using different thresholds for Optical Flow Smoothing. Right: Input video
reconstruction results with and without ControlNet guidance.

4.4 A PPLICATIONS OF G ROUND -A-V IDEO
Groundings-guided Editing with Inpainting. Employing a grounding condition offers a signifi-
cant advantage, as it facilitates the creation of an inpainting mask. This mask is readily obtained by
intersecting the shared outer areas of bounding boxes. By utilizing this acquired mask during edit-
ing, which identifies regions in the source video that should remain unaltered, Preserve-Accuracy is
further enhanced. For instance, in Fig. 7-Middle, the common outer spaces of red bounding boxes
and blue bounding boxes form a binary mask which is used for inpainting. Yet, in Fig. 7-Bottom,
there is no intersection of common outer spaces, and thus, inpainting is not applied in this scenario.
Video Style Transfer & Text-to-video Generation with Pose Control. In the video style transfer
task of 7-Middle, target style texts are injected to UNet backbone in both Cross-Frame Gated Atten-
tion and Modulated Cross Attention layers. The second row showcases the application of style trans-
fer, while the third row shows style transfer combined with attributes editing. Our method adeptly
translates input video into the desired style, all while incorporating semantic edits when necessary.
Fig. 7-Right illustrates the use of Ground-A-Video for zero-shot text-to-video generation with pose
map guidance. The pose map images are sourced from Ma et al. (2023). These spatially-continuous
pose map conditions are integrated into the diffusion reverse process via inflated ControlNet.


Figure 7: Left: Video editing with and without inpainting. Middle: Video style transfer with attribute change.
Right: Text-to-video generation with pose maps. All three results are generated with zero-shot inference.

5    C ONCLUSION
In our work, we addressed the problem of complex multi-
attribute editing of a video and proposed an answer of
utilizing both spatially-continuous and discrete conditions.
Ground-A-Video offers precise video editing capabilities
without the need for fine-tuning off-the-shelf diffusion models Figure 8: Video editing results with
on any video data. We demonstrated the power of our method on different ControlNet Scales.
various input videos and applications. We provided detailed comparisons to existing baselines along
with an extensive user study, demonstrating its superiority in terms of consistency and accuracy.
Limitations. Since video groundings play a crucial role in our pipeline, misleading groundings
(e.g., incorrect bounding box coordinates) may result in inaccurate editing outcomes. Although the
use of ControlNet inherently brings the issue of structural flexibility between the input and output,
this can be effectively controlled through the ‘ControlNet Scale’ hyperparameter (see Fig. 8, 26).


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics & Reproducibility. The use of T2I foundation models brings forth several ethical con-
siderations. These models possess the potential for malicious applications, such as the creation of
misleading or counterfeit content, which could yield adverse societal consequences. Our work heav-
ily relies on one such model, making it susceptible to these concerns. Furthermore, the models were
trained on a dataset of internet-sourced images (Schuhmann et al., 2022), which may encompass
inappropriate content and inherent biases. Consequently, these models might perpetuate such biases
(Mishkin et al., 2022) and generate inappropriate imagery. To address these potential concerns and
foster reproducibility, we will release our source code, model, and data under a license that encour-
ages ethical and legal usage. Additional information regarding experiments, implementations and
the code base can be found in the Appendix (see Sec. D).
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Ko-
rea (NRF) (RS-202300262527), Field-oriented Technology Development Project for Customs Ad-
ministration funded by the Korean government (the Ministry of Science & ICT and the Ko-
rea Customs Service) through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea under Grant
NRF2021M3I1A1097910 & NRF2021M3I1A1097938, Korea Medical Device Development Fund
grant funded by the Korea government (the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Ministry of Trade, In-
dustry, and Energy, the Ministry of Health & Welfare, the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety) (Project
Number: 1711137899, KMDF PR 20200901 0015), and Culture, Sports, and Tourism R&D Pro-
gram through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports
and Tourism in 2023.

R EFERENCES
Shariq Farooq Bhat, Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, Peter Wonka, and Matthias Müller. Zoedepth: Zero-
  shot transfer by combining relative and metric depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12288, 2023.

Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.08465, 2023.

Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao Paul Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12688, 2023.

Weifeng Chen, Jie Wu, Pan Xie, Hefeng Wu, Jiashi Li, Xin Xia, Xuefeng Xiao, and Liang Lin.
 Control-a-video: Controllable text-to-video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.13840, 2023.

Ernie Chu, Shuo-Yen Lin, and Jun-Cheng Chen. Video controlnet: Towards temporally consis-
  tent synthetic-to-real video translation using conditional image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.19193, 2023.

Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03011, 2023.

Michal Geyer, Omer Bar-Tal, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Tokenflow: Consistent diffusion features
 for consistent video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10373, 2023.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv:2204.03458, 2022b.
Zhihao Hu and Dong Xu. Videocontrolnet: A motion-guided video-to-video translation framework
  by using diffusion model with controlnet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14073, 2023.
Zhihao Hu, Guo Lu, and Dong Xu. Fvc: A new framework towards deep video compression in
  feature space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1502–1511, 2021.
Zhihao Hu, Dong Xu, Guo Lu, Wei Jiang, Wei Wang, and Shan Liu. Fvc: An end-to-end framework
  towards deep video compression in feature space. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 45(4):4569–4585, 2022.
Hyeonho Jeong, Geon Yeong Park, and Jong Chul Ye. Vmc: Video motion customization using
  temporal attention adaption for text-to-video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00845,
  2023.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023a.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023b.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023a.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong, Li-
  juan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-training.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10965–10975, 2022.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023b.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04761, 2023.
Yue Ma, Yingqing He, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, Xiu Li, and Qifeng Chen. Fol-
  low your pose: Pose-guided text-to-video generation using pose-free videos. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.01186, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
P Mishkin, L Ahmad, M Brundage, G Krueger, and G Sastry. Dall· e 2 preview-risks and limitations.
  Noudettu, 28:2022, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Geon Yeong Park, Jeongsol Kim, Beomsu Kim, Sang Wan Lee, and Jong Chul Ye. Energy-based
  cross attention for bayesian context update in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.09869, 2023.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–11, 2023.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Federico Perazzi, Sergi Caelles, Pablo Arbeláez, Alex Sorkine-Hornung, and
  Luc Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.00675, 2017.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09535, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part II 16, pp. 402–419. Springer, 2020.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.
Wen Wang, Kangyang Xie, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, Yue Cao, Xinlong Wang, and Chunhua Shen. Zero-
 shot video editing using off-the-shelf image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17599,
 2023.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Jinheng Xie, Yuexiang Li, Yawen Huang, Haozhe Liu, Wentian Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, and
   Mike Zheng Shou. Boxdiff: Text-to-image synthesis with training-free box-constrained diffu-
   sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10816, 2023.
Zhen Xing, Qijun Feng, Haoran Chen, Qi Dai, Han Hu, Hang Xu, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
  A survey on video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10647, 2023.
Zhengyuan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Chenfei Wu, Nan Duan, Zicheng
  Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, et al. Reco: Region-controlled text-to-image generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14246–
  14255, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Yabo Zhang, Yuxiang Wei, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, and Qi Tian. Con-
  trolvideo: Training-free controllable text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13077,
  2023.
Rui Zhao, Yuchao Gu, Jay Zhangjie Wu, David Junhao Zhang, Jiawei Liu, Weijia Wu, Jussi Keppo,
  and Mike Zheng Shou. Motiondirector: Motion customization of text-to-video diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08465, 2023.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMPARISON TO P ER - FRAME T2I E DITING M ETHODS

To further underscore the effectiveness and indispensability of Ground-A-Video’s pipeline design,
we offer comparisons with two groundbreaking T2I editing methods applied in a per-frame manner,
i.e., per-frame GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023b) editing and per-frame ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023) editing. Note that random seeds were consistently fixed when sampling each frame and DDIM
inversion was utilized to give additional compositional guidance for both GLIGEN editing and Con-
trolNet editing. As demonstrated in Fig. 9, a straightforward extension of the T2I methods in a
frame-by-frame fashion leads to significant appearance inconsistencies in the video translation task.


Figure 9: Comparison with GLIGEN inpainting and ControlNet (depth) img2img on a frame-by-frame basis:
The direct application of state-of-the-art image editing methods to the video editing task results in a substantial
lack of appearance consistency among frames.



B     U TILIZING O PTICAL F LOW-G UIDED I NVERTED L ATENTS S MOOTHING IN
      T UNE -A-V IDEO

To further validate robustness of the proposed optical flow-guided inverted latents smoothing, we
demonstrate its application within the Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu et al., 2022) framework. Similar to
our approach, TAV commences its denoising process from DDIM-inverted latents. Fig. 10 illustrates
a comparison between the application of flow smoothing and its absence within the TAV editing
framework. Our smoothing technique effectively ensures consistency within static regions (e.g., the
avocado on the left and the corn on the right) and eliminates artifacts across frames. It is noteworthy
that our proposed optical flow smoothing is applicable to any video editing framework utilizing
DDIM inversion.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 10: Application of the flow-guided inverted latents smoothing in the Tune-A-Video framework.


C     R ELATED W ORK
C.1    C ONTROL OVER T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION

Internet-scale datasets of image-text pairs (Schuhmann et al., 2022) have driven remarkable ad-
vancements in diffusion models within the realm of text-image generation (Rombach et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022). Consequently, the focus of text-image models natu-
rally shifted towards the challenge of controllable generation. Controlled image generation can be
achieved through two distinct modalities: spatially-continuous conditions and discrete conditions.
Notable contributions in the former include T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) and ControlNet (Zhang
& Agrawala, 2023), which augment pretrained T2I models with auxiliary networks. These networks
are specifically trained to produce images conditioned on spatially-continuous visual cues such as
depth maps and edge maps. Conversely, GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023b) and Reco (Yang et al., 2023)
fine-tune the T2I model to accommodate discrete layout information, comprising bounding box co-
ordinates and textual captions.
Another approach to exert control over the generation process is to heavily reference the input image,
with the goal of preserving structural and background attributes. Prompt-to-prompt (Hertz et al.,
2022) and Pix2pix-zero (Parmar et al., 2023) achieve structure-preserving image generation by using
cross-attention maps of the input image, while Plug-and-play (Tumanyan et al., 2023) and MasaCtrl
(Cao et al., 2023) manipulates spatial features of the self-attention mechanism, which are extracted
from the input image diffusion trajectory. Alternate strategies (Mokady et al., 2023; Kawar et al.,
2023) attain enhanced editing capabilities through optimization techniques. Yet, straightforward
application of previously mentioned methods in a frame-by-frame manner for video editing outputs
pronounced flickering and temporal inconsistencies.

C.2    D IFFUSION M ODELS FOR V IDEO

When juxtaposed with text-image generation, generating videos in a text-only condition poses a sig-
nificantly elevated challenge due to the complexity of constraining temporal consistency along with
the scarcity of extensive text-video datasets, which are both resource-unfriendly. Video Diffusion
Models (VDM) (Ho et al., 2022b) designs a space-time factorized 3D UNet architecture trained
on both image and video modalities. ImagenVideo (Ho et al., 2022a) trains cascaded VDMs with
v-prediction parameterization. Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022) and MagicVideo (Zhou et al.,
2022) adopt a similar approach in that they train T2V models transferring from pretrained T2I mod-
els. More recently, Text2Video-Zero (Khachatryan et al., 2023b) achieves zero-shot text-to-video
generation by enhancing the latent features of the generated frames with motion dynamics and re-
structuring the Spatial Self-Attention along the frame-axis.
Simultaneously, significant research efforts have been dedicated to video editing tasks (Xing et al.,
2023). Pioneering work in this field, exemplified by Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022), has employed
the approach of fine-tuning query projection matrices in attention layers to effectively retain infor-
mation from the source video. Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023) adopts an approach of fine-tuning a
Text-to-Set model on the source video as well, additionally introducing a decoupled-guidance atten-


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion control for the inference stage. More recent one-shot video editing frameworks include Motion
Director (Zhao et al., 2023) and VMC (Jeong et al., 2023), where they both aim to customize mo-
tion patterns presented in the source video. To eliminate the necessity of optimizing model weights
entirely, various zero-shot editing techniques have been introduced. Vid2vid-zero (Wang et al.,
2023) focus on a cross-attention maps guidance while Pix2Video (Ceylan et al., 2023) employs a
self-attention maps injection mechanism, where the attention maps are obtained in the input video
inversion stage in both methods. It’s worth noting these two distinct attention control methods are
orthogonal and thus can be utilized at the same time. Furthermore, FateZero (Qi et al., 2023) intro-
duces a training-free video editing pipeline that utilizes cross-attention maps from the input video
inversion trajectory. These maps are used to calculate blending masks, aiming to enhance consis-
tency in the background regions of the generated videos. In contrast to approaches that involve
no training on video or training on a single video, Gen-1 (Esser et al., 2023) and Control-A-Video
(Chen et al., 2023) adopt a training-based approach for video translation, incorporating additional
structural guidance. Notably, Control-A-Video achieves efficient convergence through their innova-
tive first-frame conditioning method, optimizing resource utilization. Recent methodologies (Chu
et al., 2023; Hu & Xu, 2023) have made significant advancements in frame consistency by integrat-
ing an optical flow warping mechanism into their generation process. A promising concurrent work,
TokenFlow (Geyer et al., 2023), accomplishes time-consistent video editing that strongly preserves
spatial layout by enforcing consistency on the internal diffusion features across frames during the
denoising process.


D       E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND I MPLEMENTATIONS


In this section, we provide experimental details of our method and the compared baselines. Ground-
A-Video(Depth) utilizes DDIM inversion then performs null-text optimization with the default hy-
perparameters in Mokady et al. (2023). In the flow-driven inverted latents smoothing stage, the
magnitude threshold Mthres is set to 0.2. At inference, DDIM scheduler (Song et al., 2020a) with
50 steps and classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) of 12.5 scale is used. The executable
code base will be available at our project’s repository.
For the comparison with Tune-A-Video-Control(Depth) (Wu et al., 2022), we utilize the authors’
provided implementation1 and also adjust ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) following their
inflation guidelines. For fine-tuning, we train the model on each example video for 500 iterations
using their default parameters. During inference, we utilize DDIM inversion with 50 steps and em-
ploy diffusion reverse with the DDIM scheduler, also using 50 steps. The model architecture and
training script for ControlNet-attached Tune-A-Video will also be made available in our project’s
code repository. For the comparison with Control-A-Video(Depth) (Chen et al., 2023), we utilize
their official implementation2 with the following hyperparameter settings: 50 steps for inference,
a video scale of 1.5, and a noise threshold of 0.1. In our comparison with ControlVideo(Depth)
(Zhang et al., 2023), we leverage their open-source code repository3 and demo website4 . We per-
form inference using 50 steps, and we apply interleaved-frame smoothing with steps set at [19,
20]. Although Gen-2, the successor to Gen-1 (Esser et al., 2023), has been recently announced, it
is important to note that Gen-2 supports sole text-to-video generation functionality, which differs
from the focus of our paper, which is centered on comparing video editing performance. Thus, we
have utilized Gen-1 for our comparisons and the results from Gen-1 were generated by executing its
web-based product.


    1
      https://github.com/showlab/Tune-A-Video
    2
      https://github.com/Weifeng-Chen/control-a-video
    3
      https://github.com/YBYBZhang/ControlVideo
    4
      https://replicate.com/cjwbw/controlvideo


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Left: Input video and Ground-A-Video’s editing result, driven by the target prompt ”A crow flying
above desert in the forest on fire.” Right: Cases of Neglected Edit and Edit on Wrong Element. The editings
are driven by the same target prompt, using Control-A-Video and Tune-A-Video-ControlNet, respectively.


E    S EMANTIC M ISALIGNMENT & A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS
In our study, we define the concept of semantic misalignment within the realm of video editing. To
facilitate better understanding, we offer illustrative examples of various forms of semantic misalign-
ment through baseline comparisons.
The most common types of semantic misalignment encountered in video editing are ‘Neglected
Edit’ and ‘Edit on Wrong Element’. Neglected Edit is signified by the omission of one of the
intended attribute edits, while Edit on Wrong Element refers to cases where a semantic edit is ap-
plied to an element that was not the intended target of the edit. These misalignments are typically
observed in scenarios where a wide range of different edits need to be performed. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 11, editing scenario can be represented as {τbird  τcrow , τlake  τdesert , τforest  τon fire }. In
the first row of Fig. 11-right, the edit of ‘τforest  τon fire ’ is omitted in the results. The results in the
second row provide an example of Edit on Wrong Element, specifically visualizing the occurrence
of ‘τbird  τon fire . The next type is ‘Mixed edit’, which denotes the situations where two or more sep-
arate edits become intertwined and mutually affect each other, straying from the original intention.
This issue is commonly observed in complex editing scenarios that involve object color changes. For
instance, in the second row of Fig. 12-left, the edits ‘τcar  τred ’ and ‘τ∅  τsunset ’ become intertwined
as ‘τred · τsunset ’ and are applied globally to the entire image within a video. Finally, we address
‘Preservation Failure’, which refers to instances where the generated results fail to preserve the
regions that are not the target of editing. This issue is not exclusive to complex editing scenarios.
For example, in the second row of Fig. 12-right, the edit ‘τpenguin  τkungfu panda ’ on the foreground
object has been successfully performed, but it has failed to preserve the background of the source
video.


        Figure 12: Left: An example of Mixed Edit.          Right: An example of Preservation Failure.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     S PATIAL C ONDITIONS
F.1   D ISCRETE AND C ONTINUOUS C ONDITIONS

Ground-A-Video framework categorizes spatial conditions into two types: Spatially-discrete con-
ditions and Spatially-continuous conditions. Spatially-discrete conditions refer to modalities that
do not rigidly dictate the precise spatial arrangement of objects or elements within the ultimate out-
put image or video. In our work, we utilize a blend of bounding box coordinates and textual descrip-
tions that pertain to the grounded entity. This spatially-discrete condition doesn’t enforce particular
layout or structural constraints within the bounding box but rather determines the positions of the
entities enclosed by the bounding box within the image frame. In contrast, spatially-continuous
conditions provide information that explicitly influences the placement, structure, or spatial distri-
bution of objects throughout every part of the frame, e.g., edge maps and depth maps. To enhance
understanding of these terms, we visualize examples of each modalities that are used in our editing
pipeline in Fig. 13.


           Figure 13: Left: Spatially-continuous conditions. Right: Spatially-discrete conditions.


F.2   S TATIC AND DYNAMIC G ROUNDINGS

Video groundings play a central role in our video editing pipeline, and we would like to classify them
into two separate categories based on the video’s main subject characteristics: Static groundings
and Dynamic groundings. Static groundings refer to groundings that describe a subject that exhibit
minimal movement or remain in a fixed region of the layout. In contrast, dynamic groundings
involve groundings describing a subject that transition from one region to another within a video. In
Fig. 14, the first row presents an input video featuring a static ‘penguin’ subject. The subsequent two
rows below the first row illustrate our method’s successful editing using static groundings associated
with the stationary subject. The first row of Fig.15 showcases a video with a dynamic ‘car’ subject,
and the two rows following it demonstrate our method’s effectiveness in editing the dynamic subject
with the assistance of dynamic groundings.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 14: Input video of static subject ‘penguin’ and static groundings-driven video editing results.


   Figure 15: Input video of dynamic subject ‘car’ and dynamic groundings-driven video editing results.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     F ULL - LENGTH A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

G.1   V IDEO S TYLE T RANSFER

Ground-A-Video is primarily designed for multi-attribute video editing but can also perform video
style transfer tasks with temporal consistency. Additional video style transfer applications on various
videos are presented in Fig. 16.


                           Figure 16: Full-length Video Style Transfer results.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2   M ULTI -ATTRIBUTE E DITING

We present additional qualitative results of Ground-A-Video on multi-attribute editing. In each of
the Fig. 17, 18, 19, and 20, the top rows visualize5 the optical flow maps estimated from an input
video. The second row shows the input frames, each with annotated bounding boxes around the
entities. Our optical flow estimation network, RAFT (Teed & Deng, 2020), requires consecutive
images for accurate estimation. Consequently, the first frame, lacking a previous frame for com-
parison, does not yield any estimation results. For Fig. 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25, the top two rows
visualize both the estimated optical flow maps and the corresponding magnitude maps. An optical
flow map comprises two-channel images, with each channel representing vertical and horizontal mo-
tion residuals. The magnitude map, which combines motion information from both directions into
a single-channel image, is computed using normmax (∥mapopt ∥). The normalization is performed
along the frame dimension. In the examples, the visualization of magnitude maps demonstrates a
successful comprehension of vertical and horizontal movements. On all Fig. 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25 under the input video, we present the editing results in ascending order based on the ‘number
of attributes to be changed’ (from small changes to a large number of changes). Furthermore, Fig.
26 presents the editing outcomes using various settings of the ControlNet Scale hyperparameter. It’s
noteworthy that a reduction in the scaling parameter leads to greater independence in the shapes of
the tiger (particularly its ears) and the football from the input video and depth maps. To better assess
temporal consistency, full-length results are provided for all figures.


          Figure 17: Various editing results on the video of “A bird flying above lake in the forest.”


  5
    https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/generated/torchvision.utils.flow_to_
image.html


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 18: Various editing results on the video of “A black swan with a red beak swimming in a river near a
wall and bushes.”


             Figure 19: Various editing results on the video of “A white fox sitting in the grass.”



                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Figure 20: Various editing results on the video of “A rabbit is eating strawberries.”


                  Figure 21: Various editing results on the video of “A cat is roaring.”


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Figure 22: Various editing results on the video of “A squirrel eating a carrot.”


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 23: Various editing results on the video of “Brown bear walking on the rock, against a wall.”


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 24: Various editing results on the video of “A man is walking a dog on the road.”



                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 25: Various editing results on the video of “A rabbit is eating a watermelon on the table.”


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Figure 26: Full frame editing result with varying ControlNet Scales.


                                                  28
