Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AXIMIZING LLM S P OTENTIAL : E NHANCING M ON -
GOLIAN C HINESE M ACHINE T RANSLATION WITH RL
AGENTS AND A DVERSARIAL M ULTI K NOWLEDGE
D ISTILLATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Despite the impressive performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) in Natu-
         ral Language Processing (NLP), they still face challenges in low-resource transla-
         tion tasks, particularly in Mongolian to Chinese machine translation, often yield-
         ing suboptimal results. To address this issue, we propose an innovative approach
         that combines multi-source knowledge distillation and incorporates Reinforce-
         ment Learning (RL) to help models acquire and transfer knowledge from LLMs
         more effectively. RL plays a crucial role in this, making dynamic decisions to
         determine useful information for low-resource translation models and how to ex-
         tract it efficiently. We introduce a new reward function to comprehensively guide
         knowledge distillation, and experiments show that this approach harnesses the po-
         tential of LLMs, significantly improving translation quality in low-resource set-
         tings.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As the field of natural language processing continues to advance, large-scale language models like
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) has shown excellent performance in a variety of NLP tasks. However,
significant challenges remain in certain specific tasks, particularly in low-resource machine trans-
lation. A case in point is the translation from Mongolian to Chinese, where large-scale language
models even underperform compared to Transformer (Dai et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023) (Table 1
presents the results of our comparison between the use of large language models and conventional
models in Mongolian to Chinese machine translation) .
To address this issue, this study aims to introduce an innovative approach to improve low-resource
machine translation from Mongolian to Chinese. Our method combines three key elements: first, ex-
tracting knowledge from large language models through multiple datasets and multi-source knowl-
edge distillation; second, leveraging the dynamic decision-making capabilities of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) agents to more effectively distill knowledge from large-scale language models. To
achieve this, we propose a new reward function that comprehensively guides the knowledge distil-
lation process. This function takes into account the intricate and diverse decision-making processes
of both the student and teacher models during knowledge distillation. Finally, we introduce adver-
sarial noise as a perturbation in the distillation process, and experimental results indicate that this
significantly enhances the effectiveness of distillation.
In summary, the primary contributions of this research are as follows:

       • By integrating multi-source knowledge distillation and reinforcement learning, we effec-
         tively optimize low-resource Mongolian-to-Chinese machine translation.
       • We propose a new reward function specifically designed to guide the knowledge distillation
         process. It comprehensively considers multiple factors of the teacher model and the student
         model in distillation.
       • The introduction of adversarial noise significantly improves the effectiveness of the knowl-
         edge distillation process.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: BLEU Scores in Mongolian-to-Chinese Machine Translation Across Different Language
Models

                                          Method                    BLEU

                           Transformer                              32.6
                           Performer                                32.7
                           Linformer                                31.3
                           Llama2-13B (Touvron et al., 2023)        29.1
                           GPT-NEOX-20B (Black et al., 2022)        28.2


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION IN N EURAL M ACHINE T RANSLATION

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has demonstrated superior performance across various transla-
tion benchmarks, establishing itself as the state-of-the-art method for translation. However, these
models typically require large datasets for training, making them less practical in low-resource set-
tings. Knowledge distillation emerges as a novel technology that not only compresses models but
also delivers superior performance. Recent studies have shown that applying knowledge distillation
to machine translation, especially in low-resource scenarios, can yield promising results. Firstly,
Xu Tan et al. proposed a multilingual machine translation method using knowledge distillation (Tan
et al., 2019). By using a single model as the teacher, they trained a multilingual model through
knowledge distillation, effectively improving translation accuracy. Secondly, Wang focused on the
selective application of knowledge distillation in NMT (Wang et al., 2021a). They introduced batch-
level and global-level selection strategies to choose samples that are more suitable for knowledge
distillation. Lastly, Jooste further explored the application of knowledge distillation in low-resource
scenarios (Jooste et al., 2022). They used sequence-level knowledge distillation to train small stu-
dent models on a simulated low-resource German-to-English translation task. These student models
obtained knowledge from larger teacher models and ultimately outperformed them. Overall, these
works comprehensively explore the combination of knowledge distillation and machine translation
but do not consider the dynamics involved in the distillation process. We address this by introduc-
ing reinforcement learning to account for the dynamic changes between student and teacher models
during knowledge distillation.

2.2   R EINFORCED L EARNING K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

Chen’s research (Chen et al., 2023) primarily addresses the issue of portfolio management in fi-
nancial markets. By utilizing multi-agent reinforcement learning and knowledge distillation, it suc-
cessfully creates effective investment strategies in complex financial environments. Wang’s work
(Wang et al., 2021b) introduces a novel method for multi-constraint molecular generation. By com-
bining conditional transformers, knowledge distillation, and reinforcement learning, it effectively
generates new compounds that meet multiple physicochemical constraints. Another study by Fan
(Fan et al., 2021) proposes a reinforced knowledge distillation method based on policy gradient re-
inforcement learning, effectively tackling the issue of multi-class imbalanced classification. These
works demonstrate the feasibility of agent-based knowledge distillation.
However, distinct from these previous studies, our current work introduces multiple teacher models
and datasets. Furthermore, to adapt to the dynamic changes inherent in the distillation process, we
introduce a brand-new reward function, as detailed in Section 3.2, making it applicable to NMT
tasks.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
Our knowledge distillation architecture, illustrated in Figure 1, combines multi-source knowledge
distillation with reinforcement learning to train a more powerful student model by amalgamating
knowledge from multiple teacher models. During training, data generated by these teacher models


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


guides the student model while introducing adversarial noise to enhance its robustness. A reinforce-
ment learning agent selects the optimal teacher model based on the current state’s performance and
adversarial loss, transferring its knowledge to the student model.

3.1   A DVERSARIAL M ULTI K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

We utilize multi-source knowledge distillation to enhance the performance of the student model.
Specifically, we train multiple teacher models with different architectures and objectives and distill
their knowledge into a single student model.
Assuming we have N teacher models and one student model, their output probability distributions
are denoted as Mti and Ms respectively. The knowledge distillation loss LKD is composed of two
parts: Lsimilarity and Ltranslation .

                                            LKD = Lsimilarity + Ltranslation                         (1)

Lsimilarity is used to measure the similarity between the teacher models and the student model. We
not only want the student model to learn the output probabilities of the teacher model, but, more
importantly, we want the student model to capture a broader range of knowledge from the teacher
model. Therefore, we combine cross-entropy loss and mean squared error (MSE) loss as a loss
function to measure the overall similarity between the teacher model and the student model (Zhao
et al., 2022).

                                 N
                                 X
                                       wi · MSE Mti , Ms + CrossEntropy Mti , Ms

                 Lsimilarity =                                                                       (2)
                                 i=1

Ltranslation is used to measure the discrepancy between the student model’s output and the ground
truth data.
                                 Ltranslation = CrossEntropy (My , Ms )                        (3)

Additionally, we incorporate an adversarial loss Ladv to further enhance the model’s generalization
capabilities:

                         Ladv = max CrossEntropy Ms , Mti − λ · ||δ||2

                                                                                                     (4)
                                        δ

where δ represents an adversarial perturbation, λ is a hyperparameter that balances the trade-off
between maximizing the adversarial loss and controlling the magnitude of the perturbation (δ).
The overall loss function Ltotal is a weighted combination of the above components:

                                       Ltotal = β · LKD + (1 − β) · Ladv                             (5)

Here, β is a hyperparameter used to balance the contribution of different loss components.

3.2   N OVEL RL AGENT K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

In order to make the student model pay more attention to the knowledge of the teacher model, we
have made a crucial conceptual assumption by representing the iterative process of teacher models
weighting as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Fan et al., 2021). S represents the state space. A
is the space of teacher weights. The transition probability T is deterministic, meaning that actions
always transition s to the next s with a probability of 1. r is the reward function. r (st , at ) denotes
the reward received by the agent when taking action at in state st .
Let L (πθ ) be the objective function, which denotes the long-run average-reward under policy πθ .
S = {st : t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , Tmax } denotes the state set of MDP. Mathematically, L (πθ ) is defined
as


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           X                 X
                          L (πθ ) =                T (st )           πθ (at | st ) r (st , at ) .              (6)
                                           st ∈S             at ∈A


To learn the optimal policy θ opt = argmaxL (πθ ), the gradient of L (πθ ) can be derived as:
                                               θ

                                       X                 X
               ∇θ L (πθ ) = ∇θ                T (st )              πθ (at | st ) r (st , at )                  (7)
                                      st ∈S             at ∈A
                                   X                 X
                               =           T (st )           ∇θ πθ (at | st ) r (st , at )                     (8)
                                   st ∈S             at ∈A
                                   X                 X                        ∇θ πθ (at | st )
                               =           T (st )           πθ (at | st )                     r (st , at )    (9)
                                                                               πθ (at | st )
                                   st ∈S             at ∈A
                               = E [∇θ log πθ (at | st ) r (st , at )]                                        (10)

where r (st , at ) = E (rt+1 | st , at ) denotes the single-stage expected rewards. πθ is a parameter-
ized randomized stationary policy (composed of actions) with parameter θ, which maps each state
st to a probability distribution at . The update process of teachers weights can be formalized by
Policy Gradient Reinforcement learning. The procedure of RLAMKD is presented as follows in 1
1. Initial Teacher Weights (Agent’s Action):
                                                                   1
                                                         ωi =                                                 (11)
                                                                   N
                                               ω = [ω0 , ω1 , . . . , ωN ]                                    (12)
Where N is the number of teacher models. As a result, each teacher model receives equal attention
at the start, providing the agent with a fair starting point to evaluate the contribution of each teacher
model.
2. Calculate the weighted loss of the teacher and student network: In knowledge distillation, we
encourage the student model to learn from the teacher model by computing the following loss eq.(3).
3.Calculate the Reward rt : The designed reward function is defined as follows:
                                                   rt (st , ωt ) = F1 (t)                                     (13)

F1 (t) serves as a comprehensive measure of the model’s performance over time. We aim for the
agent to consider not only the current BLEU score of the model but also to acquire more knowledge
from large language models. It is defined as follows:

                          Z T
               F1 (t) =         [−SCRPS (t) − G(t) − P(t) + H(t) + α · BLEU(t)] e−ϵt dt                       (14)
                           0

Here, ϵ is a time-dependent discount factor used to adjust the present value of future rewards.
SCRPS (t) represents the Continuous Ranked Probability Score, which measures the model’s accuracy
in probabilistic predictions and is minimized in this function. The Gini coefficient G(t) quantifies
the inequality or complexity among predictions made by teacher models. Consistency between the
student and teacher models is captured by P (t), which can be the Pearson correlation coefficient. α
is a weight parameter used to control the importance of BLEU value in the reward function. Finally,
H(t), the Herfindahl Index, is used to gauge the diversity among predictions from teacher models.
Appendix A.1 provides a detailed explanation and proof of the SCRPS (t) function.
4. Obtain State st : The state st is composed of two features concatenated in the feature dimensions.
The first feature is the output probability of the teacher network pT t . The second feature is the output
probability of the student network pS  t  . The state st is represented as:
                                                      T S
                                             st = pt , pt


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5. Update Actions of Policy Agent: The teachers weights ωt correspond to the actions at of the
policy agent. Policy gradient is employed in the policy agent network, and the loss function is
defined as follows:
                                         TX
                                          max

                        L (st , ωt ) = −      rt (st , ωt ) log πθ (ωt | st )              (15)
                                            t=0

These two steps describe how to obtain the state st and how to update the actions of the policy agent,
where the actions correspond to the teacher weights ωt . The policy agent network is optimized using
policy gradient to maximize rewards and improve performance.


Figure 1: The complete architecture of the proposed RL Agent Multi-Source Knowledge Distillation
method. The number of teacher networks can be modified based on the dataset.


4     E XPERIMENT
4.1     E XPERIMENTAL DATA AND C ONFIGURATION

4.1.1    C ONFIGURATION
In this experiment, we set different learning rates for the teacher and student models, specifically
0.01 for the teacher model and 0.001 for the student model. Additionally, we utilized the Adam
optimizer with these specified learning rates and implemented weight decay and gradual learning
rate scheduling. The batch size was set at 64, and the maximum sequence length for the tokenizer
was 128. All computations were conducted on a system equipped with NVIDIA A100 GPUs to
ensure efficient training and evaluation. Each teacher model underwent training for 100 epochs on
the respective dataset. Knowledge distillation training for the student model spanned 300 epochs.
The entire training process extended over 200 epochs, with evaluations performed at the end of each
epoch to calculate the BLEU score for the student model. To ensure a fair method comparison,
we conducted hyperparameter tuning and selected the best settings based on the validation dataset
results, with specific parameters β = 0.7, λ = 0.1 , ϵ = 0.01 and α = 0.32. For more training
details, please refer to A.2.
We required three large-scale corpus datasets, namely English-Chinese, English-Turkish, and
Russian-Chinese, to train the teacher models in order to distill the student model. For more details
on the dataset information and the reasons for selection, please refer to A.3. Subsequently, our stu-
dent model was trained and tested on Mongolian-Chinese, Korean-Chinese, and Japanese-Chinese
translation tasks. Further information on these datasets can be found in A.4.

4.2     M ODEL SELECTION

In our approach, we opt for the Transformer, Performer (Choromanski et al., 2020), and Linformer
(Wang et al., 2020) as student models. These models have already demonstrated excellent per-
formance in NLP tasks, particularly in machine translation, making them natural choices for our
experiment. Specifically, we use the Transformer as the baseline model for this study to provide


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a stable and empirically validated starting point. Additionally, this setup enables us to compare
the effectiveness of different attention mechanisms during the knowledge distillation process and
indirectly assess the potential of each mechanism.
Furthermore, we employ Llama2 and GPT-NEOX as teacher models for training. These are large-
scale models that have been trained on extensive datasets, endowing them with strong text under-
standing and generation capabilities. Such large-scale training provides a rich and high-quality
knowledge base for the student models. Going even further, these teacher models come from diverse
research backgrounds and task objectives (Wei et al., 2022), each with its unique data distribution
and specialization. This diversity offers a more comprehensive and multi-faceted knowledge base
for the student models.
Student Model Choose

      • Transformer: A standard Transformer(baseline).
      • Performer: A strategy to improve the attention mechanism of Transformer through nonlin-
        ear mapping (Choromanski et al., 2020).
      • Linformer: An improved strategy for Transformer’s Attention Mechanism through Low
        Rank Matrix Approximation (Wang et al., 2020).

Teacher Model Choose

      • Llama2: Llama2 is a large-scale pre-trained model released by Meta AI. It is part of a series
        of pre-trained and fine-tuned large language models (LLMs). According to the referenced
        work (Touvron et al., 2023), Llama2’s model performance is evaluated with various param-
        eter configurations, and the choice of a 13-billion-parameter model was made considering
        both model performance and hardware resource limitations.
      • GPT-NEOX: GPT-NEOX is a self-regressive Transformer decoder model proposed by
        EleutherAI. Its architecture largely follows that of GPT-3 but incorporates some improve-
        ments. It is an open-source model that can to some extent replace GPT-3. According to
        the description in reference (Black et al., 2022), we have chosen its 20-billion-parameter
        model.

4.3   R ESULT

Figure 2 (a) illustrates the relationship between the number of teacher models (Teacher Numbers)
and their corresponding Bleu scores. As the number of teacher models increases, Bleu scores show
an upward trend, indicating that increasing the number of teacher models can enhance performance.
However, it’s worth noting that after reaching a certain threshold of five teacher models, the im-
provement in performance becomes less significant, suggesting a saturation point. Furthermore,
further increasing the number of teacher models does not lead to further performance gains, indicat-
ing stability within a certain range.
Figure 2 (b) compares two different models, Llama2-13B and GPTNEXO-20B, in the context of
multilingual knowledge distillation with varying numbers of teacher models (Teacher Numbers).
The results demonstrate that both models show increasing Bleu scores as the number of teacher
models increases, consistent with the findings in Figure 2 (a). However, once a certain threshold of
teacher model numbers is reached, Bleu scores stabilize.
Moving to Figure 3 (c), we analyze the effectiveness of training teacher models with different cor-
pora for multi-source distillation. The results reveal that the ”Mix” training method consistently
achieves the highest Bleu scores in most cases, further corroborating that our multilingual approach
contributes to improved translation performance to some extent.
Figure 3 (d) examines the relationship between Bleu scores and sentence length for OurKD and
StKD (Standard KD). The results indicate that OurKD shows an upward trend in Bleu scores as
sentence length increases, whereas StKD exhibits a declining trend in Bleu scores for longer sen-
tences. This suggests that OurKD outperforms StKD in handling longer sentences, emphasizing the
improved comprehension of semantic information in longer sentences after distillation with large-
scale language teacher models.


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Table 2: Comparison of different methods based on BLEU scores.

                                                                                Method                                                                                       MN-CH            Kr-CH                                             JP-CH

                                              AMTML-KD (Liu et al., 2020)                                                                                                    38.1             36.7                                              37.9
                                              SKD (Liu et al., 2023a)                                                                                                        38.5             36.3                                              37.1
                                              RMSKD (Yuan et al., 2021)                                                                                                      38.2             37.3                                              37.1
                                              Multi-G (Liu et al., 2022)                                                                                                     38.1             36.3                                              37.2
                                              RLAMKD (Our)                                                                                                                   38.6             36.8                                              37.8


Table 3 summarizes the BLEU score comparisons in ablation experiments conducted on Trans-
former, Performer, and Linformer models. These experiments encompass the comparison of per-
formance with and without Multilingual Multi-Source Knowledge Distillation (MKD), Adversar-
ial Perturbation (AP), Strander Knowledge Distillation (StKD) and Reinforcement Learning Agent
(RLAgent) . The results demonstrate that MKD, RL Agent and AP have a significant impact on
performance improvement. It is evident from this table that incorporating adversarial perturbation
into knowledge distillation enhances model performance.
From table 2, we can observe that among various knowledge distillation methods, RLAMKD (our
method) achieves the highest BLEU scores on both the MN-CH and Kr-CH datasets, demonstrating
its superiority on these sets. While on the JP-CH dataset, AMTML-KD performs slightly better
than RLAMKD, the score of RLAMKD is very close to the top, trailing by only 0.1 points. This
indicates that RLAMKD exhibits consistent and impressive performance across all three datasets.
Meanwhile, other methods like SKD, RMSKD, and Multi-G show relatively stable performance
across the different datasets. Overall, RLAMKD appears to be the most effective among these
methods, particularly on the MN-CH and Kr-CH datasets.
From Figure 4, after determining the optimal teacher model out of the four considered, we pro-
ceeded to combine different corpora to draw conclusions. It’s evident that the BLEU scores vary
depending on the corpora combination used. Notably, when considering the combination ”1 & 3”,
specifically the ”1 & 3 & 1 & 3” set, it exhibited the highest BLEU score of 38.62. This suggests
that the translation quality is optimal when the En-Tu corpus is involved in this combination. On the
contrary, the ”1 & 2” combination, particularly the ”1 & 2 & 1 & 2” set, yielded the lowest BLEU
score of 38.55. Additionally, the ”2 & 3 & 2 & 3” combination also achieved an impressive BLEU
score of 38.61, which is almost on par with the highest score.
Finally, We conducted a detailed sensitivity analysis for each hyperparameter, and we also conducted
ablation experiments for each component of the proposed reward function. The final results for all
these experiments are presented in Appendices Table 5, 6, and 7.
                                                           7HDFKHU 1XPEHUV 9V  %OHX 9DOXHV                                                                     7HDFKHU 1XPEHUV 9V  %OHX 9DOXHV


         %OHX 9DOXHV


                                                                                                                                                %OHX 9DOXHV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %OHX 9DOXHV  2QO\ /ODPD    %

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %OHX 9DOXHV  2QO\ *371(;2   %


                                                                          7HDFKHU 1XPEHUV                                                                                                     7HDFKHU 1XPEHUV


                                                                           (a)                                                                                                                                (b)
Figure 2: (a) Depict the relationship between Teacher Numbers and Bleu Values (MN-CH). (b)
Compare Bleu values for Llama2-13B and GPTNEXO-20B models as the number of teacher models
(Teacher Numbers) increases( MN-CH).


4.4   D ISCUSS

Based on the results mentioned above, we have observed that increasing the number of teacher mod-
els indeed enhances the model’s performance. This further confirms the advantages of integrating


                                                                                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparison of BLEU scores in ablation experiments on Transformer, Performer, and Lin-
former, including performance comparisons with and without Multilingual Multi-Source Knowledge
Distillation (MKD), Adversarial Perturbation (AP), and Standard Knowledge Distillation (StKD).
Reinforcement Learning Agent (OurRL)

                                         Method                                                                                      Model                                             MN-CH                                   Kr-CH                                                 JP-CH

                                                                         Performer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                           38.6                                    36.8                                                  38.1
                                                                         Transformer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                         38.3                                    36.8                                                  38.2
                                                                         Linformer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                           37.9                                    36.3                                                  37.2


                                                                         Performer(OurRL)                                                                                              37.8                                    35.3                                                  37.1
                                         MKD
                                                                         Transformer(OurRL)                                                                                            37.6                                    34.9                                                  37.2
                                                                         Linformer(OurRL)                                                                                              37.2                                    35.1                                                  37.1


                                                                         Performer(AP)                                                                                                 36.8                                    35.1                                                  35.7
                                                                         Transformer(AP)                                                                                               36.2                                    34.9                                                  35.6
                                                                         Linformer(AP)                                                                                                 36.1                                    34.9                                                  35.4


                                                                         Performer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                           36.4                                    34.5                                                  34.8
                                                                         Transformer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                         36.4                                    34.2                                                  34.2
                                                                         Linformer(OurRL+AP)                                                                                           36.3                                    34.1                                                  33.1

                                         StKD
                                                                         Performer(OurRL)                                                                                              36.2                                    34.2                                                  34.3
                                                                         Transformer(OurRL)                                                                                            36.2                                    34.2                                                  34.4
                                                                         Linformer(OurRL)                                                                                              36.3                                    34.1                                                  33.1


                                                                         Performer(AP)                                                                                                 36.2                                    34.1                                                  33.7
                                                                         Transformer(AP)                                                                                               36.2                                    33.9                                                  32.3
                                                                         Linformer(AP)                                                                                                 36.5                                    33.7                                                  33.3

                                                    %/(8 6FRUHV 9V  7HDFKHU 0RGHO 4XDQWLWLHV                                                                                 &RPSDULVRQ RI 2XU.' DQG 6W.' E\ /HQJWK

                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2XU.'
                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6W.'
                                                                                                                                                       7


         %/(8 6FRUH


                                                                                                                                                                 6FRUHV


                                       (1 &+        56 &+                                                 (1 75               0L[                                            >                >                >                >              >          

                                                                                      0HWKRG                                                                                                                                                   /HQJWK


                                                                             (c)                                                                                                                                                               (d)
Figure 3: (c) Compare Bleu scores for different training methods (EN-CH, EN-TR, RS-CH, Mix)
with varying numbers of teacher models (2T, 5T, 8T) in MN-CH.(d) Compare OurKD and StKD
(Standard KD) scores based on sentence length in MN-CH.


knowledge from multiple teacher models, especially in resource-constrained settings. Additionally,
when compared to traditional reinforcement learning distillation, the distillation process employed
in our study demonstrated superior performance, indirectly affirming the benefits of replacing the
utility function. These findings are consistent with related research in the literature (Zhou et al.,
2023; Dombry et al., 2023), and align well with the assumptions of our study.
Moreover, our research hypothesis is not solely focused on improving the performance of large
language models; it also emphasizes the acquisition of knowledge. Through experiments, we have


                                                                                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                               %/(8 6FRUH IRU /DUJH FRUSRUD


                               %/(8 6FRUH


                                                                                                                                                                    /DUJH FRUSRUD


Figure 4: BLEU scores of different large corpora, where 1 represents En-Ch, 2 represents Ru-Ch,
and 3 represents En-Tu.



successfully validated the validity of this hypothesis, which aligns with the findings of Zhao (Zhao
et al., 2022).
Furthermore, the importance of teacher models trained on the EN-TU dataset for the Mongolian-
Chinese translation task becomes particularly evident. This can be attributed to the presence of
certain shared linguistic features between Mongolian and Chinese, similar to those between English
and Turkish (Unseth, 2005). This suggests that knowledge derived from the EN-TU dataset offers
valuable insights for Mongolian-Chinese translation.
Additionally, the emergence of large language models opens up a broader landscape for this type
of knowledge transfer. Prior to the advent of large language models, capturing such nuanced cross-
language transfers may have posed significant challenges. However, with the application of these
models, we can not only identify such transfers but also delve deeper into investigating and har-
nessing them. This indirectly highlights the tremendous potential of large language models. As
described in the literature (Liu et al., 2023b), these models’ capabilities extend far beyond mere text
generation or comprehension; they can function as versatile tools for a wide range of tasks, from ba-
sic text classification to intricate knowledge transfer and distillation. The extensive parameter space
and comprehensive training data that these models utilize provide them with a wealth of linguistic
and cultural knowledge, ensuring their exceptional performance in cross-language and cross-cultural
tasks.


5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

5.1   C ONCLUSION

This work aims to address the challenges of low-resource Mongolian to Chinese machine translation
by employing large-scale language models and multi-source knowledge distillation. Our primary
contributions lie in significantly improving translation quality through effective knowledge transfer
and the dynamic decision-making capabilities introduced by reinforcement learning (RL) agents.
While empirical results have confirmed the effectiveness of this approach, we also acknowledge the
substantial computational resources required. Additionally, there is potential for further optimization
through the exploration of alternative RL algorithms in future research.


5.2   F UTURE W ORK

Our future research will focus on enhancing the multi-source knowledge distillation process through
contrastive learning and meta-learning techniques. We aim to extend our approach to other low-
resource language pairs and NLP tasks, such as text generation and question-answering systems.
We will also explore interdisciplinary approaches, including game theory, to further optimize our
framework. Lastly, we are committed to ensuring that our research has a positive social impact,
particularly for low-resource language communities.


                                                                                                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace
  He, Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, et al. Gpt-neox-20b: An open-source autore-
  gressive language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06745, 2022.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Min-You Chen, Chiao-Ting Chen, and Szu-Hao Huang. Knowledge distillation for portfolio man-
 agement using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 57:
 102096, 2023.

Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
  Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking attention
  with performers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.

Yuqian Dai, Marc de Kamps, and Serge Sharoff. Bertology for machine translation: What bert
  knows about linguistic difficulties for translation. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language
  Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 6674–6690, 2022.

Clément Dombry, Romain Pic, Philippe Naveau, and Maxime Taillardat. Mathematical properties
  of continuous ranked probability score forecasting. Technical report, Copernicus Meetings, 2023.

Saite Fan, Xinmin Zhang, and Zhihuan Song. Reinforced knowledge distillation: Multi-class imbal-
  anced classifier based on policy gradient reinforcement learning. Neurocomputing, 463:422–436,
  2021.

Yoichiro Hasebe. Design and implementation of an online corpus of presentation transcripts of ted
  talks. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 198:174–182, 2015.

Tianyu Hu, Huimin Ma, Hao Liu, Hongbin Sun, and Kailong Liu. Self-attention-based machine
  theory of mind for electric vehicle charging demand forecast. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
  Informatics, 18(11):8191–8202, 2022.

Wandri Jooste, Rejwanul Haque, and Andy Way. Knowledge distillation: A method for making
 neural machine translation more efficient. Information, 13(2):88, 2022.

Chang Liu, Chongyang Tao, Jiazhan Feng, and Dongyan Zhao. Multi-granularity structural knowl-
  edge distillation for language model compression. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1001–1011, 2022.

Min Liu, Yu Bao, Chengqi Zhao, and Shujian Huang. Selective knowledge distillation for non-
 autoregressive neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17910, 2023a.

Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian, Hao He, Antong
  Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, et al. Summary of chatgpt/gpt-4 research and perspective
  towards the future of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01852, 2023b.

Yuang Liu, Wei Zhang, and Jun Wang. Adaptive multi-teacher multi-level knowledge distillation.
  Neurocomputing, 415:106–113, 2020.

Chanjun Park, Chanhee Lee, Yeongwook Yang, and Heuiseok Lim. Ancient korean neural machine
  translation. IEEE Access, 8:116617–116625, 2020.

Ju-Fang Shi, You-Lin Qiao, Jennifer S Smith, Bolormaa Dondog, Yan-Ping Bao, Min Dai, Gary M
  Clifford, and Silvia Franceschi. Epidemiology and prevention of human papillomavirus and cer-
  vical cancer in china and mongolia. Vaccine, 26:M53–M59, 2008.

Xu Tan, Yi Ren, Di He, Tao Qin, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Multilingual neural machine trans-
  lation with knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10461, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Peter Unseth. Sociolinguistic parallels between choosing scripts and languages. Written language
  & literacy, 8(1):19–42, 2005.
Fusheng Wang, Jianhao Yan, Fandong Meng, and Jie Zhou. Selective knowledge distillation for
  neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12967, 2021a.
Jike Wang, Chang-Yu Hsieh, Mingyang Wang, Xiaorui Wang, Zhenxing Wu, Dejun Jiang, Benben
   Liao, Xujun Zhang, Bo Yang, Qiaojun He, et al. Multi-constraint molecular generation based
   on conditional transformer, knowledge distillation and reinforcement learning. Nature Machine
   Intelligence, 3(10):914–922, 2021b.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Zeynep Yirmibeşoğlu, Olgun Dursun, Harun Dallı, Mehmet Şahin, Ena Hodzik, Sabri Gürses, and
  Tunga Güngör. Incorporating human translator style into english-turkish literary machine trans-
  lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11457, 2023.
Fei Yuan, Linjun Shou, Jian Pei, Wutao Lin, Ming Gong, Yan Fu, and Daxin Jiang. Reinforced
  multi-teacher selection for knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 14284–14291, 2021.
Jinyi Zhang, Ye Tian, Jiannan Mao, Mei Han, and Tadahiro Matsumoto. Wcc-jc: a web-crawled
   corpus for japanese-chinese neural machine translation. Applied Sciences, 12(12):6002, 2022.
Borui Zhao, Quan Cui, Renjie Song, Yiyu Qiu, and Jiajun Liang. Decoupled knowledge distillation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  11953–11962, 2022.
Panpan Zhou, Wei Wang, Dennis KJ Lin, and Yang Liu. A novel criterion based on continuous
  ranked probability score for performance evaluation of control charts. Quality and Reliability
  Engineering International, 2023.
Wenhao Zhu, Hongyi Liu, Qingxiu Dong, Jingjing Xu, Lingpeng Kong, Jiajun Chen, Lei Li, and
 Shujian Huang. Multilingual machine translation with large language models: Empirical results
 and analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04675, 2023.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     P ROOF R EWARD F UNCTION

A.1.1    R EWARD M ETRIC IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION
In the context of knowledge distillation within reinforcement learning, the objective is to have the
student model learn from the teacher model such that its output closely mirrors that of the teacher
model. To quantify this closeness and provide feedback to the student model, we introduce the
Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) as a reward metric (Hu et al., 2022).
Consider the outputs from both the student and teacher models. We interpret these outputs as Cu-
mulative Distribution Functions (CDFs). CRPS serves as a metric that measures the discrepancy
between two CDFs. It’s specifically defined as:

                                           T    Z 1
                                        1X              student                            2
           RCRPS (student, teacher) =                  Ft       (p) − ε(p − Ftteacher (p)) dp   (16)
                                        T t=1    0



                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, ε(x) is a step function, defined as:
                                              
                                              0             if x < 0
                                        ε(x) = 0.5           if x = 0                                  (17)
                                              
                                               1             if x > 0

The explanations for the other metric are as follows:
G(t) - Gini Coefficient: It is used to quantify the inequality or complexity among predictions made
by the teacher model.

                                                             N
                                                             X
                                            G(t) = 1 −             p2i                                 (18)
                                                             i=1

where pi represents the probability distribution of different predictions by the teacher model at time
t.
P(t) - Pearson Correlation Coefficient: It is employed to capture the consistency between the student
and teacher models.

                                              PN
                                                  i=1 (xi − x̄)(yi − ȳ)
                             P (t) = qP                       qP                                       (19)
                                             N            2     N                      2
                                             i=1 (xi − x̄)               i=1 (yi − ȳ)

Here, xi represents predictions from the student model, yi represents predictions from the teacher
model, and x̄ and ȳ are their respective means.
H(t) - Herfindahl Index**: It is used to assess the diversity among predictions from teacher models.

                                                          N
                                                          X
                                              H(t) =            p2i                                    (20)
                                                          i=1

where pi represents the probability distribution of different predictions by the teacher model at time
t.

A.1.2     P ROOF OF E QUIVALENCE B ETWEEN D ISCRETE AND C ONTINUOUS F ORMS
Lemma 1:Transition from Discrete to Continuous
Consider a function f (x) defined on the interval [a, b]. If we take a partition P = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xn }
within this interval (where a = x0 < x1 < . . . < xn = b), and select some point ci in each
sub-interval [xi−1 , xi ], then the Riemann sum is given by:

                                                  n
                                                  X
                                    S(P, f ) =          f (ci )(xi − xi−1 )                            (21)
                                                  i=1

As the maximum length of the partition P approaches zero, the Riemann sum converges to the
integral of f (x) over the interval [a, b].
Lemma 2: Equivalence of Discrete and Continuous Forms
Assume we have a function g(p) defined over [0, 1]. If we partition [0, 1] into n small equidistant
intervals, each of length ∆p = n1 , then:

                                           n
                                           X                    Z 1
                                     lim         g(pi )∆p =              g(p)dp                        (22)
                                    n→∞                            0
                                           i=1

Proof:


                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider our continuous CRPS definition:
                                               T    Z 1
                                        1X                  student                            2
             SCRPS (student, teacher) =                    Ft       (p) − ε(p − Ftteacher (p)) dp    (23)
                                        T t=1        0


Now, consider the discrete case. Suppose we partition the interval [0, 1] into n subintervals of equal
length, each of length ∆p = n1 . For each subinterval, we choose the midpoint pi as a representative
and compute the difference at that point.

                                               T   n
                                            1 X X   student                                 2
      SCRPS,discrete (student, teacher) =             Ft    (pi ) − ε(pi − Ftteacher (pi )) ∆p       (24)
                                            T t=1 i=1

Based on Lemma 2, as n approaches infinity, the above discrete form will converge to the continuous
form. This establishes the equivalence between the discrete and continuous forms of CRPS.

A.1.3     C ONTINUITY AND D IFFERENTIABILITY
Lemma 3: Square of the Difference of Two Continuous Functions
Assume f (p) and g(p) are continuous functions defined over the interval [0, 1]. Then the function
h(p) = [f (p) − g(p)]2 is also continuous.
Proof: Since f and g are both continuous, their difference f (p)−g(p) is also continuous. The square
of a continuous function remains continuous over its domain. Therefore, h(p) is continuous.
Lemma 4: Differentiability of Continuous Functions
Suppose f (p) is a continuous function defined over [0, 1] and is differentiable almost everywhere on
                                R1
this interval. Then its integral 0 f (p)dp exists and is continuous.
Proof: The integral of a continuous function always exists over its domain. Since f (p) is differen-
tiable almost everywhere on [0, 1], its antiderivative (indefinite integral) is continuous. Therefore,
its definite integral (over a specific interval) is also continuous.
Proof:
Consider our CRPS definition:

                                               T    Z 1
                                            1X              student                            2
             SCRPS (student, teacher) =                    Ft       (p) − ε(p − Ftteacher (p)) dp    (25)
                                            T t=1    0


According to Lemma 3, the squared function [Ftstudent (p) − ε(p − Ftteacher (p))] is continuous over
[0, 1].
As this function is continuous over [0, 1] and since the antiderivative of a continuous function is
continuous, we can deduce that the CRPS formula is continuous over [0, 1].
Regarding differentiability, since CRPS is a function of [Ftstudent (p)] and [Ftteacher (p)], we only need
to prove that these two functions are differentiable almost everywhere over [0, 1]. Since they are both
CDFs, they are continuous over [0, 1] and are differentiable almost everywhere. Therefore, based on
Lemma 4, the CRPS formula is continuous and differentiable almost everywhere over [0, 1].

A.2     T RAIN C ONFIGURATION

In this experiment, we chose Python (3.8.1) as our programming language and utilized the Pytorch
(2.6.11) deep learning framework. The model weights were initialized using a random initialization
method. To prevent overfitting, we employed a dropout rate of 0.5 and implemented Layer Nor-
malization. Furthermore, we primarily used the ReLU activation function. Whenever the validation
performance reached a new peak, we saved the model weights. All computations were conducted
on a system equipped with 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs and 64GB RAM.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 4: The impact of setting different loss functions during distillation on the final results

                                              Loss            BLEU

                                      MSE                     37.4
                                      CrossEntropy            37.8
                                      MSE+CrossEntropy        38.6


A.3     R EASON FOR T EACHER TRAIN DATASET

        • English-Chinese: There are a total of 17.8 million bilingual sentence pairs, which are part
          of the language data provided by WMT17.
        • English-Turkish: There are a total of 28.3 million bilingual sentence pairs, and the data
          source is based on the work referenced in (Yirmibeşoğlu et al., 2023).
        • Russian-Chinese: There are a total of 63.2 million bilingual sentence pairs, and the data
          source is based on the work referenced in (Hasebe, 2015).

The main reason for selecting English-Chinese and Russian-Chinese corpora as the training data for
the teacher model is that these language pairs constitute extensive corpora covering major languages
from both Europe and Asia. These corpora provide high-quality data that can significantly facilitate
the model’s training (Jooste et al., 2022). Additionally, the diversity of these languages, belonging
to different language families, and having distinct structures, grammar rules, and expressions, aids
the teacher model in better learning and comprehension, which in turn enhances its performance in
multilingual scenarios.
The choice of English-Turkish as the training data for the multi-source knowledge distillation teacher
model, used to distill the Mongolian language student model, is primarily due to the fact that Mon-
golian and Turkish belong to the same Altaic language family and share many similarities (Shi et al.,
2008). It is hoped that languages from similar language families can distill some shared features.

A.4     DATA S ETS D ETAIL

        • Mongolia-Chinese (MN-CH): 8.7 million sentences in Mongolia and Chinese,We allocated
          30% of the data for validation and the remaining 70% for training.
        • Korean-Chinese (Kr- CH) (Park et al., 2020): 12.5 million sentences in Korean and Chi-
          nese, We allocated 30% of the data for validation and the remaining 70% for training.
        • Japanese-Chinese (JP-CH) (Zhang et al., 2022): 12 million sentences in Japaneseand Chi-
          nese,We allocated 30% of the data for validation and the remaining 70% for training.

A.5     T RAINING

The figures and tables presented in this section provide a comprehensive overview of the experiment
results. In Figures 5 and 6, we track various metrics during the training and validation phases, in-
cluding BLEU scores and loss functions. Figure 5(e) displays the BLEU score trends during training
and validation, highlighting the model’s performance over time. Figure 5(f) compares BLEU scores
among different models during validation, offering insights into their relative effectiveness. Figures
6 (g) and (h) illustrate the behavior of the loss functions during training and validation, providing a
visual representation of the optimization process. Figure 7 illustrates the reward trends throughout
the entire distillation process. The x-axis in the graph represents time or different stages of distil-
lation, while the y-axis represents the reward values. In this graph, we can observe that the reward
values consistently increase over the course of the entire distillation phase.
Additionally, Table 4 examines the impact of different loss functions on the final BLEU scores,
demonstrating that combining MSE and CrossEntropy yields the best result. Furthermore, Table 5
explores the sensitivity of the hyperparameter β, showcasing how variations in its value affect the
BLEU scores.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   7UDLQ 9V  9DOLGDWLRQ %/(8                                                                                                        9DOLGDWLRQ %/(8


               %/(8


                                                                                                                                                                                  %/(8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.' 2XU5/ $3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.' 2XU5/

                                                                                                                                    7UDLQ                                                                                                                    0.' $3


                                                                                                                                    9DOLGDWLRQ                                                                                                            0.' 6W5/


                                                                                    (32&+                                                                                                                                       (32&+



                                                                                    (e)                                                                                                                                               (f)
Figure 5: (e) BLEU score during training and validation. (f) Comparing BLEU scores among dif-
ferent models during validation.



                                                                    7UDLQ 9V  9DOLGDWLRQ /RVV                                                                                                              7UDQ /RVV


                                                                                                                                7UDLQ                                                                                                                  0.' 2XU5/ $3

                                                                                                                                    9DOLGDWLRQ                                                                                                            0.' 2XU5/

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.' $3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.' 6W5/


    /RVV


                                                                                                                                                                       /RVV


                                                                                      (SRFK                                                                                                                                       (SRFK



                                                                                     (g)                                                                                                                                              (h)
Figure 6: (g) Loss function during training and validation. (h) Comparing loss functions among
different models during validation.


                                                                                                                                                 5HZDUG YV  (SRFKV


                                                                                                  2XU5HZDUG

                                                                                                  06(5HZDUG


                                        5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                           (SRFKV



                                                                                                                                  Figure 7: Reward Trends



                                                                                                                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Table 5: Sensitivity Test of β

                                         Value     BLEU

                                         0.50      36.2
                                         0.51      36.3
                                         0.53      36.5
                                         0.55      36.7
                                         0.57      36.9
                                         0.58      37.0
                                         0.59      37.1
                                         0.61      37.2
                                         0.63      37.4
                                         0.65      37.5
                                         0.66      37.3
                                         0.67      37.2
                                         0.68      37.1
                                         0.69      37.0
                                         0.70      38.6
                                         0.71      38.5
                                         0.72      38.4
                                         0.73      38.3
                                         0.74      38.2
                                         0.75      38.3
                                         0.76      38.2
                                         0.77      38.2


                                   Table 6: Sensitivity Test of α

                                         Value     BLEU

                                         0.10      37.2
                                         0.20      38.3
                                         0.30      38.5
                                         0.32      38.6
                                         0.34      38.2
                                         0.36      38.1
                                         0.38      38.0
                                         0.40      37.8
                                         0.50      37.8



A.6   M ULTIPLE -S OURCE K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION WITH R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
      AND A DVERSARIAL T RAINING A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

These parameters and variables play different roles in the pseudo-code:

      • s represents the current state, used to describe the context in reinforcement learning.
      • rt is the reward function used to evaluate the performance of the student model. It calcu-
        lates rewards based on the comparison between the student model’s outputs and reference
        translations to guide the reinforcement learning process.
      • β is a hyperparameter that represents the weight of the adversarial loss in the total loss,
        controlling the strength of adversarial training.
      • Nepochs indicates the total number of training epochs, i.e., how many iterations the entire
        training process will go through.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 7: Reward Components and BLEU Values in α = 0.32

                                 Reward Components              BLEU

                           + SCRPS                              38.1
                           + GINI                               36.1
                           +P                                   36.3
                           +H                                   36.2
                           + BLEU                               36.8
                           + SCRPS + GINI                       38.2
                           + SCRPS + P                          38.2
                           + SCRPS + P + H                      38.3
                           + SCRPS + P + H + BLEU               38.4
                           + SCRPS + BLEU                       38.4
                           + SCRPS + P + BLEU                   38.2
                           + SCRPS + H + BLEU                   38.3
                           + SCRPS + GINI + BLEU                38.1
                           + MSE + BLEU                         37.3
                           + MSE + GINI + P + H + BLEU          37.4
                           + MSE                                37.2
                           + SCRPS + GINI + P + H + BLEU        38.6


      • D represents the training dataset, which includes data batches used to train the student
        model.

These parameters and variables serve different purposes in the context of multiple-source knowl-
edge distillation and reinforcement learning, helping control the training process, choose actions,
calculate rewards, and evaluate performance.

Algorithm 1 Multiple-Source Knowledge Distillation with Reinforcement Learning and Adversarial
Training
 1: procedure RLAMKD
 2:    Initialize the agent: agent ← Agent(num teachers)
 3:    for epoch ← 1 to Nepochs do
 4:        for each d sample data in the D do
 5:             Assign weights to teacher models: weights ts ← agent.weights teachers()
 6:             Calculate loss: loss ← compute kd ad loss(d, weights ts, t models, s model, β)
 7:             Calculate rt : rt ← compute reward(d, s model, t models)
 8:             Get state: agent.get state(d, s model, t models)
 9:             Update agent’s weights: agent.update weights(weights ts, reward value)
10:        end for
11:    end for
12: end procedure


                                                17
