Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N EURAL S PECTRAL M ETHODS :
S ELF - SUPERVISED LEARNING IN THE SPECTRAL DOMAIN

 Yiheng Du, Nithin Chalapathi, Aditi S. Krishnapriyan
 {yihengdu, nithinc, aditik1}@berkeley.edu
 University of California, Berkeley


                                           A BSTRACT
         We present Neural Spectral Methods, a technique to solve parametric Partial Dif-
         ferential Equations (PDEs), grounded in classical spectral methods. Our method
         uses orthogonal bases to learn PDE solutions as mappings between spectral co-
         efficients, instantiating a spectral-based neural operator. In contrast to current
         machine learning approaches which enforce PDE constraints by minimizing the
         numerical quadrature of the residuals in the spatiotemporal domain, we leverage
         Parseval’s identity and introduce a new training strategy through a spectral loss.
         Our spectral loss enables more efficient differentiation through the neural net-
         work, and substantially reduces training complexity. At inference time, the com-
         putational cost of our method remains constant, regardless of the spatiotemporal
         resolution of the domain. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method
         significantly outperforms previous machine learning approaches in terms of speed
         and accuracy by one to two orders of magnitude on multiple different problems,
         including reaction-diffusion, and forced and unforced Navier-Stokes equations.
         When compared to numerical solvers of the same accuracy, our method demon-
         strates a 10× increase in performance speed. Our source code is publicly available
         at https://github.com/ASK-Berkeley/Neural-Spectral-Methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental for describing complex systems like turbulent
flow (Temam, 2001), diffusive processes (Friedman, 2008), and thermodynamics (Van Kampen,
1992). Due to their complexity, these systems frequently lack closed-form analytical solutions,
prompting the use of numerical methods. These numerical techniques discretize the spatiotemporal
domain of interest and solve a set of discrete equations to approximate the system’s behavior.
Spectral methods are one such class of numerical techniques, and are widely recognized for their
effectiveness (Boyd, 2001; Gottlieb & Orszag, 1977). These methods approximate PDE solutions as
a sum of basis functions and transform the equations into the spectral domain. Spectral methods are
known for their fast convergence and computational efficiency, especially for problems with smooth
solutions. They are notably impactful in fields like computational fluid dynamics (Peyret, 2002).
Numerical methods can be computationally expensive because a fine discretization of the physical
domain and a large number of time-stepping iterations are often required to achieve high accuracy.
Additionally, many engineering applications require solving systems under different parameters or
initial conditions, necessitating multiple iterations to repeatedly solve such systems. The aforemen-
tioned spectral methods also rely on time-stepping schemes, and present similar challenges to other
numerical methods. These factors underscore the need for more efficient computational strategies.
Recent advances in machine learning (ML) highlight neural networks (NNs) as potential alternatives
or enhancements to traditional numerical solvers. Consider PDEs on a regular domain Ω ⊆ Rd :
                                      Fϕ (u(x)) = 0 in Ω,
                                                                                                  (1)
                                      Bϕ (u(x)) = 0 on ∂Ω,
where u is the classical solution, Fϕ is the potentially nonlinear differential operator, and Bϕ are
the boundary condition(s). Both operators are parameterized by ϕ, which could correspond to initial
conditions or parameters associated with Ω, such as diffusion coefficients. A common ML approach


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is to train NNs on datasets of numerical solutions spanning various parameters, and then learn the
mapping Gθ : ϕ 7→ uθ from parameters to solutions. This approach is typically done via supervised
learning, where the NN is trained by minimizing the error between the predicted solution and the
numerical solution. At inference time, the goal is to generalize to previously unseen parameters and
directly predict solutions. By amortizing computational costs during training and having rapid infer-
ence, these data-driven approaches have the potential to be more efficient than traditional numerical
solvers.
When there is information about the governing physical laws, another common ML approach is
to train the NN through a loss function that imposes a soft constraint on these laws (Raissi et al.,
2019). In this case, the NN predicts a solution uθ , and then the corresponding residual function,
R(x) = Fϕ (uθ (x)), is minimized on a set of sampled spatial and/or temporal points. Specifically,
an additional loss term is defined as the numerical quadrature to the residual norm:
                                1 X
               LPINN (uθ ) :=           R(xn )2 ≈ ||R(x)||2L2 (Ω) , xn ∼ i.i.d. U(Ω).           (2)
                               N
                                  n∈[N ]
This is often called a Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) loss function, which we denote as
LPINN (uθ ). In practice, this approach does not require solution data on the interior of the domain,
and the NN can be trained by only satisfying the PDE(s) of interest. This loss function can also be
combined with a data fitting loss and trained together. However, this can often be impractical, as
it requires knowing both the underlying governing physical laws and having solution data (either
through a numerical solver or through observational measurements).
Most current ML methods to solve PDEs (Kochkov et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020) are grid-based ap-
proaches. To model parametric solutions, these models create a mesh, and perform the parameters-
to-solutions mapping through non-local transformations on function values at points in the mesh.
One such example are neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2021), which parameterize the mapping
using iterative kernel integrals, and have been applied to a wide range of engineering problems
(Zhang et al., 2022; Kurth et al., 2023). Neural operators can be trained through supervised learn-
ing procedures (a loss function that matches solution data), self-supervised methods (such as the
aforementioned PINN loss function), and a combination of both.
Data-fitting and PINN loss approaches both have several limitations:

       • Data availability. The effectiveness of data-driven methods generally depends on the avail-
         ability of large datasets consisting of PDE parameters and corresponding solutions. For
         complex problems, solution data can only be generated from expensive solvers (or through
         observations), and also includes inherent numerical errors. When solving new systems,
         new solution data often needs to be generated, which can be time-consuming.
       • Optimization. Empirical evidence has suggested that minimizing the PINN loss often en-
         counters convergence issues, particularly for complex problems, resulting in subpar accu-
         racy. This is likely attributed to the ill-posed nature of the optimization problem that arises
         from incorporating PDE constraints into the model (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
         2021a).
       • Computation cost. Computing the PINN loss involves evaluating the differential opera-
         tor F at sampled points, which requires computing higher-order derivatives of uθ . As the
         complexity of uθ increases, the computation cost of back-propagation scales significantly.
         Moreover, accurate estimation of the residual norm requires a substantial amount of sam-
         pled points to enforce the PDE. For neural operators such as the commonly used Fourier
         Neural Operator (FNO) Li et al. (2020), differentiation costs scale quadratically with the
         number of points. This is due to the use of Fourier transform, and this makes it intractable
         to take exact derivatives for large numbers of sampled points (see discussions in §B).

To address these issues with accuracy and efficiency, our work explores the incorporation of ML
with spectral methods. We focus on a data-constrained setting to learn the solution operator of
parameterized PDEs, where we assume that we have no solution data on the interior of the spa-
tiotemporal domain and only train our model by minimizing the PDE residual. Given the form of
a differential operator Fϕ , the model learns to map the parameter function ϕ to the corresponding
solution uθ . Our key insights are to learn the solution as a series of orthogonal basis functions, and
leverage Parseval’s Identity to obtain a loss function in the spectral domain. While prior approaches


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


minimize the approximated residual function by computing higher-order derivatives on the sampled
points, our method exploits properties of the spectral representation to obtain the exact residual via
algebraic operations on the prediction.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
       • We propose Neural Spectral Methods (NSM) to learn PDE solutions in the spectral domain.
         Our model parameterizes spectral transformations with NNs, and learns by minimizing the
         norm of the residual function in the spectral domain. Since solution data can be expensive
         to generate for every new problem, we focus on scenarios with no solution data on the
         interior of the domain.
       • We introduce a spectral-based neural operator that can learn transformations in a spectral
         basis. By operating on fixed collocation points, our proposed spectral-based neural operator
         avoids aliasing error and avoids scaling the computational cost with grid resolution.
       • We introduce a spectral loss to train models entirely in the spectral domain. By utilizing
         the spectral representation of the prediction and Parseval’s identity, the residual norm is
         computed by exact operations on the spectral coefficients. This approach avoids sampling
         a large number of points and the numerical quadrature used by the PINN loss, thereby
         simplifying computation complexity.
       • We provide experimental results on three PDEs: Poisson equation §4.1, Reaction-Diffusion
         equation §4.2, and Navier-Stokes equations §4.3. Our approach consistently achieves a
         minimum speedup of 100× during training and 500× during inference. It also surpasses the
         accuracy of grid-based approaches trained with the PINN loss by over 10×. When tested on
         different grid resolutions, our method maintains constant computational cost and solution
         error. In comparison to iterative numerical solvers that achieve equivalent accuracy, our
         method is an order of magnitude faster.

2   R ELATED WORKS
ML methods for solving PDEs. Using NNs to solve PDEs has become an active research focus in
scientific computing (Han et al., 2018; Raissi et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021). He et al. (2018); Mitusch
et al. (2021) explore finite element methods in NNs. Yu et al. (2018); Sirignano & Spiliopoulos
(2018); Ainsworth & Dong (2021); Bruna et al. (2022) recast PDEs into variational forms and ap-
ply the Galerkin projection minimization via sampling-based losses. Sharma & Shankar (2022)
accelerate discretized PDE residual computation. Wang et al. (2021b) focus on Fourier features and
eigenvalue problems. In the context of spectral methods, Lange et al. (2021) focus on data-fitting;
Dresdner et al. (2022) learn to correct numerical solvers; Xia et al. (2023); Lütjens et al. (2021) use
spectral representations in spatial domains; and Meuris et al. (2023) extract basis functions from
trained NNs for downstream tasks. These studies differ in problem settings and deviate from our
method in both architecture and training.
Neural operators. Neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021)
learn mappings between functions, such as PDE parameters or initial conditions to the PDE solu-
tions. They are typically trained in a supervised learning manner on parameter–solution datasets,
and aim to learn the functional mappings between them (i.e., the solution operator). However, the
supervised learning setting poses a challenge in data generation for new or complex problems, es-
pecially when the data is scarce or the numerical solvers generating it are inefficient.
One of the most common neural operators is the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020;
Kurth et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022). The training process for FNO consists of performing convo-
lutions through Fourier layers and learning in the frequency domain. The Spectral Neural Operator
(SNO) (Fanaskov & Oseledets, 2022) was proposed to reduce aliasing error in general neural op-
erators by utilizing a feed-forward network to map between spectral coefficients. Similarly, the
TransformOnce (T1) (Poli et al., 2022) model looks at learning transformations in the frequency
domain with an improved model architecture. However, both models have a number of architecture
and training differences from NSM, and as we will show, have much poorer accuracy. They also
only look at the supervised learning setting.
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). The physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)
framework (Raissi et al., 2019) adds the governing physical laws (i.e., PDE residual function), esti-
mated on sampled points, into the NN’s loss function. This additional term, which we refer to as a


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PINN loss (Eq. 2), acts as a soft constraint to regularize the model’s prediction of the PDE solution,
and can be considered a self-supervised loss function. This approach can also be used in a operator
learning setting across various architectures, where the base architecture is a neural operator and the
PINN loss is used to train the model Li et al. (2021); Tripura et al. (2023); Rosofsky et al. (2023);
Goswami et al. (2022).
However, the PINN approach requires evaluating the PDE residual on a large number of sampled
points in the interior domain. In scenarios with higher-order derivatives in the PDE residual, multi-
ple differentiations through the NN are required. When using the PINN loss with grid-based neural
operators such as FNO, the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in the forward pass escalates to quadratic
in batched differentiation with respect to the number of sampled points, making exact residual com-
putation through auto-differentiation computationally expensive (see discussions in §B for more
details). As we will show, these grid-based methods are inaccurate and often overfit to the training
grid size because of aliasing error.

3     N EURAL S PECTRAL M ETHODS
We introduce Neural Spectral Methods (NSM), a general class of techniques to incorporate spectral
methods with NNs. NSM learns the mapping from PDE parameters to PDE solutions, i.e., Gθ : ϕ 7→
uθ , and is shown in Fig. 1. NSM consists of two key components: a base NN architecture (Fig. 1a)
that maps the spectral representation of the parameters ϕ to that of its solutions uθ , and a spectral
training procedure (Fig. 1b) that minimizes the spectral norm of the PDE residual function.
In §3.2, we describe our core NN architecture, which incorporates spectral methods within a neural
operator framework. In §3.3, we introduce our spectral training procedure. Finally, in §4, we demon-
strate the strong empirical performance of NSM for learning solutions to different PDE classes.

3.1   BACKGROUND

Notation. A set of functions on Ω is denoted as {fm (x) : x ∈ Ω}m∈I where I is a countable index
set. We denote integer indices by [n] := {1, 2, .., n}. The nth component of a vector x is denoted as
xn . Given a set of basis functions, the spectral coefficients of a function u are denoted as ũ. For an
integer k > 0, the kth order Sobolev space (Evans, 2022) on domain Ω ⊆ Rd is denoted as Hk (Ω).

Orthogonal basis. Orthogonal basis functions are fundamental components of spectral methods.
For completeness, the definition of orthogonality is provided in §A. The choice of the basis functions
is problem-specific and they must have desirable spectral properties. In this paper, we focus on two
commonly used orthogonal bases for periodic and other types of boundary conditions, respectively:
Example 1 (Fourier basis). {sin(mx), cos(mx) : x ∈ 2πT}m∈N w.r.t Lebesgue measure.
                                                                                 √
Example 2 (Chebyshev polynomials). {Tm (x) : x ∈ [−1, 1]}m∈N w.r.t dµ                     2
                                                                         dx = 1/ 1 − x , where
                      Tm (x) := cos(m cos−1 (x)) ≡ (−1)m sin(m sin−1 (x)).

For multi-dimensional problems, we can verify that the product of basis in each dimension preserves
completeness and orthogonality (see Proposition 1). Spectral representations are known for their
efficiency in representing smooth functions. Specifically, Fourier and Chebyshev interpolations pos-
sess the well-known spectral decay for sufficiently smooth functions (Mason & Handscomb, 2002):
Fact 1. For any f ∈ Hp (Td ), its Fourier series coefficients |f˜m | = O(1/mp ).
Fact 2. For any f ∈ Hp ([−1, 1]d ), its Chebyshev expansion |f˜m | = O(1/mp ).

Neural operators. Neural operators parameterize the mapping Gθ : ϕ 7→ uθ as,
                      Gθ := Q ◦ σ(W (L) + K(L) ) ◦ · · · ◦ σ(W (1) + K(1) ) ◦ P,                    (3)
                                                              (l)
where σ is a non-linearity. The operator iteratively updates vθ : Ω → Rdl , where dl is the hidden
                                       (0)                                  (L)
dimension of layer l. The input layer vθ = P(ϕ) and output layer uθ = Q(vθ ) are parameterized
                                           (l)                                (l)
by point-wise NNs. The affine operator W       and the kernel integral operator K are defined as,
                                                                 Z
           (W (l) (v))(x) = W (l) v(x) + b(l) , (K(l) (v))(x) =      K (l) (x, y)v(y)dµ(y),     (4)
                                                                   Ω


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        a)                                                   b)
                                                                             Par seval's I dentity   Spectral
                                                                                                        Loss


                          Spectral                                                                      NSM
                          Physical
        c)                                                   d)
                                                             Autogr ad                                 PINN
                                                                                                        Loss
                                                             or FDM

                                                                                                       PINN

Figure 1: Schematic of NSM. We refer to Neural Spectral Methods (NSM) as a general approach
to learn PDE solution mappings in the spectral domain. Our method consists of two components: a)
The parameters ϕ are converted to spectral coefficients, ϕ̃. In each NN layer l, the spectral coeffi-
         (l)
cients ṽθ are transformed by a linear operator K̃, with the activation σ then applied on collocation
points in the physical space. b) The prediction ũθ is transformed by F˜ϕ , the spectral form of the
differential operator, which gives the spectral coefficients R̃ of the residual function. The exact
residual norm is obtained by Parseval’s Identity, giving the spectral loss ||R̃||22 . We contrast our
method against the commonly employed grid-based neural operators with a PINN loss. c) General
neural operators learn the PDE solutions as transformations of function values on xi . We consider
the kernel integral in a more general sense, with transformation T not restricted to a Fourier basis.
d) Autograd or finite difference methods are used to obtain the higher-order derivatives. The PINN
loss is then obtained by approximating the norm of the residual function on the sampled points.

where the input v is in Ω → Rdl−1 and the outputs are in Rdl . The affine operator and kernel integral
operator are used to capture local and non-local transformations, respectively. Given input grid [xi ],
general grid-based neural operators parameterize Gθ as a mapping between function values:
               [ϕ(x1 ) ϕ(x2 ) . . . ϕ(xN )] 7→ [uθ (x1 ) uθ (x2 ) . . . uθ (xN )] .                (5)

3.2      S PECTRAL - BASED NEURAL OPERATORS

In this work, we employ the neural operator architecture to model transformations between spectral
coefficients. By fixing {fm (x) : x ∈ Ω}m∈I as the chosen basis functions, the solution operator
is parameterized as the mapping between the coefficients of the parameter functions ϕ and the pre-
dicted solutions uθ . Suppose the series is truncated to M terms, then Gθ is parameterized in the
spectral domain as:
                              X                              X
                      ϕ(x) =        ϕ̃m fm (x) 7→ uθ (x) =       ũθ,m fm (x),                 (6)
                              m∈[M ]                         m∈[M ]

where ϕ̃ and ũθ are the spectral expansion of ϕ and uθ under the basis f . For each layer l, the
          (l)
function vθ and kernel K (l) are also parameterized under the same basis functions,
               (l)
                        X (l)                               X
              vθ (x) =       ṽθ,m fm (x), K (l) (x, y) =          (l)
                                                                 K̃m   fm1 (x)fm2 (y),        (7)
                        m∈[M ]                               m∈[M ]2
             (l)
where ṽθ ∈ RM ×dl and K̃ (l) ∈ RM ×M ×dl ×dl−1 are coefficients in the spectral domain. Due to
                                                                                              (l−1)
orthogonality, integral transformations K(l) are actually equivalent to tensor contractions ṽθ,m2 i ·
  (l)                                                                    (l−1)      (l)     (l)
K̃m1 m2 ij . Similarly, affine transformations W (l) are equivalent to ṽθ,mi · Wij + bmj .

Non-linear activation functions. The activation σ is applied on the collocation points. We denote
T as the interpolation of function values at collocation points aligned with the basis, and T −1 as
the function value evaluation on those collocation points. Then σ̃, the spectral counterpart of the
activation function σ, is given by:
                                        σ̃ = T ◦ σ ◦ T −1 .                                     (8)

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aliasing error. General grid-based neural operators are prone to aliasing error. When trained and
tested on different grid resolutions, the interpolation error is inconsistent, leading to an increased
error on the test grids that are a different resolution from the training grid. In contrast, our spectral-
based approach circumvents aliasing error. By operating exclusively on fixed collocation points, the
interpolation error remains consistent across different input resolutions. This also ensures that the
model’s computation cost and predictions are resolution-independent.

Kernel approximation. Within each layer, the computational cost of the kernel integral is
quadratic. To mitigate this cost, the kernel can be confined to a low-rank or simplified form. Here,
we employ FNO’s approach, which simplifies the kernel integral into a convolution through a Fourier
transformation. More broadly, the kernel is restricted to a diagonal form, K̃ (l) ∈ RM ×dl ×dl−1 , and,
                                               X
                               K (l) (x, y) =         (l)
                                                    K̃m   fm (x)fm (y).                             (9)
                                               m∈[M ]

3.3   S PECTRAL TRAINING

After our base NN architecture predicts the solution ũ in Eq. 6, we train our model using a spectral
training procedure. Here, we describe the details of our spectral training procedure.

Spectral form of the residual function. We can derive the exact residual function using the spec-
tral representation of the prediction, denoted by ũ. The spectral representation has a direct corre-
spondence between operations performed on function values and on spectral coefficients. Addi-
tionally, differentiation and integration are transformed to algebraic operations on the coefficients.
Given the PDE operator Fϕ , we convert it to its spectral correspondence F̃ϕ : ũθ 7→ R̃, such that,
                                                    X
                                     Fϕ (uθ (x)) =     R̃m fm (x),                               (10)
                                                    m∈I
where R̃ represents the spectral form of the PDE residual function. We describe in more detail how
to obtain F̃ϕ from Fϕ for typical nonlinear operators and bases composed of Fourier series and
Chebyshev polynomials in §A.1.

Spectral loss. After computing the residual function, we aim to minimize our spectral loss, ||R̃||22 .
This method involves projecting the residual function onto a subspace spanned by truncated basis
functions, known as the Galerkin projection. The orthogonality of the basis functions is crucial to
this procedure. Leveraging Parseval’s Identity, we can equate the spectral loss to the weighted norm
of the residual function, as outlined below:
                                                P
Theorem 1 (Parseval’s Identity). For R(x) = m∈I R̃m fm (x), we have,
                                     Z                  X
                                         R(x)2 dµ(x) =     R̃m2
                                                                .                                (11)
                                       Ω                  m∈I

Contrast with the PINN loss. As previously discussed, the PINN loss is obtained by sampling a
substantial number of points within the interior domain, followed by employing a numerical quadra-
ture to approximate the integral of R(x)2 . This requires differentiating through the NN, which can
be computationally expensive, especially for higher-order derivatives, and when a large number of
points are sampled to ensure accurate quadrature. For the grid-based PINN loss, which commonly
uses finite difference methods to approximate the derivatives, we have provided an error analysis in
§B.1. From a theoretical perspective, we show that as long as the grid spacing is finite, the expected
solution error can be non-zero, even if the grid-based PINN loss is minimized arbitrarily well.
We bypass this process by using the spectral representation of the solution, and apply spectral trans-
formations to represent the residual function in the same basis. This greatly simplifies the entire
optimization procedure, and as we will demonstrate, significantly reduces training time. Note that
even though the spectral loss is a weighted norm, the corresponding PINN loss can also be readily
constrained:
                  dx
Corollary 1. For dµ  ∈ L∞ (Ω), ||R(x)||L2 (Ω) = O(||R̃||22 ).

This result follows directly by Hölder’s inequality. Both Fourier series and Chebyshev polynomials
fulfill this condition, ensuring that minimizing the spectral loss also minimizes the PINN loss.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We compare NSM to different neural operators with diffeerent loss functions (PINN and spectral
losses) on several PDEs: 2D Poission (§4.1), 1D Reaction-Diffusion (§4.2), and 2D Navier-Stokes
(§4.3) with both forced and unforced flow. NSM is consistently the most accurate method, and
orders of magnitudes faster during both training and inference, especially on large grid sizes.
Problem setting. For all experiments, we focus on the data-constrained setting, using no interior
domain solution data during training (i.e., we train only by minimizing the PDE residual). The task
is to learn the mapping from PDE parameters ϕ to solutions u. During training, each model is given
Fϕ and the parameters ϕi , which are independently sampled in every training iteration.
Recall that the PINN loss (Eq. 12) and the spectral loss (Eq. 13) are used on grid-based and spectral-
based models, respectively. For the PINN loss, higher-order derivatives are computed using the finite
difference method on a fixed rectangular grid [x1 x2 . . . xN ]. For our spectral loss, the M -term
residual series is directly transformed from the predicted solution ũθ .
                              PINN Loss                                                   Spectral Loss
   1       X 1 X                                                                1
                             Fϕi (uθ,i (xn ), ∇uθ,i (xn )...)2
                                                                                         X X
                                                                    (12)                          F̃ϕi (ũθ,i )2m   (13)
 |{ϕi }|        N                                                             |{ϕi }|
           ϕi       n∈[N ]                                                               ϕi m∈[M ]

For each problem, the test set consists of N = 128 PDE parameters, denoted by ϕi . Each ϕi is
sampled from the same distribution used at training time, and ui is the corresponding reference
solution. For each prediction uθ , we evaluate two metrics: L2 relative error ||uθ,i − ui ||2 /||ui ||2
and the PDE residual error ||Fϕ (uθ,i )||2 . Both metrics are computed on the test set resolution, and
averaged over the dataset. Additional details about the experimental setup are provided in §C.
We include the following models for comparison:

        • FNO + PINN loss. A grid-based FNO architecture (Li et al., 2020), trained with a PINN
          loss. The model is trained on different grid sizes, which are indicated by the corresponding
          labels (e.g., FNO×642 means a grid size of 64 × 64 is used to calculate the PINN loss).
        • SNO + Spectral loss. Ablation model: A base SNO architecture (Fanaskov & Oseledets,
          2022), trained with our spectral loss.
        • T1 + PINN loss / Spectral loss. Ablation model: A base TransformOnce architecture (Poli
          et al., 2022), trained with either a PINN loss or our spectral loss.
        • CNO + PINN loss (ours). Ablation model: The base architecture is identical to NSM, but
          trained with a PINN loss on the largest grid size used by FNO, i.e. 256 on each dimension.
        • NSM (ours). Our proposed spectral-based neural operator using Fourier and Chebyshev
          basis on periodic and non-periodic dimensions, and it is trained with our spectral loss.

For a fair comparison, the base architecture, number of parameters, and other hyperparameters are
kept exactly the same across neural operator-based models. Detailed parameters are provided in §C.
4.1    P OISSON EQUATION

We study the 2D Poisson equation, −∆u(x, y) = s(x, y), x, y ∈ T, with periodic boundary condi-
tions. The source term s is sampled from a random field with a length scale of 0.2. The task is to
learn the mapping from s to the potential field u. We evaluate the predictions using an L2 relative
error with respect to the analytical solution. Additional details and results for Dirichlet boundary
conditions are in §C.1.
                       Table 1: L2 relative error (%) for the periodic Poission equation.

SNO+Spectral    T1×642 +PINN         T1+Spectral    FNO×642 +PINN      FNO×1282 +PINN        FNO×2562 +PINN     NSM (ours)
 0.59 ± 0.12        3.22 ± 0.49     0.302 ± 0.071     4.24 ± 0.13          2.01 ± 0.03          1.75 ± 0.02    .057 ± .012

Results. The results are summarized in Tab. 1. Since the solution operator is an inverse Laplacian,
all models can theoretically express it with one layer (see discussions in C.1), but the FNO + PINN
models exhibits high error, even when trained with large grids and for a longer training time. This
simple example highlights the inherent optimization challenges with the grid-based PINN loss.


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Reaction-Diffusion equation with ν = 0.01. In a) and b), the L2 relative error and PDE
residual on the test set are plotted over training each model. The grid-based methods (FNO trained
with a PINN loss) show improved accuracy as the grid resolution increases, but are significantly
slower to train. When tested on different resolutions, significant aliasing errors occur on test grid
resolutions that differ from the training grid resolution. In contrast, NSM has a much low error and
PDE residual, and achieves this lower error 100× faster than the grid-based methods. In c), when
compared with iterative numerical solvers on different resolutions, NSM achieves the same level of
accuracy with a 10× speedup. Notably, both the accuracy and computational cost of NSM remains
constant, regardless of grid resolution.

4.2    R EACTION -D IFFUSION EQUATION

We study the 1D periodic Reaction-Diffusion system with different diffusion coefficients:
                               ut − νuxx = ρu(1 − u), x ∈ T, t ∈ [0, T ],
                                                                                                      (14)
                                  u(x, 0) = h(x),     x ∈ T,
where ν is the diffusion coefficient, and h(x) is the initial condition sampled from a random field
with a length scale of 0.2. Given h(x), the model learns to predict u(x, t) up to time T = 1. The
initial condition is enforced by transforming the prediction u(x, t) to u(x, t) · t + h(x).

Table 2: L2 relative error (%) and computation cost (GFLOP) for the Reaction-Diffusion equation.

             SNO+Spectral   FNO×642 +PINN   FNO×1282 +PINN   FNO×2562 +PINN   CNO+PINN (ours)   NSM (ours)
ν = 0.005    4.56 ± 0.99     2.30 ± 0.19      0.94 ± 0.11      0.33 ± 0.04      0.20 ± 0.01     .075 ± .016
ν = 0.01     5.41 ± 4.43     2.64 ± 0.97      2.27 ± 1.19      0.57 ± 0.19      0.48 ± 0.16     .086 ± .019
ν = 0.05     87.76 ± 52      11.82 ± 5.4      3.25 ± 1.29      1.06 ± 0.28      0.78 ± 0.01     .083 ± .006
ν = 0.1      152.8 ± 58      13.03 ± 6.4      4.90 ± 2.40      4.07 ± 2.00      1.28 ± 0.42     .077 ± .005
Train/Test    0.91/0.03       7.30/15.8       31.3/15.8        138.5/15.8       200.3/25.0       15.0/0.32


Results. The main results are summarized in Tab. 2, including the results for TransformOnce (Poli
et al., 2022) in §C.2. The training curves for the PDE residual and relative error on the test set for
diffusion coefficient ν = 0.01 are shown in Fig. 2. The grid-based models using the PINN loss
improve in relative error with a higher-resolution grid, but require significantly longer training time.
In contrast, NSM consistently achieves high accuracy while maintaining a low computation cost.
As the diffusion coefficient increases, NSM shows strong robustness and consistently achieves low
solution error, while the other models all increase significantly in solution error.
We also compare the ML models to a standard numerical solver (Simpson & Landman, 2006), as
shown in Fig. 2c. During inference time, the accuracy and computational cost of NSM remains
constant, regardless of the spatiotemporal resolution of the domain. NSM exhibits a 10× increase
in speed when compared to a numerical solver with a comparable level of accuracy. Solution error
distributions and additional details are in §C.2.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Navier-Stokes equation with ν = 10−4 . In a) and b), the relative error and PDE residual
on the test set are plotted. NSM achieves low L2 error and PDE residual 100× faster than FNO +
PINN methods, and is an order of magnitude more accurate. c) NSM captures fine features of the
vorticity evolution accurately, while the grid-based approach fails to predict the overall shape.
4.3   NAVIER -S TOKES EQUATION

We study the vorticity form of the 2D periodic Navier-Stokes (NS) equations:

            ∂t w + u · ∇w = ν∆w + f,         x ∈ T2 , t ∈ [0, T ],    where      ∇ · u = 0,
                                                   2
                                                                                                     (15)
                   w(x, 0) = w0 (x),         x∈T ,                              ∇ × u = w,
where ν is the viscosity, w is the vorticity field, and f is the forcing term. The initial vorticity w0 is
sampled from a random field with a length scale of 0.8. Given w, the velocity field u is determined
by applying the inverse Laplacian operator. The model is trained to learn the evolution of vorticity.
We first consider the unforced flow with Table 3: L2 relative error (%) for unforced NS equations.
different ν values and T = 3s. The solu-
tion is diffusive for large ν, and becomes           FNO×643 +PINN FNO×963 +PINN NSM (ours)
more challenging to learn as the viscos- ν = 10−2       8.18 ± 2.83      7.90 ± 0.57     0.71 ± 0.02
ity decreases, due to the sharp features in ν = 10−3   14.81 ± 0.67     11.99 ± 0.86     1.65 ± 0.26
the solution. For FNO trained with the ν = 10−4        17.88 ± 2.67     16.20 ± 0.61     3.53 ± 0.53
PINN loss, using a grid resolution larger
                                            Train           41h              131h            10h
than 96 becomes intractable to train, due
to the cost of compute and memory. The results are summarized in Tab. 3 and the case for ν = 10−4
is shown in Fig. 3. NSM significantly outperforms grid-based FNO with the PINN loss in terms of
both error and computational speed, achieving accurate results 100× faster (see Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b).
Next, we consider the long temporal transient flow under Table 4: L2 relative error (%) for the long
the forcing term f = 0.1(sin(2π(x + y)) + cos(2π(x + temporal transient NS equation.
y))) and T = 50s, following the setting in Li et al.
(2020; 2021). This is a significantly more challenging                   FNO×963 +PINN NSM (ours)
task, as it requires propagating the initial condition over ν = 1/500        55.1 ± 17.4  13.2 ± 0.57
an extended time interval. Nevertheless, as summarized
in Tab. 4, NSM maintains high accuracy, while grid-based FNO with the PINN loss collapses during
training and fails entirely. Further details for both unforced and forced flow can be found in §C.3.

Conclusion. We introduce an ML approach for solving PDEs, inspired by spectral methods. By
utilizing orthogonal basis functions and their spectral properties, we demonstrate numerous advan-
tages for learning PDEs in the spectral domain. Our method is evaluated on different PDEs, and
achieves significantly lower error and increased efficiency when compared to current ML methods.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Sci-
ence, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Scientific Discovery through Advanced
Computing (SciDAC) program under contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. It was also supported in
part by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant N00014-23-1-2587. We also acknowledge
generous support from Google Cloud and AWS Cloud Credit for Research. We thank Rasmus Malik
Høegh Lindrup and Sanjeev Raja for helpful discussions and feedback.

R EFERENCES
Mark Ainsworth and Justin Dong. Galerkin neural networks: A framework for approximating varia-
 tional equations with error control. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(4):A2474–A2501,
 2021.
John P Boyd. Chebyshev and Fourier spectral methods. Courier Corporation, 2001.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Joan Bruna, Benjamin Peherstorfer, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Neural galerkin scheme with active
  learning for high-dimensional evolution equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01360, 2022.
Gideon Dresdner, Dmitrii Kochkov, Peter Norgaard, Leonardo Zepeda-Núñez, Jamie A Smith,
  Michael P Brenner, and Stephan Hoyer. Learning to correct spectral methods for simulating
  turbulent flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00556, 2022.
Lawrence C Evans. Partial differential equations, volume 19. American Mathematical Society,
  2022.
Vladimir Fanaskov and Ivan Oseledets. Spectral neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10573,
  2022.
Avner Friedman. Partial differential equations of parabolic type. Courier Dover Publications, 2008.
Somdatta Goswami, Aniruddha Bora, Yue Yu, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed neu-
  ral operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05748, 2022.
David Gottlieb and Steven A Orszag. Numerical analysis of spectral methods: theory and applica-
  tions. SIAM, 1977.
Gaurav Gupta, Xiongye Xiao, and Paul Bogdan. Multiwavelet-based operator learning for differen-
  tial equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:24048–24062, 2021.
Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, and Weinan E. Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations
   using deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(34):8505–8510,
   2018.
Juncai He, Lin Li, Jinchao Xu, and Chunyue Zheng. Relu deep neural networks and linear finite
  elements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03973, 2018.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie A Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael P Brenner, and Stephan
 Hoyer. Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 118(21):e2101784118, 2021.
Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.08481, 2021.
Aditi Krishnapriyan, Amir Gholami, Shandian Zhe, Robert Kirby, and Michael W Mahoney. Char-
  acterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks. Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 34:26548–26560, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thorsten Kurth, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Jaideep Pathak, Morteza Mardani, David
  Hall, Andrea Miele, Karthik Kashinath, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourcastnet: Accelerating
  global high-resolution weather forecasting using adaptive fourier neural operators. In Proceedings
  of the Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing Conference, pp. 1–11, 2023.
Henning Lange, Steven L Brunton, and J Nathan Kutz. From fourier to koopman: Spectral methods
  for long-term time series prediction. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):1881–
  1918, 2021.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential
  equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03794, 2021.
Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, Zhiping Mao, and George Em Karniadakis. Deepxde: A deep learning library
  for solving differential equations. SIAM review, 63(1):208–228, 2021.
Björn Lütjens, Catherine H Crawford, Mark Veillette, and Dava Newman. Spectral pinns: Fast un-
  certainty propagation with physics-informed neural networks. In The Symbiosis of Deep Learning
  and Differential Equations, 2021.
John C Mason and David C Handscomb. Chebyshev polynomials. CRC press, 2002.
Brek Meuris, Saad Qadeer, and Panos Stinis. Machine-learning-based spectral methods for partial
  differential equations. Scientific Reports, 13(1):1739, 2023.
Sebastian K Mitusch, Simon W Funke, and Miroslav Kuchta. Hybrid fem-nn models: Combining
  artificial neural networks with the finite element method. Journal of Computational Physics, 446:
  110651, 2021.
Roger Peyret. Spectral methods for incompressible viscous flow, volume 148. Springer, 2002.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Federico Berto, Jinkyoo Park, Tri Dao, Christopher Ré, and Ste-
 fano Ermon. Transform once: Efficient operator learning in frequency domain. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:7947–7959, 2022.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Shawn G Rosofsky, Hani Al Majed, and EA Huerta. Applications of physics informed neural oper-
  ators. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 4(2):025022, 2023.
Ramansh Sharma and Varun Shankar. Accelerated training of physics-informed neural networks
  (pinns) using meshless discretizations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  1034–1046, 2022.
Matthew J Simpson and Kerry A Landman. Characterizing and minimizing the operator split error
 for fisher’s equation. Applied mathematics letters, 19(7):604–612, 2006.
Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Dgm: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial
  differential equations. Journal of computational physics, 375:1339–1364, 2018.
Roger Temam. Navier-Stokes equations: theory and numerical analysis, volume 343. American
  Mathematical Soc., 2001.
Tapas Tripura, Souvik Chakraborty, et al. Physics informed wno. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05925,
  2023.
Nicolaas Godfried Van Kampen. Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry, volume 1. Elsevier,
  1992.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sifan Wang, Yujun Teng, and Paris Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow patholo-
   gies in physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(5):A3055–
   A3081, 2021a.
Sifan Wang, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. On the eigenvector bias of fourier feature net-
   works: From regression to solving multi-scale pdes with physics-informed neural networks. Com-
   puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 384:113938, 2021b.
Mingtao Xia, Lucas Böttcher, and Tom Chou. Spectrally adapted physics-informed neural networks
 for solving unbounded domain problems. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 4(2):
 025024, 2023.
Bing Yu et al. The deep ritz method: a deep learning-based numerical algorithm for solving varia-
  tional problems. Communications in Mathematics and Statistics, 6(1):1–12, 2018.
Kai Zhang, Yuande Zuo, Hanjun Zhao, Xiaopeng Ma, Jianwei Gu, Jian Wang, Yongfei Yang, Chuan-
  jin Yao, and Jun Yao. Fourier neural operator for solving subsurface oil/water two-phase flow
  partial differential equation. SPE Journal, 27(03):1815–1830, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     O RTHOGONAL BASIS
Definition 1 (Orthogonal basis). A set of real-valued functions {fm (x) : x ∈ Ω}m∈I is said to be
orthogonal w.r.t a probability measure µ : Ω → R+ , if for any two indices i, j ∈ I we have,
                                   Z
                                      fi (x)fj (x)dµ(x) = µi δij ,                           (16)
                                       Ω
where constants µi ∈ R+ and δij = 1i=j . If µi ≡ 1, they are also orthonormal. Furthermore, when
their finite linear combinations are dense in L2 (Ω; µ), they are called an orthogonal basis.
Given that a set of orthogonal basis functions can be easily normalized, we assume their orthonor-
mality unless otherwise specified in this paper. For multi-dimensional problems, we can use the
cross product of basis functions on each dimension to form another orthogonal basis:
                                                (1)                                 (2)
Proposition 1. Given orthogonal basis {fm (x1 ) : x1 ∈ Ω1 }m∈I1 and {fm (x2 ) : x2 ∈ Ω2 }m∈I2
                                                        (1)      (2)
in L2 (Ω1 ; µ1 ) and L2 (Ω2 ; µ2 ), the cross product {fm1 (x1 )fm2 (x2 ) : x ∈ Ω1 × Ω2 }m∈I1 ×I2 is an
orthongonal basis in the product space L2 (Ω1 × Ω2 ; µ1 × µ2 ).

A.1    S PECTRAL CORRESPONDENCE

This section details operations in common PDE operators and their spectral correspondence with
Fourier and Chebyshev1 bases. While operations on Fourier bases are well-known, for an in-depth
introduction of Chebyshev polynomials, see Mason & Handscomb (2002).
Let u, v be the 1-dimensional function in consideration. Denote ũ, ṽ ∈ RM as their M -term expan-
sion under a Fourier or Chebyshev basis. We have the following properties in Tab. 5:

                      Table 5: Spectral correspondence of common operations.

                               Fourier basis                          Chebyshev polynomials
                           fm,cos = cos(2πmx)
       f                                                             fm (x) = cos(m cos−1 (x))
                           fm,sin = sin(2πmx)

       f = u+v                   f˜ = ũ + ṽ                               f˜ = ũ + ṽ
                                 X
                    f˜m,cos =          ũn,cos ṽm−n,cos −
                                                                        X
                                                              f˜m =           ũn ṽm−n +
                               n≤m,M ũn,sin ṽm−n,sin                n≤m,M
       f =u·v                    X                                      X
                    f˜m,sin =          ũn,cos ṽm−n,sin +                     ũm ṽm+n + ũm+n ṽm
                               n≤m,M ũn,sin ṽm−n,cos                n≤M −m

                          f˜m,cos = 2πmũm,sin
                                                                       X
       f = du                                                f˜m =             2(m+2n+1)ũm+2n+1
           dx
                          f˜m,sin = −2πmũm,cos                      2n≤M −m

                                  P
Note that sums in convolution form l al bk−l can be accelerated by Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT).
For multi-dimensional problems, the above operations can be done on each dimension sequentially.

B     G RID - BASED METHODS
Complexity of computing residuals. We continue the discussion in our introduction and Li et al.
(2021), where we look at the complexity of computing exact derivatives for grid-based neural oper-
ators. Consider differentiating a parameterized kernel K:
                          Z                         X Z
     v(x) = (Ku)(x) =         K(x, y)u(y)dµ(y) =          K̃m fm1 (x)fm2 (y)u(y)dµ(y).        (17)
                            Ω                      m∈I 2 Ω
                                       N
For a given set of sampled points {xi }i=1 , suppose both u and v are queried at these points. Then,
                                                                                     ∂v(xi )
regardless of how the integral is implemented or approximated, generally we have ∂u(x    j)
                                                                                             ̸= 0 for
every i, j ∈ [N ]. Therefore, the complexity to obtain the exact derivatives is quadratic in N .
   1
     For implementation purposes, we use shifted Chebyshev polynomial on [0, 1] throughout this work, i.e.
                       ∗
we consider functions Tm (x) = Tm (2x − 1), where Tm is the standard Chebyshev polynomial on [−1, 1].


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.1   E RROR ANALYSIS FOR GRID - BASED PINN LOSS

Grid-based methods estimate residuals on a discretized domain. As grid spacings (e.g., ∆x, ∆t)
approach zero, the estimated residuals tend towards being exact. However, the grid size is limited
by the expensive backpropagation in the training time, causing discretization errors. In this section,
we demonstrate this with an error analysis of the grid-based PINN loss for elliptic PDEs (Evans,
2022).

Problem setting. Consider an operator L on a bounded open subset Ω ⊂ Rd :
                                            Lu = −∇ · (A∇u),                                                 (18)
where A(x) ∈ Rd×d are coefficient functions. In order to guarantee the uniqueness of the solution,
we assume A satisfies the following uniformly elliptic condition for almost every x in Ω:
                               s||ξ||22 ≤ ξ T A(x)ξ ≤ S||ξ||22   for all ξ ∈ Rd ,                            (19)
where s, S > 0 are absolute constants. Given ϕ ∈ L2 (Ω), consider the Dirichlet problem Luϕ = ϕ
for uϕ ∈ H2 (Ω) satisfying uϕ = 0 on ∂Ω. The task is to learn the transformation G : ϕ 7→ uϕ .

Error analysis. Given an input ϕ, denote the model prediction as ūϕ . Consider minimizing the
grid-based PINN loss using finite difference methods with grid spacing h > 0, i.e., the discrete
gradient operator ∇h is used to approximate ∇ in L. Suppose that the grid-based PINN loss is
minimized, that is for some small ϵ, δ > 0, the probability is,
                               P(||∇h · (A∇h ūϕ ) + ϕ||L2 (Ω) ≤ ϵ) ≥ 1 − δ.                                 (20)
Proposition 2. Under the assumptions of Eq. 19 and Eq. 20, the estimation for the expected solution
error holds:
                               s||∇h (uϕ − ūϕ )||2L2 (Ω) + s||∇uϕ ||2L2 (Ω) − S||∇h ūϕ ||2L2 (Ω) − ϵ
   E[||ūϕ − uϕ ||L2 (Ω) ] ≥                                                                             .   (21)
                                                 ||∇h · (A∇h uϕ )||L2 (Ω) /(1 − δ)

Proof. Consider the inner product ⟨∇h · (A∇h uϕ ), ūϕ − uϕ ⟩Ω . By Cauchy-Schwartz:
               ⟨∇h · A(∇h uϕ ), uϕ − ūϕ ⟩Ω ≤ ||∇h · (A∇h uϕ )||L2 (Ω) · ||ūϕ − uϕ ||L2 (Ω) .               (22)
We can also use integration by parts, and then this inner product equals:
       Z
            (ūϕ − uϕ )∇h · (A∇h uϕ )dx,
       ZΩ
  =         ∇h (uϕ − ūϕ ) · (A∇h (uϕ − ūϕ )) + (ūϕ − uϕ )∇h · (A∇h ūϕ )dx,                         (23)
       ZΩ                                           Z                          Z
  =         ∇h (uϕ − ūϕ ) · (A∇h (uϕ − ūϕ ))dx −     ∇h ūϕ · (A∇h ūϕ )dx −   uϕ ∇h · (A∇h ūϕ )dx.
        Ω                                            Ω                           Ω

By the uniformity condition in Eq. 19, the first two terms can be estimated by:
               Z
                   ∇h (uϕ − ūϕ ) · (A∇h (uϕ − ūϕ ))dx ≥ s||∇h (uϕ − ūϕ )||2L2 (Ω) ,
                 Ω
                               Z                                                                             (24)
                                    ∇h ūϕ · (A∇h ūϕ )dx ≤ S||∇h ūϕ ||2L2 (Ω) .
                                     Ω

By assumption Eq. 20, the following holds with probability 1 − δ:
         Z                           Z
             uϕ ∇h · (A∇h ūϕ )dx ≤     uϕ ∇ · (A∇uϕ )dx + ϵ ≤ −s||∇uϕ ||2L2 (Ω) + ϵ.                        (25)
               Ω                             Ω

Then, with high probability, the inner product in Eq. 22 can be estimated by P(⟨∇h · (A∇h uϕ ), ūϕ −
uϕ ⟩Ω ≥ s||∇h (uϕ − ūϕ )||2L2 (Ω) + s||∇uϕ ||2L2 (Ω) − S||∇h ūϕ ||2L2 (Ω) − ϵ) ≥ 1 − δ. Rearranging the
terms, the desired result follows by Markov’s inequality.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion. This analysis implies that when the difference between the exact derivatives ∇uϕ , and
the approximated derivatives ∇h uϕ , is sufficiently large, there exists some prediction ūϕ , such that
the solution error for the prediction that minimizes the grid-based PINN loss can also be large. The
spectral loss has no such issue, as it is able to always obtain exact residuals.

C     E XPERIMENT SETUP AND DETAILS
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ASK-Berkeley/Neural-Spectral-Methods. All ex-
periments are implemented using the JAX framework (Bradbury et al., 2018).

Random fields. We use random fields for the distribution of PDE parameters, such as initial con-
ditions or coefficient fields. For random fields associated
                                                               with periodic boundaries, we employ a
                                         2 π      ′
                                      sin (   |x−x  |)
periodic kernel k(x, x′ ) = exp −           2
                                            l2 /2        to sample values on a uniform grid and use a
                                                                                                 ′ 2

Fourier basis for interpolation. Otherwise, we employ a RBF kernel k(x, x′ ) = exp − |x−x    2l 2
                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                       to
sample values on Chebyshev collocation points and use Chebyshev polynomials for interpolation.

Training. During training, the PDE parameters are sampled online from random fields, as describe
above. We use a batch size of 16. The learning rate is initialized to 10−3 , and exponentially decays to
10−6 through the whole training. Experiments are run with 4 different random seeds, and averaged
over the seeds.

Testing. For each problem, the test set consists of N = 128 parameters sampled from the same
distribution used for training (different from the training samples). The reference solutions are gen-
erated as specified in §C.1, §C.2, and §C.3. Both L2 relative error and PDE residuals are averaged
over the whole test set.

Profiling. During training or inference, the wall clock time is measured by the average elapsed
time during 16 calls of just-in-time compiled gradient descent step or a forward pass. The com-
putation cost of numerical solvers in the Reaction-Diffusion problem is measured similarly. The
parameter countings for each model used in each experiment are provided in Tab. 6.
             Table 6: Model size (number of trainable parameters) in each experiment.

PDE         Poisson equation           Reaction-Diffusion equation        Navier-Stokes equation   Forced NS
Model      SNO    FNO / NSM    SNO        CNO     FNO / NSM          T1   FNO / NSM       T1       FNO / NSM
# Param.   7.5M     31.6M      33.6M     67.2M       67.2M       167.8M     236.2M      782.4M       82.7M

Boundary conditions. Similar to classic spectral methods, the imposition of boundary and initial
conditions is straightforward. Periodic boundaries can be automatically satisfied by using a Fourier
basis, and other types of boundary conditions can be enforced by applying a mollifier to the coeffi-
cients. This procedure can be specific to the problem at hand, and we show examples in §4.

C.1     P OISSON EQUATION

Besides the periodic Poisson equation, we also show results for Dirichlet boundary conditions.

Parameters. For periodic boundary conditions, all models use Fourier bases in x and y dimen-
sions. For Dirichlet boundary conditions, both SNO and NSM use Chebyshev polynomials in both
dimensions. For each model, we use 4 layers with 64 hidden dimensions. In each layer, we use 31
modes in both dimensions. All models are trained for 30k steps, except for FNO with a grid size of
256, which requires 100k steps to converge. For the PINN loss, the discrete Laplacian is computed
with a 5-point stencil, and with a periodic wrapping for the periodic boundary case. The analytic
solutions are evaluated on resolution 256 × 256.
All models use ReLU activations, except those using a PINN loss which totally collapse during the
training. Therefore, we use tanh activations for FNO+PINN and T1+PINN, and report these results.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: (a) Source term (b) Solution of periodic Poisson equation. An additional constraint
u(0, 0) = 0 is imposed to ensure the uniqueness of the solution. (c) Relative error curves dur-
ing training. NSM converges significantly faster and to a lower error than the other methods.
  Table 7: L2 relative error (%) of the 2D Poission equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions.

SNO+Spectral   T1×642 +PINN   T1+Spectral     FNO×642 +PINN   FNO×1282 +PINN   FNO×2562 +PINN      NSM (ours)
 39.9 ± 36.6    2.24 ± 1.61   0.407 ± 0.068     3.52 ± 0.29     3.61 ± 0.27      0.443 ± 0.032   0.280 ± 0.017


Results. The L2 relative error for both types of boundaries are summarized in Tab. 1 and Tab. 7,
and the case for periodic boundary conditions is shown in Fig. 4. For the periodic case, the inverse
Laplacian operator is a convolution with g(x) ∝ ||x||2 . Therefore, all models can exactly represent
the solution with one layer. However, FNOs with a PINN loss fail to achieve an reasonable level of
accuracy. As the grid size increases, error improves but it requires more training steps to converge.
For Dirichlet boundary conditions, the solution operator is no longer diagonal under either Fourier
or Chebyshev basis. Nevertheless, NSM still achieves the highest accuracy among each models.

C.2    R EACTION - DIFFUSION EQUATION

Parameters. Both CNO and NSM use Chebyshev polynomials in the t dimension, and Fourier
bases in the x dimension. All models use ReLU activations. For each model, we use 4 layers with
64 hidden dimensions. In each layer, we use 32 modes in the time dimension and 64 modes in
the spatial dimension. For ν = 0.005 and ν = 0.01, all models are trained for 30k steps. Due to
the increasing problem difficulty as ν becomes larger, the training steps are increased to 100k for
ν = 0.05, and 200k for ν = 0.1, respectively.
The reference solution is generated by a standard operator splitting method (Simpson & Landman,
2006) with resolution 4096 × 4096, and then downsampled to resolution 512 × 512.


Figure 5: Solutions of the 1D Reaction-Diffusion equation with different2 diffusion coefficients ν.
Following Krishnapriyan et al. (2021), we use a reaction coefficient ρ = 5 and four different values
for the diffusion coefficient. As ν increases, the problem becomes progressively harder to solve.


    2
      The domain on the x-axis is taken as [0, 1), unlike Krishnapriyan et al. (2021), which considered the
interval [0, 2π). Diffusion coefficients are rescaled accordingly for similar solution behaviors. For diffusion
coefficients larger than 0.1, the solution becomes almost fully diffusive and constant over the domain.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results. The L2 relative error for all models are summarized in Tab. 2 and Tab. 8, and distributions
of absolution error over the test set are shown in Fig. 6. As ν increases, the error distribution of the
grid-based methods significantly increases, while the error of NSM remains almost identical.

Table 8: L2 relative error (%) and computation cost (GFLOP) for the Reaction-Diffusion equation,
compared to T1 + Spectral loss and T1 + PINN loss (continued from Tab. 2).

              T1+Spectral   T1×642 +PINN   T1×1282 +PINN   T1×2562 +PINN   CNO+PINN (ours)   NSM (ours)
ν = 0.005    0.68 ± 0.02     2.30 ± 0.19    0.94 ± 0.11     0.32 ± 0.04      0.20 ± 0.01     .075 ± .016
ν = 0.01     0.84 ± 0.08     2.64 ± 0.97    2.27 ± 1.19     0.57 ± 0.19      0.48 ± 0.16     .086 ± .019
ν = 0.05     41.36 ± 69      60.10 ± 8.5    81.87 ± 3.1     90.86 ± 6.8      0.78 ± 0.01     .083 ± .006
ν = 0.1      196.5 ± 0.6    94.91 ± 23.7    101.7 ± 2.5     94.89 ± 5.4      1.28 ± 0.42     .077 ± .005
Train/Test    4.08/0.17      6.64/6.35       16.5/6.35       60.1/6.35       200.3/25.0       15.0/0.32

Both SNO and T1 perform non-linear activations directly on spectral coefficients, a design choice
that differs from FNO’s approach of activating function values. This distinction leads to poor ro-
bustness in SNO and T1 for increasing ν values. In contrast, NSM shows a notable robustness to the
increasing diffusivity, validating our decision to apply activations at the collocation points.


      Figure 6: Reaction-Diffusion equation: Error distribution on the test set for each value of ν.

C.2.1     A BLATION STUDY: F IXED - GRID TRAINING
An insightful observation in our study is the connection between our spectral training and the prac-
tice of training grid-based FNOs on fixed-resolution grids, followed by interpolation for inference on
different grid sizes. In this section, we provide an ablation study on this fixed-grid training strategy.

Problem setup. We use exactly the same PDE problem settings as in §4.2. The ablation model is
trained on its collocation points, i.e. a fixed-resolution grid with 32 × 64 nodes. During inference
time, the model prediction is interpolated using the Fourier basis, and queried at the test resolution.

Results. The L2 relative error for this ab-
lation model is summarized in Tab. 9. FNO Table 9: L2 relative error (%) for fixed-grid training.
trained with a fixed-resolution grid fails to ν = 0.005     ν = 0.01    ν = 0.05       ν = 0.1
converge, showing the important distinction
between our spectral training and the practice 55.7 ± 0.01 76.9 ± 0.02 79.5 ± 0.04 80.4 ± 0.23
of fixing training resolution and interpolating.

C.3     NAVIER -S TOKES EQUATION

Parameters for the unforced flow. For each model, we use 10 layers with 32 hidden dimensions.
In each layer, we use 12 modes in the time dimension and 31 modes in both spatial dimensions.

Parameters for the forced flow. For each model, we use 5 layers with 32 hidden dimensions. In
each layer, we use 18 modes in the time dimension and 31 modes in both spatial dimensions.
The reference solution is generated numerically using a time-stepping scheme similar to Li et al.
(2020), with a spatial resolution of 256 × 256. The time stepping interval ∆t is set to 10−3 for the
unforced flow, and 5 × 10−3 for the forced flow. Solution is recorded at a temporal resolution of 64.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Visualization of unforced flow at time T = 3 for viscosity ν = 10−4 , using various initial
vorticity samples.


NSM uses a Fourier basis in the x, y dimensions and Chebyshev polynomials in the t dimension.
All models use ReLU activations. All models’ learning rate schedulers target 200k steps. For FNO
with the PINN loss, the training is limited to 1 day for grid size 643 and 3 days for 963 respectively,
after the loss plateaus.

               Table 10: L2 relative error (%) for unforced NS equation, compared
               to T1 + Spectral loss and T1 + PINN loss (continued from Tab. 3).

                           FNO×643 +PINN     T1×643 +PINN     T1+Spectral    NSM (ours)
                      −4
               ν = 10        17.88 ± 2.67      34.6 ± 0.21    9.22 ± 0.05   3.53 ± 0.53


Results. The L2 relative errors for both problems are summarized in Tab. 3, Tab. 4, and Tab. 10,
and a visualization of the predicted vorticity for the unforced flow is shown in Fig. 7. FNO with a
PINN loss fails to predict both the overall shape and the fine features of the vorticity evolution.

D    D ISCUSSION : LIMITATIONS
NSM applies to a wide range of problems, but is not a one-size-fits-all solution. Similar to those
in numerical analysis, efficient spectral representations necessitate sufficient regularities of the so-
lution. Therefore, predicting solutions that involve singularities requires more basis functions. Ad-
ditionally, NSM is designed for low-dimensional problems, e.g., problems described in x, y, z (and
t) coordinates. Extensions of our spectral training strategy to high-dimensional problems are left for
future research.


                                                  18
