Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S IM SCOOD: S YSTEMATIC A NALYSIS OF O UT- OF -
D ISTRIBUTION G ENERALIZATION IN F INE - TUNED
S OURCE C ODE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large code datasets have become increasingly accessible for pre-training source
         code models. However, for the fine-tuning phase, obtaining representative training
         data that fully covers the code distribution for specific downstream tasks remains
         challenging due to the task-specific nature and limited labeling resources. More-
         over, fine-tuning pretrained models can result in forgetting previously acquired
         pre-training knowledge. These lead to out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
         issues with unexpected model inference behaviors that have not been systemati-
         cally studied yet. In this paper, we contribute the first systematic approach that
         simulates various OOD scenarios along different dimensions of source code data
         properties and study the fine-tuned model behaviors in such scenarios. We inves-
         tigate the behaviors of models under different fine-tuning methodologies, includ-
         ing full fine-tuning and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) fine-tuning methods. Our
         comprehensive analysis, conducted on four state-of-the-art pretrained models and
         applied to two code generation tasks, exposes multiple failure modes attributed to
         OOD generalization issues. Additionally, our analysis uncovers that LoRA fine-
         tuning consistently exhibits significantly better OOD generalization performance
         than full fine-tuning across various scenarios.


1   I NTRODUCTION

There has been increasing success in apply-
ing Large Language Models (LLMs) to vari-
ous source code understanding and generation
tasks. LLMs for codes such as CodeBERT (Feng
et al., 2020), GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021),
CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2023), CodeGen (Nijkamp
et al., 2023), and Code Llama (Rozière et al.,
2023) are pretrained using large-scale source code      Figure 1: Our approach simulates out-of-
datasets, and serve as universal initialization for a   distribution (OOD) scenarios and analyzes the
variety of downstream tasks. These tasks include        corresponding behaviors of models. (I) Origi-
code summarization (Alon et al., 2019; LeClair          nal source code distribution along a certain di-
et al., 2020), text-to-code (Iyer et al., 2018), code   mension. (II) OOD simulation by masking out
translation (Nguyen et al., 2013; Rozière et al.,      a sub-region of the distribution. (III) Model
2020), and program repair (Tufano et al., 2018;         fine-tuning. (IV) Evaluation on OOD data.
Chen et al., 2019; Hajipour et al., 2021).
The emerging abilities of LLMs, such as in-context learning, demonstrate their potential to handle
a wide range of tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020). However, it has been shown that not
all tasks can be effectively addressed by relying only on the pretrained LLMs (Anil et al., 2022).
To adapt pretrained models for specific tasks, they can be fine-tuned with specific datasets for each
downstream task. This fine-tuning process can involve optimizing all parameters or adopting a
parameter-efficient approach (Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2022), such as Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA)(Hu et al., 2022). Considering fine-tuning is prone to catastrophic forgetting (Chen et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2022a), and these models play crucial roles in automatic software development, it


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is equally important if not more, to foresee and understand any unexpected models behaviors in
different scenarios beyond in-distribution fine-tuning data.
Despite having access to the large code datasets to pre-train these models, it remains challenging in
practice to fully cover the code distribution, specifically in fine-tuning datasets, where the availability
of labeled data is limited. This mainly stems from the compositional structures of programs and the
complexity of software. Furthermore, it has been shown that fine-tuned models forget previously
learned knowledge (Chen et al., 2020), and fully fine-tuning the parameters of the pretrained models
can distort the pretrained features (Kumar et al., 2022).
Therefore, it is unclear how the fine-tuned code models generalize to scenarios not seen or are rare
in the fine-tuning distribution (Shen et al., 2021). For example, there is a lack of existing studies to
uncover how these models generalize to programs with specific language elements or semantics not
seen in fine-tuning datasets. A common way to study model behaviors in various OOD scenarios
is to collect testing datasets in the complementary domains of the fine-tuning dataset domain (Shen
et al., 2021). However, because the underlying true distribution of source code is intractable, it
is barely feasible to justify whether two raw datasets share a domain or not. Not to mention the
substantial costs to enumerate and constitute a variety of OOD testing datasets.
Simulating various OOD scenarios by masking out sub-regions of training data distribution is an
alternative way to systematically study the model behaviors (Schott et al., 2022; Wiles et al., 2022).
There are several distribution dimensions based on data properties. In the source code domain, we
have access to the structural information to model the source code distribution based on the length,
syntax, and semantics of programs. For example, in terms of the syntax dimension, we can mask
out all the data with uniray expressions or specific API to create a syntax-based OOD scenario.
In this work, we propose a systematic approach to analyzing the behaviors of fine-tuned source code
models in various OOD and few-data regime scenarios. We achieve this by harnessing the token
size, syntax information, and contextual embeddings of programs to simulate the OOD scenarios in
terms of length, syntax, and semantics dimensions, as illustrated in Figure 1. By utilizing these data
dimensions and control over the data, we can systematically examine the performance of fine-tuned
models in OOD scenarios and investigate the generalization capabilities of different fine-tuning
methods.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are as follows: 1. Our work pioneers in inves-
tigating the behaviors of the fine-tuned source code models in OOD scenarios. 2. We propose a
systematic approach to simulate various OOD scenarios by masking out sub-regions of source code
distribution along the length, syntax, and semantics dimensions. At the time of publication, we will
publish the implementation of our work. 3. We find that the performance of the fine-tuned models
can significantly deteriorate in various OOD scenarios despite the model encountering similar ex-
amples during the pre-training phase. In particular, in syntax and length-based OOD scenarios, the
drop can be as substantial as 90%. 4. Our systematic analysis shows that, while full fine-tuning and
LoRA fine-tuning perform comparably on in-distribution code data, LoRA fine-tuning demonstrates
significantly better performance on OOD data. 5. Our analysis of data/model properties provides
insights into model finetuning and shapes future datasets/research to focus on OOD of code models,
which has the potential to enhance generalization accuracy across various code generation tasks.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Large Language Models for Codes. With the availability of large-scale code datasets (Husain
et al., 2019; Kocetkov et al., 2022), there is growing interest in employing large language mod-
els to develop a unified pre-training model for source code understanding and generation. Code-
BERT (Feng et al., 2020) is one of the first models that use pre-training in the source code domain.
CodeBERT extends the RoBERTa-based model (Liu et al., 2019) to understand and generate source
code in various programming languages. Guo et al. (2021) extend CodeBERT by using a semantic-
aware objective function. CodeT5 and CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2021; 2023) are developed based on
encoder-decoder architecture, making them versatile models for addressing a wide range of code
understanding and code generation tasks. Svyatkovskiy et al. (2020) employ GPT-based (Radford
et al., 2019), which uses decoder-only architecture, for the code completion task. CodeGen (Ni-
jkamp et al., 2023), StarCoder (Li et al., 2023), and Code Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) also employ


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decoder-only architecture to pre-train code generation models, these models demonstrate impres-
sive results across a variety of code generation tasks. While these models show remarkable results
by following natural language instructions, it has been demonstrated that LLMs still have difficulty
in understanding the codes (Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b), specifically in domain-specific
tasks (Anil et al., 2022). In our work, we focus on generation tasks to spot weak and strong points
of the fine-tuned LLMs in generating rare and unseen programs.

Out-of-Distribution Analysis in Natural Languages and Programming Languages. Despite
the importance of OOD analysis and detection in production (Shen et al., 2021), there are surpris-
ingly much fewer efforts to investigate OOD behaviors of NLP and PL approaches (Arora et al.,
2021). Hendrycks et al. (2020); Kong et al. (2020) study the behavior of pretrained large language
models in OOD scenarios. Even though they show that the pretrained models are better calibrated,
the provided results indicate that there is still room for improvement. Bui & Yu (2021) propose an
energy-bounded-based approach to detect OOD data in source code classification tasks. Their ap-
proach defines OOD scenarios by masking out data belonging to specific class(es) (Bui & Yu, 2021).
Recently, Shi et al. (2022) proposed a set of pre-defined scenarios to investigate the compositional
generalization of neural program synthesizers. It is important to note that their investigation was
limited to domain-specific languages, such as SCAN (Lake & Baroni, 2018), and did not incorpo-
rate pretrained code models. In contrast, we proposed the first systematic study to investigate the
behavior of fine-tuned code models across different OOD scenarios.

Fine-tuning LLMs and Catastrophic Forgetting. LLMs have demonstrated impressive capabili-
ties in handling various tasks using zero-shot and few-shot learning approaches (Brown et al., 2020;
Kojima et al., 2022). However, not all tasks can be effectively handled by relying on pretrained
LLMs (Anil et al., 2022; Scialom et al., 2022). For such tasks, we can employ fine-tuning tech-
niques with the datasets for the targeted downstream tasks. Furthermore, recent works indicate that
fine-tuning LLMs with instructions can enhance their capabilities (Ouyang et al., 2022; Xu et al.,
2023; Dai et al., 2023). Despite the effectiveness of the fine-tuning procedure, recent work shows
that after fine-tuning, the LLMs can experience catastrophic forgetting in various NLP tasks (Luo
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2020). Furthermore, Kumar et al. (2022) validates that fully fine-tuning
the models can distort the pretraining feature and adversely impact the OOD generalization perfor-
mance in image classification tasks. In this work, for the first time, we systematically investigate the
behavior of the fine-tuned source code models by carefully designing various OOD scenarios.

3   S IM SCOOD: S IMULATION OF S OURCE C ODE O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION
    S CENARIOS
In this work, we propose a systematic approach to investigate the fine-tuned code model behaviors on
OOD data by simulating the OOD scenarios in multiple dimensions. Our simulation strategy allows
us to construct measurable OOD scenarios without the additional costs of accessing another dataset.
More importantly, by simulating the OOD scenarios, we have control over different properties of
OOD scenarios. We achieve this by masking out specific sub-regions of data distribution.
These OOD scenarios span over three data dimensions, including length, syntax, and semantics.
These dimensions cover different aspects of the programs. In length-based OOD scenarios where
we model the program length based on their token sizes (Meneely et al., 2013), we can study the
length-generalization ability of the fine-tuned models. For example, whether the models can produce
longer codes with high quality and how well the models can interpolate over distribution gaps.
Syntax-based scenarios enable us to study the models by masking out specific language elements.
More interestingly, using syntax-based scenarios, we can analyze to what extent each model can
generate unseen language elements. Using semantic-based scenarios, we can investigate how the
models behave if we mask out the data with specific functionalities (e.g., getter functions in Java).
Benefiting from these scenarios, we can also implicitly quantify how well the models compose
different code language elements to achieve unseen or rare functionality.

Modeling the Distribution of Source Code. Here, we experiment with different pretrained mod-
els and probe their behaviors in each scenario. We achieve this using our new approach that system-
atically constructs various scenarios to challenge the OOD performance of each model. As a result,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview of different out-of-distribution scenarios. Part of the data that needs to be
masked out from the training distribution is highlighted by the red rectangles.

the distribution of source code can be characterized using the aforementioned dimensions that we
call properties in the following. We model the joint distribution of the source code as q(p1 , ..., pn )
where each pi is a specific property of the source code in distribution q. Given this distribution
we can sample a dataset D = {x1 , . . . , xN |xi ∼ q(p1 , ..., pn )}. To create each OOD scenario we
need to sample a new dataset D̂ = {x1 , . . . , xN |xi ∼ q̂(p1 , ..., pn )} where q̂(pf , ..., pk ) = 0,
meaning the samples with properties pf , ..., pk are masked out. Note that we just formulated
OOD scenarios with categorical properties, whereas it also holds for continuous properties by
p(a < pi < b) with a < b and a, b ∈ R.
To sample dataset D̂, we get inspiration from the rejection sampling technique (Casella et al., 2004).
Here, q̂(p1 , ..., pn ) is our target distribution and we consider q(p1 , ..., pn ) as our proposal distribu-
tion. We reject or accept the sample data x ∼ q(p1 , ..., pn ) using the following step function,

                                                    1       if P(x) ∈
                                                                    / P̃
                                      f (x) =                                                            (1)
                                                    0       if P(x) ∈ P̃

Where P(x) returns the properties of data x , and P̃ are the properties that we do not want the
sampled data x to contain. Using the rejection sampling technique with a hard-decision function
(Equation 1) we can construct dataset D̂ = {x1 , . . . , xN |x ∼ q̂(p1 , ..., pn )} with accepted samples,
and also have access to dataset D̃ = {x1 , . . . , xN |x ∼ q̃(p1 , ..., pn )} which are all of the rejected
samples. To examine model behaviors in each OOD scenario, we fine-tune models using D̂ data,
and test them on test set of D̃. Figure 2 depicts an overview of the length-, syntax-, and semantic-
based scenarios. In the following, we provide the details of how we simulate each OOD scenario
(subsection 4.1).

3.1   L ENGTH - BASED OOD S CENARIOS

To simulate length-based scenarios, we use the histogram of program token sizes to represent the
distribution of a given dataset. See Figure 2 left as an example. To create each OOD scenario,
according to the rejection sampling technique, we draw samples from the distribution and reject
only the samples in the histogram’s specified sub-region.
As an example, in one of the OOD scenarios, we can consider token size between 120 and 135 as
OOD testing data. Then D̂ = {x ∼ q̂(p1 , ..., pn )} where q̂(120 < pi < 135) = 0 is the accepted
data in the rejection sampling technique. Experimenting with the length-based OOD scenarios en-
ables us to analyze how fine-tuned source code models generalize to interpolate and extrapolate over
distribution gaps.

3.2   S YNTAX - BASED OOD S CENARIOS

Each programming language has its own grammar, which is a set of rules to define valid program
statements. Using the grammar, we can parse each program into an abstract syntax tree (Guo et al.,
2021) and have access to all of the language elements used in the program. For example, we can
identify all the programs with conditional or specific APIs in the given dataset. In this work, we
leverage the grammatical information of the programming language to create syntax-based OOD
scenarios. We use the histogram of language elements to model the syntax distribution of a given


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


source code dataset. Figure 2 middle shows an example of how we construct a syntax-based OOD
scenario by masking out specific language elements. To create an OOD scenario, using the rejection
sampling technique, we sample testing data D̃ that contain certain language elements (e.g., else),
namely, P̃ = {else}. We then fine-tune our model using D̂ which is the set of data that does not
contain else, and test the model using D̃. In order to set up systematic syntax-based OOD scenarios,
we can replace else in P̃ with other language elements and APIs. Using syntax-based scenarios,
in addition to analyzing model behaviors in such OOD scenarios, we can also explore if various
fine-tuned LLMs can generate unseen language elements. For example, we can investigate if the
pretrained models can generate specific elements and APIs not seen during fine-tuning.

3.3   S EMANTIC - BASED OOD S CENARIOS

The programs’ semantics is another dimension to model the distribution of source code data. How-
ever, it is not clear how we can model the semantics of the programs, especially in the cases where
we do not have input-output examples or any meta-data. It has been shown that a large pretrained
model can be used to cluster the data based on their semantics (Aharoni & Goldberg, 2020). Fur-
thermore, recent studies conducted by Troshin & Chirkova (2022) and Ahmed et al. (2023) have
demonstrated that pretrained code models represent program semantics within the continuous space.
They accomplished this by probing the pretrained models and conducting experiments involving the
manipulation of code fragments. Following the success of unsupervised domain clustering and
the model’s abilities to understand the semantics of programs, we propose to utilize the pretrained
source code model to cluster programs within the continuous space. We employ the state-of-the-art
CodeT5+ encoder (Wang et al., 2023) in our study to map a dataset of programs to a set of contin-
uous representation vectors. We then cluster the vectors to group programs with similar semantics.
As a result, we can create semantic-based OOD scenarios via the rejection sampling procedure to
reject all samples that belong to a specific cluster and accept the rest as D̂. Like other scenarios,
we can use D̂ as fine-tuning data and D̃ as test data. Our semantic-based OOD scenarios provide
an approximated proxy of real-world OOD scenarios to investigate the OOD generalization capabil-
ities of the fine-tuned models. Furthermore, these OOD scenarios allow us to analyze the model’s
abilities to deal with unseen or rare program functionalities. We provide implementation details in
subsection 4.2.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first articulate the experiment setups, including the pretrained models, down-
stream tasks, and the OOD data construction process. Then, we demonstrate the model performance
in different OOD scenarios. We also analyze how well the model can perform by revealing 50% of
the masked data (≈ 1.5% of the entire fine-tuning data) to the model. In the following, we call the
50% masked-out cases few-data regime.

4.1   S ETUPS

Pretrained Models. We analyze the behavior of four widely-used pretrained models for source
codes. These models are designed using a variety of architectures, pre-training objective func-
tions, numbers of parameters, and pre-training datasets. GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021) is an
encoder-only pretrained model, which extends the capabilities of CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020)
by incorporating a semantic-aware pre-training objective function. CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021)
employs T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) encoder-decoder architecture. In our implementations, we use
CodeT5-base with 220M parameters. Here, we also investigate the behavior of larger models, in-
cluding CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2023) with 770M parameters and Code Llama with 13B param-
eters. CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2023) is an extension of CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021), and Code
Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) is a decoder-only build on top of Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) for
code-specialized tasks. We provide more details in Appendix A.

Downstream Tasks. We study the behavior of the models on two different downstream tasks, in-
cluding text-to-code generation and code refinement. These tasks are part of the most challenging
tasks in the CodeXGLUE benchmark (Lu et al., 2021). Text-to-code is the task of generating a


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


program given a natural language description. In CodeXGLUE benchmark (Lu et al., 2021), CON-
CODE dataset (Iyer et al., 2018) is proposed for this task. Code refinement is the task of resolving
the bugs in a given program by automatically generating a corrected program. We use the medium
dataset of Tufano et al. (2019).

Evaluation Metrics. Exact match (Wang et al., 2021), CodeBLEU (Ren et al., 2020), and BLEU
score (Papineni et al., 2002) have been commonly used to evaluate the model performance in the
downstream tasks. The exact match metric evaluates if the generated code matches the target code
at the token-level. BLEU score measures the n-gram overlap between the output and the target code.
CodeBLEU considers syntactic and data-flow matches of the codes in addition to the n-gram overlap.
In this work, we focus on the exact match metric to quantify the model behaviors. This is due to the
nature of OOD scenarios, where it is desirable to see if the model can generate specific unseen or
rare programs correctly. It is important to note that Wang et al. (2021) have demonstrated that for the
code refinement task, achieving a high BLEU score can be accomplished with a simple duplication
of the input codes, comparable to state-of-the-art models. Furthermore, it has been shown that
CodeBLEU and BLEU scores are not necessarily correlated with the correctness of the programs
(Evtikhiev et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021). We report BLEU score results in Appendix F.

4.2   DATA C ONSTRUCTION AND F INE - TUNING

In the data construction process, for each scenario, we choose P̃ in a way that counts for ≈ 3%
of the entire fine-tuning data. In OOD scenarios, we mask out all of the data items with properties
P̃. For the few-data regime cases, we mask-out half (50%) of data with properties P̃ (≈ 1.5% of
the entire fine-tuning data). In all the scenarios, we infer the fine-tuned models on test data with P̃
properties. Note that, in the text-to-code task, we mask out the data based on the target data (code
data rather than text data) properties. For the code refinement tasks, we masked the data based on
the input.

Length-based Scenarios. To generate data for length-based scenarios, we characterize the dataset
of programs based on the token size. For each scenario, P̃ specifies a continuous range of program
token sizes. We consider five ranges in our experiments: P̃1 = {[0%, 3%]}, P̃2 = {[24%, 27%]},
P̃3 = {[48%, 51%]}, P̃4 = {[72%, 75%]}, and P̃5 = {[97%, 100%]}. Note that P̃1 = {[0%, 3%]}
represents the top 3% smallest programs, in terms of token size. We consider P̃1 and P̃5 as length-
based extrapolation scenarios and P̃2 , P̃3 , and P̃4 as length-based interpolation scenarios.

Syntax-based Scenarios. In syntax-based scenarios, we characterize program datasets based on
the histogram of language elements (e.g., syntax keyword else). For each task, we select five differ-
ent language elements that cover ≈ 3% of the fine-tuning data. For example, in text-to-code task we
consider P̃1 = {else}. We provide details of the selected language elements in Appendix D.

Semantic-based Scenarios. In this work, we employ CodeT5+ (770M parameters) (Wang et al.,
2023) encoder to characterize the semantics distribution of programs. We feed the tokenized pro-
grams to the CodeT5+ encoder and obtain the corresponding feature vectors V of size 1024 × t,
where t is the size of the input program. We obtain the continuous representation of the programs
by averaging the tokens’ embedding following (Koto et al., 2021). We then cluster the programs in
continuous space using the K-means algorithm. We set the number of clusters K = 35 using the
elbow method (Bholowalia & Kumar, 2014). To accelerate the clustering procedure, we perform
dimensionality reduction PCA with a target dimension of 50. We determine the dimension in a way
that all the components explain at least 80% of the data variance. To have different semantic-based
scenarios without losing generality, we randomly select five different clusters. Each cluster can
represent a set of P̃i properties. We provide examples of clusters’ semantic in Appendix E.

Model Fine-tuning Details. We fine-tune four pretrained models for two different tasks in various
scenarios. We stick to their defaults for fair comparisons. For fine-tuning the models with LoRA
method, we follow the hyperparameters reported by Hu et al. (2022), where the pretrained weights
are frozen, and we only optimize the injected rank decomposition matrices. We provide more details


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Overall results of the model performance for different scenarios in text-to-code task. The
results provide the relative exact match to the 100% baseline (without data mask-out) for different
OOD and few-data regime scenarios. Length Inter and Length Extra refer to length-based interpo-
lation and extrapolation scenarios, respectively. FT denotes full fine-tuning, and LoRA refers to the
LoRA fine-tuning method. OOD and Few refer to OOD and few-data regime scenarios, respectively.

        Models              Length Inter      Length Extra                 Syntax          Semantic
                           FT      LoRA       FT        LoRA       FT           LoRA      FT     LoRA
                   OOD   53.92%   66.91%    0.00%      24.99%    16.46%        34.81%   31.90%   51.42%
      CodeT5
                   Few   86.56%   103.79%   28.56%      55.0%    93.90%        100.0%   37.56%   72.43%
                   OOD   49.65%    70.94%    5.0%      26.09%    47.95%        68.97%   39.69%   55.71%
      CodeT5+
                   Few   76.40%    96.36%   77.38%     101.72%   67.21%        78.54%   66.04%   83.68%
                   OOD     -       71.75%      -       23.57%          -       64.81%     -      56.72%
      Code Llama
                   Few     -       94.08%      -       63.21%          -       86.08%     -      84.74%

Table 2: Overall results of the model performance for different scenarios in code refinement task.
The results provide the relative exact match to the 100% baseline (without data mask-out) for dif-
ferent OOD and few-data regime scenarios. Length Inter and Length Extra refer to length-based
interpolation and extrapolation scenarios, respectively. FT denotes full fine-tuning, and LoRA refers
to the LoRA fine-tuning method. OOD and Few refer to OOD and few-data regime scenarios, re-
spectively. GCBERT denotes to the GraphCodeBERT model Guo et al. (2021).

        Models              Length Inter      Length Extra                 Syntax         Semantic
                           FT       LoRA      FT        LoRA       FT           LoRA      FT     LoRA
                   OOD   82.91%    87.89%   37.82%     74.35%    1.30%         2.35%    60.38%   69.05%
      GCBERT
                   Few   86.52%    94.45%   90.15%     90.46%    75.42%        77.92%   76.45%   84.43%
                   OOD   84.10%    86.70%   48.95%     61.53%    10.23%        28.78%   77.41%   79.36%
      CodeT5
                   Few   85.48%    89.97%   57.30%     80.29%    83.08%        85.82%   83.63%   88.73%
                   OOD   80.70%    83.39%   73.44%     82.39%    21.41%        37.14%   73.65%   78.67%
      CodeT5+
                   Few   93.28%    94.65%   79.56%     90.77%    72.83%        81.01%   85.30%   93.29%
                   OOD      -      81.70%     -        57.69%      -           43.70%     -      70.14%
      Code Llama
                   Few      -      87.68%     -        85.71%      -           87.66%     -      89.23%


of the hyperparameters in Appendix B. All our experiments are conducted using a machine with four
NVIDIA 40GB Ampere A100 GPUs.

4.3    H OW D O F INE - TUNED M ODELS G ENERALIZE IN OOD S CENARIOS ?

Table 1 and Table 2 shows the overall results of different Table 3: Exact match results of the
models in length-, syntax-, and semantic-based scenarios, fine-tuned models using the full fine-
respectively. These tables show the model performance tuning dataset for text-to-code and code
in the OOD scenarios where the models do not have ac- refinement tasks. FT denotes full fine-
cess to the fine-tuning data with P̃ properties. Further- tuning, and LoRA refers to the LoRA
more, Table 1 and Table 2 show how well the models per- fine-tuning method. GCBERT refers to
form when they have access to 50% of the masked data. Guo et al. (2021).
Note that in Table 1 and Table 2, all of the results are the
average of different scenarios and show the relative ex-       Models      Text-to-Code   Refinement
act match to the 100% baseline (models with access to                      FT      LoRA   FT    LoRA
the full data distribution). In Table 1 and Table 2, we GCBERT
                                                             CodeT5
                                                                            -        -   10.74 11.38
                                                                          22.15 21.65 14.43 14.53
provide the results of fine-tuning the models using full CodeT5+          24.95 24.70 15.18 15.29
fine-tuning and LoRA fine-tuning methods. Note that for Code Llama          -      27.65   -    19.19
Code Llama 13B, due to the substantial resource require-
ments involved in full fine-tuning, we only report the LoRA fine-tuning results. Additionally, in line
with GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021), we only investigate this model on the code refinement
task. In these tables, for the length-based scenarios, we have five different scenarios, three for the
interpolation cases and two for the extrapolation cases, so we report the average results for each
case. In syntax-based and semantic-based scenarios, we report the average results of five different
scenarios.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We conclude according to Table 1 and Table 2 that: 1. Interpolation cases in the length-based OOD
scenarios, as we expected, are the easiest OOD scenarios for the models in different tasks. 2. Syn-
tax-based and length-based extrapolation OOD scenarios are the most challenging scenarios for the
models. 3. Using LoRA fine-tuning we can achieve significantly better generalization accuracy com-
pared to full fine-tuning. 4. Few-data regime scenarios show that adding a few relevant data to the
fine-tuning distribution can gain huge performance improvement. In the following, we describe our
key findings in more detail.

Model performance decreases in various OOD scenarios. Table 1 and Table 2 show that all of
the models have difficulty in dealing with different OOD scenarios. These include models with dif-
ferent architecture and parameter sizes. For example, in Table 1, we observe that for the Code Llama
model with 13B parameters, the performance significantly dropped in the length-based extrapolation
scenario. It achieves only 23.57% of the baseline performance (model with full data access).
Table 1 and Table 2 indicate that length-based interpolation scenarios are the least challenging OOD
scenarios for various models in both text-to-code and code refinement tasks. While length-based
interpolation is the easiest OOD scenario, it is worth noting that CodeT5+ with full fine-tuning only
attains 49.67% of the baseline performance (See Table 1). Additionally, Table 1 and Table 2 reveal
that the models exhibit the most significant performance reduction in the length-based extrapolation
and syntax-based OOD scenarios. This performance drop occurred despite the models being ex-
posed to similar examples during pre-training. For instance, the models had previously encountered
code examples that included the else element.
A comparison between the outcomes of the semantic scenarios presented in Table 1 and Table 2
highlights that the text-to-code task is more challenging than the code refinement task. This is
mainly due to the multi-modality nature of the task, wherein the models need to learn to map natural
languages to the unseen or rare compositions of programs.

  Takeaway: Performance of fine-tuned models, regardless of architectures and parameter sizes,
  can significantly deteriorate in OOD scenarios, even when the models have seen similar code
  samples during pre-training.


LoRA fine-tuning exhibits better OOD generalization compared to full fine-tuning. In Ta-
ble 1 and Table 2, we provide the results of fine-tuning the models using two different fine-tuning
approaches: full parameter fine-tuning and LoRA fine-tuning. The results presented in these tables
indicate that LoRA fine-tuning consistently exhibits superior OOD generalization across various
scenarios. For example, Table 1 shows that in the length-based extrapolation scenario, fine-tuning
CodeT5 with LoRA fine-tuning resulted in a 24.99% relative exact match, whereas the model’s rel-
ative performance using full fine-tuning was 0.0%. Furthermore, as demonstrated in Table 2, in
the syntax-based OOD scenario, the utilization of LoRA fine-tuning for fine-tuning CodeT5 and
CodeT5+ results in significantly superior performance compared to employing full fine-tuning for
these models. This observation shows that LoRA fine-tuning, which involves freezing the pretrained
weights, effectively leverages the previously acquired knowledge, resulting in improved OOD gen-
eralization compared to full fine-tuning.
Table 3 provides in-distribution performance results of the models fine-tuned using both full fine-
tuning and LoRA fine-tuning methods. This table displays the exact match accuracy of the models
on the complete test set under the condition that the models have access to the entire fine-tuning
distribution. Table 3 demonstrates that employing LoRA fine-tuning enables us to achieve perfor-
mance that is comparable to full fine-tuning. It is important to highlight that in all of the experiments
involving LoRA fine-tuning, the pretrained weights are frozen, and we only need to optimize newly
injected weights. These LoRA parameters account for less than 1% of the pretrained weights. Note
that we provide BLEU score results in Appendix C.

  Takeaway: While full fine-tuning and LoRA fine-tuning methods show comparable results
  over in-distribution data, LoRA fine-tuning significantly outperforms full fine-tuning in OOD
  scenarios. This suggests that with freezing pretrained weights, LoRA fine-tuned models can
  effectively utilize their pretraining knowledge in dealing with various OOD scenarios.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Models can gain significant improvement by adding a few relevant data to the training set.
Table 1 and Table 2 provide the results for few-data regime scenarios. In these scenarios, we only
mask out 50% of the data with P̃ properties (≈ 1.5% of the fine-tuning data). The Table 1 and
Table 2 demonstrate in each scenario that by adding data in size ≈ 1.5% of the fine-tuning data in
each specific scenario, the model can gain significant accuracy performance. For example, Table 1
shows that in syntax-based scenarios, applying LoRA fine-tuning to CodeT5 can lead to gain 100%
of relative performance by adding a small amount of relevant data.

    Takeaway: By incorporating a small amount of relevant data (representing ≈ 1.5% of the fine-
    tuning data) into the fine-tuning set, models can achieve substantial performance enhancements.

4.4    C AN F INE - TUNED LLM S G ENERATE U NSEEN L ANGUAGE E LEMENTS ?

In the syntax-based OOD scenarios, we can assess the fine-
tuned LLMs’ ability to leverage their prior knowledge in gen-
erating unseen language elements. For instance, can the fine-
tuned models generate the else element if they have not been
exposed to any code data containing else during fine-tuning?
In Figure 3, we present the relative frequencies of generat-
ing unseen elements by models fine-tuned using both full fine-
tuning and LoRA fine-tuning methods. The results in Figure 3
show the frequencies of generating unseen elements relative to                    (a)
the frequencies in ground truth programs. We report the aver-
age results of five different unseen elements during fine-tuning.
The list of these elements was reported Appendix D. In Fig-
ure 3, the solid bars represent the results for models fine-tuned
using full fine-tuning, while the hatched bars depict the results
for models fine-tuned using the LoRA method.
Figure 3 shows that the fine-tuned LLMs are able to gener-
ate unseen language elements in different tasks. More inter-
estingly, the models fine-tuned using the LoRA fine-tuning                         (b)
exhibit the ability to generate a higher percentage of unseen
elements when compared to models fine-tuned with the full Figure 3: The ratios of frequency
fine-tuning approach. This indicates that the models fine-tuned of generated unseen language ele-
with the LoRA method possess a superior capability to lever- ments over the frequency in ground
age their previously acquired knowledge and are less prone to truth data. Solid and hatched bars
forgetting. Furthermore, we observe that generating unseen show the results of the model fine-
language elements is more challenging in the text-to-code task tuned with the full fine-tuning and
(Figure 3a) compared to the code refinement task (Figure 3b). LoRA fine-tuning, respectively.
The main reason is that in the text-to-code task, the models
need to learn the mapping from natural language to the programs. As shown in Figure 3b, Graph-
CodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021) generates a lower number of unseen elements. This phenomenon is
primarily attributed to the fact that in encoder-only models, we initialize the decoder from scratch.
Consequently, these models can only rely on the prior knowledge acquired by the encoder.

    Takeaway: Our findings indicate that models fine-tuned with LoRA generate a greater number
    of unseen elements compared to those fine-tuned using the full fine-tuning. This suggests that
    LoRA fine-tuned models exhibit an enhanced ability to leverage their pretraining knowledge
    when compared to models fine-tuned with full fine-tuning.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose a systematic approach to investigate the behaviors of fine-tuned LLMs in
OOD scenarios for the source code domain. Given the data, we simulate OOD scenarios based on
the program’s length, syntax, and semantics. Using the simulated scenarios, we shed light on the
models’ fragility in the OOD scenarios, potential performance drop, and the necessity to improve
dataset construction. We also reveal the model’s impotence in handling considered OOD dimensions


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and to what extent we can improve the generalization of the models by exposing the relevant data.
Furthermore, our results reveal that, although models fine-tuned with full fine-tuning and LoRA
exhibit similar in-distribution accuracy, LoRA fine-tuning demonstrates higher OOD generalization
accuracy. We will release the implementation of our work to support future systematic analysis of
source code model behavior in OOD scenarios.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the details of data construction and fine-tuning procedure in subsection 4.2. This covers
the details of data construction for each scenario and explains how we utilized a pretrained encoder
to define the semantic scenarios. Additionally, we also provide the detail of the pretrained models
we examined in Appendix A. In all of the scenarios, to fine-tune the GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al.,
2021), CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021), and CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2023) using the full fine-tuning
method, we follow the provided hyperparameters by the authors of each work. The hyperparameters
of LoRA fine-tuning, including the hyperparameters for fine-tuning Code Llama (Rozière et al.,
2023), are provided in Appendix B. Furthermore, we provide the details of the selected language
elements of our syntax-based scenarios in Appendix D. At the time of publication, we will publish
the implementation of our work.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. Unsupervised domain clusters in pretrained language models. In
  ACL, 2020.
Toufique Ahmed, Dian Yu, Chengxuan Huang, Cathy Wang, Prem Devanbu, and Kenji Sagae. To-
  wards understanding what code language models learned. arXiv, 2023.
Uri Alon, Shaked Brody, Omer Levy, and Eran Yahav. code2seq: Generating sequences from struc-
  tured representations of code. In ICLR, 2019.
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Johan Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur.
  Exploring length generalization in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Udit Arora, William Huang, and He He. Types of out-of-distribution texts and how to detect them.
  In EMNLP, 2021.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv, 2021.
Purnima Bholowalia and Arvind Kumar. Ebk-means: A clustering technique based on elbow method
  and k-means in wsn. IJCA, 2014.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Nghi D. Q. Bui and Yijun Yu. Energy-bounded learning for robust models of code. CoRR, 2021.
George Casella, Christian P Robert, and Martin T Wells. Generalized accept-reject sampling
  schemes. LNMS, 2004.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde, Jared Kaplan, Harrison
 Edwards, Yura Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
 Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick
 Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
 Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, David W. Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
 Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William H. Guss, Alex Nichol, Igor Babuschkin, S. Arun
 Balaji, Shantanu Jain, Andrew Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew M. Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluat-
 ing large language models trained on code. arXiv, 2021.
Sanyuan Chen, Yutai Hou, Yiming Cui, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, and Xiangzhan Yu. Recall and
  learn: Fine-tuning deep pretrained language models with less forgetting. In EMNLP, 2020.
Zimin Chen, Steve Kommrusch, Michele Tufano, Louis-Noël Pouchet, Denys Poshyvanyk, and
  Martin Monperrus. Sequencer: Sequence-to-sequence learning for end-to-end program repair.
  IEEE ToSE, 2019.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning, 2023.
Mikhail Evtikhiev, Egor Bogomolov, Yaroslav Sokolov, and Timofey Bryksin. Out of the bleu: how
 should we assess quality of the code generation models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03133, 2022.
Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing
  Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. CodeBERT: A pre-trained model for programming
  and natural languages. In EMNLP, 2020.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan,
  Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, Michele Tufano, Shao Kun Deng, Colin B. Clement, Dawn
  Drain, Neel Sundaresan, Jian Yin, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. Graphcodebert: Pre-training
  code representations with data flow. In ICLR, 2021.

Hossein Hajipour, Apratim Bhattacharyya, Cristian-Alexandru Staicu, and Mario Fritz. Samplefix:
  Learning to generate functionally diverse fixes. In ECML PKDD, 2021.

Dan Hendrycks, Xiaoyuan Liu, Eric Wallace, Adam Dziedzic, Rishabh Krishnan, and Dawn Song.
  Pretrained transformers improve out-of-distribution robustness. In ACL, 2020.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge
  competence with apps. NeurIPS, 2021.

Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  NLP. In ICML, 2019.

Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR, 2022.

Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt.
  CodeSearchNet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.

Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mapping language to code
  in programmatic context. In EMNLP, 2018.

Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Carlos Muñoz Ferran-
  dis, Yacine Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, et al. The stack: 3 tb of
  permissively licensed source code. arXiv, 2022.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. NeurIPS, 2022.

Lingkai Kong, Haoming Jiang, Yuchen Zhuang, Jie Lyu, Tuo Zhao, and Chao Zhang. Calibrated
  language model fine-tuning for in- and out-of-distribution data. In EMNLP, 2020.

Fajri Koto, Jey Han Lau, and Timothy Baldwin. Discourse probing of pretrained language models.
  In NAACL, 2021.

Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Matthew Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. In ICLR, 2022.

Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills
  of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In ICML, 2018.

Alexander LeClair, Sakib Haque, Lingfei Wu, and Collin McMillan. Improved code summarization
  via a graph neural network. In ICPC, 2020.

Dingcheng Li, Zheng Chen, Eunah Cho, Jie Hao, Xiaohu Liu, Fan Xing, Chenlei Guo, and Yang Liu.
  Overcoming catastrophic forgetting during domain adaptation of seq2seq language generation. In
  NAACL, 2022a.

Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv, 2023.

Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 2022b.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin B.
  Clement, Dawn Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, Ge Li, Lidong Zhou, Linjun Shou, Long Zhou,
  Michele Tufano, Ming Gong, Ming Zhou, Nan Duan, Neel Sundaresan, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu
  Fu, and Shujie Liu. Codexglue: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding
  and generation. CoRR, 2021.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study of
  catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. arXiv, 2023.
Andrew Meneely, Ben Smith, and Laurie Williams. Validating software metrics: A spectrum of
  philosophies. TOSEM, 2013.
Anh Tuan Nguyen, Tung Thanh Nguyen, and Tien Nhut Nguyen. Lexical statistical machine trans-
  lation for language migration. In ESEC/FSE, 2013.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. In ICLR, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. NeurIPS, 2022.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In ACL, 2002.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. JMLR, 2020.
Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou,
  Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.10297, 2020.
Baptiste Rozière, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample. Unsupervised
  translation of programming languages. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv, 2023.
Lukas Schott, Julius Von Kügelgen, Frederik Träuble, Peter Vincent Gehler, Chris Russell, Matthias
  Bethge, Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, and Wieland Brendel. Visual representation
  learning does not generalize strongly within the same domain. In ICLR, 2022.
Thomas Scialom, Tuhin Chakrabarty, and Smaranda Muresan. Fine-tuned language models are
  continual learners. In EMNLP, 2022.
Zheyan Shen, Jiashuo Liu, Yue He, Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, and Peng Cui. Towards
  out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. CoRR, 2021.
Kensen Shi, Joey Hong, Manzil Zaheer, Pengcheng Yin, and Charles Sutton. Compositional gener-
  alization and decomposition in neural program synthesis. In DL4C, 2022.
Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu Fu, and Neel Sundaresan. Intellicode compose:
  Code generation using transformer. In ESEC/FSE, 2020.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv, 2023.
Sergey Troshin and Nadezhda Chirkova. Probing pretrained models of source code. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.08975, 2022.
Michele Tufano, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, Massimiliano Di Penta, Martin White, and Denys
 Poshyvanyk. An empirical investigation into learning bug-fixing patches in the wild via neural
 machine translation. In ASE, 2018.
Michele Tufano, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, Massimiliano Di Penta, Martin White, and Denys
 Poshyvanyk. An empirical study on learning bug-fixing patches in the wild via neural machine
 translation. TOSEM, 2019.
Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C.H. Hoi. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-
  trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. In EMNLP, 2021.
Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi DQ Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi.
  Codet5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.07922, 2023.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  TMLR, 2022.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In ICLR, 2022.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  arXiv, 2023.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P RETRAINED M ODELS

Here, we provide more detail about the pretrained models we used in our experiments.


A.1   BERT- BASED M ODELS

CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) is an encoder-only transformer-based model that is pretrained us-
ing CodeSerchNet dataset (Husain et al., 2019). This dataset consists of 2.1M pairs of individual
functions and code documentations with 6.4M code-only data items across multiple programming
languages. This model uses a 12-layer RoBERTa-based (Liu et al., 2019) architecture with 125M
parameters. It is trained using masked language modeling (MLM) and replaced token detection
objective.
Guo et al. (2021) proposed GraphCodeBERT by extending CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) using
a semantic-aware pre-training objective function. They incorporate data-flow information in the
pre-training stage to encode the semantic information of the program.


A.2   C ODE T5

CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021) employ T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) encoder-decoder architecture. The au-
thors use CodeSearchNet (Husain et al., 2019) with 1.2M pairs of functions’ code with correspond-
ing documentation, and 0.8M code-only data items. In our experiments, we use CodeT5-base with
220M. This model uses MLM objective and identifier-aware objective functions in the pre-training
procedure.
CodeT5+ (Wang et al., 2023) is a family of encoder-decoder LLMs (Wang et al., 2021) that is de-
veloped with the flexibility to cover a wide range of downstream tasks. CodeT5+ achieved this
flexibility by employing a mixture of pretraining objectives including span denoising, contrastive
learning, text-code matching, and causal LM pretraining tasks(Wang et al., 2023). In our experi-
ments we employ CodeT5+ with 770M parameters.


A.3   C ODE L LAMA

Code Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) is a family of LLM for code developed based on Llama 2 mod-
els (Touvron et al., 2023). The models are designed using decoder-only architectures with 7B,
13B, and 34B parameters. Code Llama encompasses different versions tailored for a wide array of
tasks and applications, including the foundational model, specialized models for Python code, and
instruction-tuned models. Code Llama outperforms open models on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021)
and MBPP benchmarks (Austin et al., 2021) up to 53% and 55%, respectively. In our experiments,
we use the foundation model version of Code Llama with 13B parameters.


B     H YPERPARAMETERS FOR L O RA F INE - TUNING

In Table 4, we present the LoRA hyperparameters that were applied in the fine-tuning of various
models. We fine-tune these models utilizing AdamW with a linear learning rate decay schedule.
During the validation and testing phases, we employed beam search with a beam size of 10, follow-
ing Wang et al. (2021; 2023); Guo et al. (2021).
For fine-tuning GCBERT, CodeT5, and CodeT5+ in the text-to-code task, we set the maximum
input and output sequence length to 320 and 150 tokens, respectively. In the case of fine-tuning
Code Llama, we set the maximum sequence length to 470 tokens. In the code refinement task, to
fine-tune GCBERT, CodeT5, and CodeT5+, we set the maximum input and output sequence length
to 240 and 240 tokens. We fine-tune Code Llama for code refinement tasks by setting the maximum
sequence length to 480.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: The LoRA hyperparameters we used to fine-tune the models for text-to-code and code
refinement tasks.


          Models        Batch Size       #Epoch      Learning Rate       Rank (rq , rv )      LoRA α
        GCBERT              32             20            5e−4               16, 16              32
        CodeT5              32             20            5e−4               16, 16              32
        CodeT5+             16             15            5e−4               16, 16              32
        Code Llama           4              5            5e−4               16, 16              32


Table 5: Exact match (EM) and BLEU (B) results of the fine-tuned models using the full fine-tuning
dataset for text-to-code and code refinement tasks. FT denotes full fine-tuning, and LoRA refers to
the LoRA fine-tuning method. GCBERT refers to Guo et al. (2021).


           Models                    Text-to-Code                              Refinement
                                FT                LoRA                   FT                LoRA
                         EM            B      EM        B         EM            B      EM        B
         GCBERT           -            -       -        -        10.74        90.93   11.38    86.45
         CodeT5         22.15        39.60   21.65    38.90      14.43        89.33   14.53    89.40
         CodeT5+        24.95        44.06   24.70    43.78      15.18        88.19   15.29    89.65
         Code Llama       -            -     27.65    45.19        -            -     19.19    90.34


C    C OMPARISON OF F ULL F INE - TUNING AND L O RA FINE - TUNING M ETHOD

In Table 5, you can find the in-distribution performance results of fine-tuned models using the full
and LoRA fine-tuning methods. This table corresponds to a version of Table 3, which additionally
includes BLEU score results.

D    L IST OF L ANGUAGE E LEMENTS

In syntax-based scenarios, we consider one element in each scenario and mask-out the source code
with that particular element. Here, we provide the details of five language elements used in our
experiments. Note that we pick the element that covers ≈ 3% of the fine-tuning data. We conduct
our syntax-based experiments based on the following language elements of each task,

     1. Text-to-Code: {else, floating point type, unary expression, array access, true}
     2. Code Refinement: {while statement, long, array creation expression, break, ⩾}

E    D O THE CLUSTERS REPRESENT PROGRAMS WITH SPECIFIC SEMANTICS ?

Table 6 provides semantics of five random clusters (out of 35) in text-to-code tasks. We randomly
check 20 source codes in each cluster to check their semantics.

                      Table 6: Semantics of five clusters in text-to-code task.


                                Cluster-ID                Semantic
                                0               Property setter functions
                                1            Property string getter functions
                                6                   Initialize object
                                11               Using getter function
                                17                String concatenation


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Overall results of the model performance for different scenarios in text-to-code task. The
results provide the BLEU score for different scenarios. Length Inter and Length Extra refer to
length-based interpolation and extrapolation scenarios, respectively. FT denotes full fine-tuning,
and LoRA refers to the LoRA fine-tuning method. OOD and Few refer to OOD and few-data
regime scenarios, respectively. Full refers to 100% baseline (when a model has access to 100% of
the fine-tuning set).

        Models               Length Inter     Length Extra            Syntax        Semantic
                             FT     LoRA      FT        LoRA     FT       LoRA     FT     LoRA
                   OOD      40.19   42.03    15.09      15.23   24.08     24.18   44.58    46.21
      CodeT5       Few      48.91   46.47    20.18      18.46   25.20     24.95   45.43    47.97
                   Full     47.79   48.34    24.08      23.34   27.01     25.83   48.48    49.65
                   OOD      40.58   44.07    15.98      17.48   24.39     26.41   40.52   43.11
      CodeT5+      Few      50.07   50.10    19.33      21.67   27.25     27.25   48.93   50.77
                   Full     51.80   51.23    23.29      22.63   28.98     28.04   50.89   51.03
                   OOD        -     54.34      -        21.24     -       25.37     -     47.74
      Code Llama   Few        -     60.35      -        36.73     -       28.06     -     50.76
                   Full       -     62.11      -        37.44     -       29.50     -     51.38


Table 8: Overall results of the model performance for different scenarios in code refinement task.
The results provide the BLEU score for different scenarios. Length Inter and Length Extra refer
to length-based interpolation and extrapolation scenarios, respectively. FT denotes full fine-tuning,
and LoRA refers to the LoRA fine-tuning method. OOD and Few refer to OOD and few-data
regime scenarios, respectively. Full refers to 100% baseline (when a model has access to 100% of
the fine-tuning set). GCBERT denotes to the GraphCodeBERT model Guo et al. (2021).

        Models               Length Inter     Length Extra            Syntax        Semantic
                             FT     LoRA      FT        LoRA     FT       LoRA     FT     LoRA
                   OOD      88.22   88.37    83.01      81.45   79.44     81.74   88.36    85.76
      GCBERT       Few      88.59   88.32    85.14      82.75   90.36     87.67   88.95    86.28
                   Full     88.32   88.56    84.61      82.99   90.10     87.93   89.73    86.45
                   OOD      87.37   88.65    80.35      84.11   83.05     87.08   84.68   87.75
      CodeT5       Few      86.67   88.06    81.62      84.22   89.19     90.19   86.54   88.24
                   Full     87.39   88.74    83.22      84.22   89.88     88.78   87.69   88.96
                   OOD      83.08   86.29    81.26      82.15   84.60     85.48   84.73   85.97
      CodeT5+      Few      84.81   87.30    83.03      82.26   88.83     88.96   85.91   86.72
                   Full     86.05   87.75    83.17      83.16   89.45     89.01   87.46   86.62
                   OOD        -     86.40      -        78.30     -       83.29     -     81.32
      Code Llama   Few        -     88.79      -        84.07     -       90.92     -     89.12
                   Full       -     89.03      -        84.26     -       91.96     -     89.80



F     M ORE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

F.1   BLEU SCORE R ESULTS

In Table 7 Table 8, we provide BLEU score results of different scenarios for the text-to-code and
code refinement tasks, respectively. As we mention in subsection 4.1, BLEU scores are not neces-
sarily correlated with the correctness of the programs (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and human judgment
(Evtikhiev et al., 2022). For example, a text-to-code model with a high BLEU score could mislead
users. Furthermore, Wang et al. (2021) show that in the code refinement task, the BLEU score of a
naive copy of the input code can be as good as the state-of-the-art methods. Table 7 shows the per-
formance (BLEU score) dropped for different models in all of the OOD scenarios compared to the
100% baseline. For example, in the length-based extrapolation scenario for the CodeLlama model,
the BLEU score dropped over 16 points when compared to the 100% baseline performance. Fur-


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Input text: Returns true if view’s layout direction is right-to-left.



                 (a) Target Code                                        (b) Generated Code
1 boolean function (View arg0) {                        1
2 if ( Build.VERSION.SDK_INT >=                         2 boolean function (View arg0) {
       VERSION_CODES.JELLY_BEAN_MR1 )                   3 return arg0.getLayoutDirection()
        {                                                      == View.LAYOUT_DIRECTION_RTL;
3 return arg0.getLayoutDirection()                      4 }
      == View.LAYOUT_DIRECTION_RTL;
4 }
5 else {
6 return false;
7 }
8 }

Figure 4: An example of generated code by Code Llama in the syntax-based OOD scenario for the
text-to-code task. Here else is the unseen language element.


thermore, as shown in Table 7, it is evident that across all OOD scenarios, fine-tuning the models
using the LoRA approach consistently results in higher BLEU scores. As depicted in Table 8, it is
apparent that there are fewer performance drops in comparison to the text-to-code results outlined
in Table 7. This distinction can be primarily attributed to the code refinement task’s inherent char-
acteristics, wherein naively copying the input tokens to the outputs can yield state-of-the-art BLEU
scores.

F.2   Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES

In Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 6, we present qualitative results showcasing instances where the
Code Llama model was not able to generate the targeted codes in the OOD scenarios. These ex-
amples highlight the challenge that even large fine-tuned LLMs face when handling OOD data.
Figure 4 shows an example of the syntax-based OOD scenarios in which the model was unable to
generate and use the else element. In Figure 5 demonstrates another example from the text-to-code
task. Here, we provide an example of the length-based extrapolation OOD scenarios. In these sce-
narios, our goal is to investigate whether the model is able to extrapolate from shorter programs to
longer ones. Figure 5 shows that Code Llama was unable to generate the target program correctly.
Note that Figure 5 shows an example of P̃5 = {[97%, 100%]} OOD scenario, where only 3% of the
entire fine-tuning data is masked out. Figure 6 shows an example of the code refinement task. In
Figure 6, we provide an example of the syntax-based scenario, in which Code Llama encountered
difficulty in generating the while statement. In this syntax-based scenario while statement is the
unseen language element.


                                                   18
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Input text: Does this nodetest pass using the specified nodetester instance?



                 (a) Target Code                                    (b) Generated Code
1 void function (NodeTester arg0,                     1 String function (Node arg0) {
      short [ ] arg1) {                               2 StringBuilder loc0 = new
2 NodeIterator loc0 =                                        StringBuilder();
       documentTraversal.                             3 handleWsRec(arg0, loc0);
       createNodeIterator(rootNode ,                  4 return loc0.toString();
       NodeFilter.SHOW_ALL, new                       5 }
       NodeTypeNodeFilter(arg1), true
        );
3 for(Node loc1 = loc0.loc1 ( );
       loc1 != null; loc1 = loc0.loc1
       ()){
4   arg0.testNode(loc1, this);
5 }
6 arg0.noMoreNodes(this);
7 }

 Figure 5: An example of generated code by Code Llama in the length-based OOD scenario for
 the text-to-code task. Here we provide an example of length-based extrapolation scenarios (P̃5 =
 {[97%, 100%]}).


                 (a) Target Code                                    (b) Generated Code
 1 public java.lang.String toString(){ 1 public java.lang.String toString(){
 2 java.lang.String VAR_1 = STRING_1; 2 java.lang.String VAR_1 = STRING_1;
 3 int temp = start;                   3 if ((METHOD_1()) != null ){
 4 while ( temp != end){               4   VAR_1 += METHOD_2();
 5   VAR_1 += (array[temp]) + STRING_2 5   if (( METHOD_1 ()) != null){
        ;                              6     VAR_1 += STRING_2;
 6   if( temp == (( array.length ) - 1 7   }
        )){                            8 }
 7    temp = 0;                        9 VAR_1 += STRING_3;
 8   }else{                           10 return VAR_1;
 9    temp ++;}                       11 }
10 }
11 VAR_1 += array[temp];
12 VAR_1 += STRING_3;
13 return VAR_1;
14 }

 Figure 6: An example of generated code by Code Llama in the syntax-based OOD scenario for the
 code refinement task. Here while statement is the unseen language element.).


                                                 19
