Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE M ATRIX F ORM OF THE Q UATERNION
F OURIER T RANSFORM AND Q UATERNION C ONVOLU -
TION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         We study matrix forms of quaternionic versions of the Fourier Transform and
         Convolution operations. Quaternions offer a powerful representation unit, how-
         ever they are related to difficulties in their use that stem foremost from non-
         commutativity of quaternion multiplication, and due to that µ2 = −1 posseses
         infinite solutions in the quaternion domain. Handling of quaternionic matrices is
         consequently complicated in several aspects (definition of eigenstructure, deter-
         minant, etc.). Our research findings clarify the relation of the Quaternion Fourier
         Transform matrix to the standard (complex) Discrete Fourier Transform matrix,
         and the extend on which well-known complex-domain theorems extend to quater-
         nions. We focus especially on the relation of Quaternion Fourier Transform matri-
         ces to Quaternion Circulant matrices (representing quaternionic convolution), and
         the eigenstructure of the latter. A proof-of-concept application that makes direct
         use of our theoretical results is presented, where we present a method to bound
         the Lipschitz constant of a Quaternionic Convolutional Neural Network.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Quaternions are four-dimensional objects that can be understood as generalizing the concept of
complex numbers. Some of the most prominent applications of quaternions are in the fields of
computer graphics (Vince, 2011), robotics (Daniilidis, 1999; Fresk & Nikolakopoulos, 2013) and
quantum mechanics (Adler, 1995; Susskind & Friedman, 2014). Perhaps the most well known
use case of quaternions involves representing a rotation in three-dimensional space (Kuipers, 1999;
Stillwell, 2008; Eater & Sanderson, 2018). This representation is convenient, as for example a
composition of rotations corresponds to a multiplication of quaternions, and both actions are non-
commutative. Compared to other spatial rotation representations such as Euler angles, quaternions
are advantageous in a number of respects (Förstner & Wrobel, 2016).
A relatively more recent and perhaps overlooked use of quaternionic analysis is in digital signal
processing and computer vision (Subakan & Vemuri, 2011; Grigoryan & Agaian, 2014; Rosa et al.,
2018; Hsu et al., 2019). The motivation for using quaternionic extensions of standard theoretical
signal processing tools such as filtering and the Fourier Transform (FT), is that their most typical
application on color images involves treating them as three separate monochrome images. As a
consequence, cross-channel dynamics are ignored in this approach. The solution is to treat each
color value as a single, unified object, and one way to do so is by representing multimodal pixel
values as quaternions. The caveat of this approach would be that standard tools, filters and methods
would have to be redefined and remodeled, a process that is typically not always straightforward (a
fact that partly motivates this work). Recent works move away from this initial motivation and apply
quaternionic and other hypercomplex representations on neural networks, on network inputs as well
as intermediate, deep layers (Parcollet et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).
In this paper, our focus is on the quaternionic version of the Discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and
its relation to quaternion convolution. The Quaternion Fourier Transform (QFT) was originally
proposed by Sangwine (1996), and in effect it provides the means to analyze and manipulate the
frequency content of multichannel signals. We argue that, while the QFT has been studied by a


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


number of works and has found uses in practical applications (Ell & Sangwine, 2007; Subakan &
Vemuri, 2011; Li et al., 2015; Hitzer, 2016), its potential has yet to be exploited in its fullest.
A matrix representation form for the Quaternion Fourier Transform and Convolution and their prop-
erties are studied in this paper. 1 We show that a number of properties of the DFT matrix form
also do extend to the quaternionic domain, in most cases appearing as a more complex version of
the original (DFT) property. We focus on its relation to Quaternionic Convolution and its circulant
form, extend the well-known results for the non-quaternionic case (Jain, 1989), and show that the
eigenstructure of Quaternionic Circulant matrices is closely connected to the Quaternion Fourier
Matrix form.
In our opinion, the most important contributions of this paper are the following: a) We find that
circulant matrices and Fourier matrices are “still” related in terms of their properties also in the
quaternionic domain, albeit in a more nuanced manner. The left and right QFT provide us with
different functions of the convolution kernel left eigenvalues. b) The literature on the theory and ap-
plications of quaternion matrices focuses on right eigenvalues, as the left spectrum is more difficult
or impossible to compute in general. Our focus here is on left eigenvalues 2 , and we show how to
compute them using QFT. c) We show that sums, multiples and products of quaternionic circulant
matrices can be reconstructed using manipulations in the left spectrum. d) In terms of application,
we show that our results find direct use, replacing and generalizing uses of standard real/complex
operators. We present a proof-of-concept application that makes use of our results. Specifically, we
propose a way to a) compute the spectral norm of Quaternionic Convolution and b) set a bound on
the Lipschitz constant of a Quaternionic Neural Network. These operations are shown to be carried
out magnitudes faster than an implementation that is oblivious to the presented results.
The paper is structured as follows. We proceed with a short discussion on Section 2 concerning
difficulties handling quaternion matrices and therefore operator matrix forms, and outline the net
benefits from such a process. In Section 3, we examine the matrix form of the QFT and Quaternion
Convolution and present our contributions regarding their properties. We showcase the usefulness
of the proposed form with an application in Section 4. We conclude the paper with Section 5. Proofs
for our propositions and supplemental material are left to the Appendix.
Let us stress that this work is not a review over pre-existing works. The main paper presents our
novel research findings, while we have moved most of the theoretical prerequisites to the Appendices
(except those that we have denoted as “straightforward”).

2    I S QUATERNIONIC REPRESENTATION WORTH THE HASSLE ?
Major difficulties in handling quaternionic matrix forms for the FT or the convolution operator
involve the following points: a) Multiplication non-commutativity: Quaternion multiplication is
non-commutative, a property which is passed on to quternion matrix multiplication. b) Multiple
definitions of convolution and QFTs. There is a left-side, a right-side, or even a two-sided Fourier
transform for quaternions, as well as variations stemming from choices of different FT axes. (An
analogous picture holds for quaternion convolution, see Appendix for details). c) Difficulties with a
convolution theorem: A long discussion exists on possible adaptations of the convolution theorem
to the quaternion domain (Ell & Sangwine, 2007; Cheng & Kou, 2019; Bahri et al., 2013; Pei
et al., 2001; Ell et al., 2014). The (complex domain) convolution theorem cannot be readily applied
for any version of the QFT and any version of Quaternion Convolution (Cheng & Kou, 2019).
Quaternion convolution theorems have however been proposed in the literature: Ell & Sangwine
(2007) discuss a convolution theorem for the discrete QFT; Bahri et al. (2013) present results for
the two-sided continuous 2D QFT. A version with the commutative bicomplex product operator also
exists, holding specifically for complex signals transformed w.r.t. to axis j (Ell et al., 2014). d) More
complex eigenstructure: Quaternion matrices have a significantly more complex eigenstructure than
real or complex matrices. Due to non-commutativity of multiplication, left and right eigenvalues
are defined, each corresponding to either the problem Ax = λx or Ax = xλ respectively. Even
   1
     Concerning prior work, to our knowledge only Ell et al. 2014, sec.3.1.1.1 refer to a matrix form of the
QFT, without proving or discussing any of its properties, its relation to convolution or their implications.
   2
     Most hitherto works focus on right eigenvalues; as Aslaksen (2001) notes, “In general, it is difficult to talk
about eigenvalues of a quaternionic matrix. Since we work with right vector spaces, we must consider right
eigenvalues.”


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


worse, the number of the eigenvalues of a quaternionic matrix is in general infinite (Zhang, 1997). e)
Quaternionic determinants: The issue of defining a Quaternion determinant is non-trivial; a function
acting with the exact same properties as those of the complex determinant, defined in the quaternion
domain, cannot exist (Dyson, 1972).
But what can we gain from a matrix form and the properties of the constituent quaternionic matrices,
especially when moving to the quaternion domain creates all sorts of difficulties? In a nutshell, the
motivation is that vectorial signals such as color images can be treated in a holistic manner, and our
analysis opens up the potential to build more powerful models directly in the quaternionic domain.
In general, given a signal processing observational model, wherever a Fourier operator of a Con-
volutional operator is defined, a matrix form allows us to easily adapt the model to the quaternion
domain. This bears at least two advantages: a) The model can be easily redefined by replacing
operators with their quaternion versions. b) Perhaps more importantly, solution of the model (i.e.,
find some parameter vector θ that fits best to observations) involves directly using properties of the
Fourier and Circulant matrices (e.g. using results about eigenvalues of a sum of circulant matrices).
Properties of the related non-quaternion operations are used in state-of-the-art signal, image process-
ing/vision and learning methods. As a few examples, we mention models in deblurring (Nan et al.,
2020) and deconvolution (Hidalgo-Gavira et al., 2019), manipulating convolution layers of neural
networks (Sedghi et al., 2018; Singla & Feizi, 2020) or constructing invertible convolutions for nor-
malizing flows (Karami et al., 2019). These properties are well-known for the real and complex
domain (Jain, 1989). With the current work, (many of) these results are adapted to the quaternionic
domain, allowing construction of more powerful, expressive models.


3     M ATRIX FORMS : Q UATERNION F OURIER M ATRIX , Q UATERNION
      C IRCULANT M ATRIX AND THEIR CONNECTION

The main theme of this section is exploring whether and to what extend do the well-known properties
and relation between circulant matrices, the Fourier matrix, and their eigenstructure generalize to
the quaternionic domain. The core of these properties (see for example Jain (1989) for a complete
treatise) is summarized in expressing the convolution theorem in matrix form, as:
                        g = Cf =⇒ Ag = AA−1 ΛC Af =⇒ G = ΛC F                                      (1)
where g, f ∈ CN , C ∈ CN ×N is a circulant matrix, G, F ∈ CN are the Fourier transforms of
g, f . As the columns of the inverse Fourier matrix A−1 are eigenvectors of any circulant matrix,
the convolution expressed by the circulant C multiplied by the signal f is easily written in eq. 1
as a point-wise product of the transform of the convolution kernel ΛC (represented as a diagonal
matrix) and the transform F . These formulae in practice aid in handling circulant matrices, which
when used in the context of signal and image processing models represent convolutional filters. The
most important of these operations are with respect to compositions of circulant matrices, as well as
operations in the frequency domain.
Note that concerning the majority of the propositions and corollaries that will be subsequently pre-
sented, we have moved our proofs to the Appendix.

3.1   Q UATERNIONIC C IRCULANT M ATRICES

Let C ∈ HN ×N be a quaternionic circulant matrix. This is defined in terms of a quaternionic
“kernel” vector, denoted as kC ∈ HN , with quaternionic values kC = [c0 c1 · · · cN −1 ]T . Then, the
element at row i = 0..N − 1 and column j = 0..N − 1 is equal to kC [i − j]N , where we take the
modulo-N of the index in brackets. Hence, a quaternionic circulant matrix bears the following form:
                                       c0    c1 c2 · · · cN −1
                                                                  
                                   cN −1 c0 c1 · · · cN −2 
                             CT =  ...      ..   .. . .      ..   .                            (2)
                                               .    .     .     . 
                                         c1    c2       c3   ···   c0
For any quaternionic circulant C, from the definition of the quaternionic circulant (eq. 2) and quater-
nionic convolution, we immediately have:


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 3.1. The product Cx implements the quaternionic circular left convolution kC ~ x:
                                                   N
                                                   X −1
                                  (kC ~ x)[i] =           kC [i − n]N x[n],                       (3)
                                                   n=0

taken for ∀i ∈ [1, N ], where x ∈ HN is the signal to be convolved, and [·]N denotes modulo − N
indexing (Jain, 1989) (i.e., the index “wraps around” with a period equal to N ).
Proposition 3.2. Quaternionic circulant matrices can be written as matrix polynomials:
                             C = c0 I + c1 P̃ + c2 P̃ 2 + · · · + cN −1 P̃ N −1 ,                 (4)
where kernel [c0 c1 · · · cN ] ∈ HN and P̃ ∈ RN ×N is the real permutation matrix (Strang, 2019) that
permutes columns 0 → 1, 1 → 2, · · · , N − 1 → 0. The inverse is also straightforward: any such
matrix polynomial is also quaternionic circulant.
Corollary 3.2.1. Transpose C T and conjugate transpose C H are also quaternionic circulant matri-
ces, with kernels equal to [c0 cN −1 · · · c2 c1 ]T and [c0 cN −1 · · · c2 c1 ]T respectively.

3.2   Q UATERNIONIC F OURIER M ATRICES

We define a class of matrices as Quaternionic Fourier matrices, shorthanded as QµN for some pure
unit quaternion µ (termed the “axis” of the transform) and N ∈ N, as follows. The element at row
                                                        i·j                               −µ2πN −1
i = 0..N − 1 and column j = 0..N − 1 is equal to wN       µ , where we have used wN µ = e          ,
raised to the power of the product of i, j. Hence, we write:
                                                                      (N −1)·0
                                                                                
                                       0·0         1·0
                                    wN    µ      wN   µ     ···     wN µ
                                       0·1         1·1                (N −1)·1 
                                    wN           wN         ···     wN µ
                               
                     µ      1            µ           µ                          
                   QN = √     
                                       ..          ..        ..          .
                                                                                 .             (5)
                             N         .           .           .        ..      
                                                                                 
                                    0·(N −1)    1·(N −1)           (N −1)·(N −1)
                                  wN µ         wN µ         · · · wN µ
Proposition 3.3 (General properties). For any Quaternionic Fourier matrix we have the following
straightforward properties:

(1) QµN is square, Vandermonde and symmetric.

(2) [QµN ]H QµN = QµN [QµN ]H = I, QµN is unitary.

(3) The product QµN x, where x ∈ HN , equals the left QFT FLµ {x}:
                                                    N −1
                                               1 X −µ2πN −1 nu
                                    FLµ [u] = √       e        f [n].                             (6)
                                                N n=0

                   µ
(4) The product QN x = Q−µ              N                               −µ
                        N x, where x ∈ H , equals the left inverse QFT FL {x} .
                                                     N −1
                                               1 X +µ2πN −1 nu
                                   FL−µ [u] = √       e        f [n].                             (7)
                                                N n=0

(5) QiN = AN where AN is the (standard, non-quaternionic) Fourier matrix of size N (Jain, 1989;
    Strang, 2019). The standard DFT comes as a special case of the QFT, for axis µ = i and a
    complex-valued input x ∈ CN .
                         µ
(6) Q−µ    µ −1
     N = (QN )  = QN = (QµN )H .

(7) QµN QµN = P̌ , where P̌ is a permutation matrix that maps column n to [N − n]N .

(see also the Appendix concerning definitions of the QFT and quaternion conjugacy). All the above
can be confirmed by using the matrix form definition of eq. 5.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consequently, and in contrast to what holds in the complex domain, we have an infinite number of
different Fourier matrices for a given signal length N , one for each different choice of pure unit
axis µ. Proposition 3.3 stated that by flipping the sign of the axis we obtain the inverse QFT with
respect to the same axis. In general, two arbitrary Fourier matrices are connected via a rotation of
their components:
Proposition 3.4. Let QµN , QνN Quaternionic Fourier matrices with non-collinear axes µ, ν. We can
always find unit p ∈ H such that
                                            QµN = pQνN p̄                                        (8)
The required quaternion p is eξθ/2 , where ξ = νµ + V (ν) · V (µ) and θ = arccos(V (µ) · V (ν)).

Let us add a short comment on the intuition behind this relation. We must note that all elements of
QµN are situated on the same plane in H, which is different from the plane for elements of QνN (due
to the assumption of non-collinearity). However, for any given axis, all planes intersect the origin
and all pass from (1, 0, 0, 0) ∈ H, since element [QµN ]1,1 equals 1 for any µ and N ∈ N. Elements of
QµN are situated on a unit circle on their corresponding plane, whereupon their position is defined by
their relative angle to the line passing between the origin and (1, 0, 0, 0). This position is determined
by the value of the element wN µ , and the power to which this element is raised, so as to give the
element of QµN in question. Intuitively, this action represents a rotation of the unitary disc where all
elements of QµN are situated.

3.3   C ONNECTION OF C IRCULANT AND F OURIER MATRICES

The following results can then be proved, underpinning the relation between Quaternionic Circulant
and Quaternionic Fourier matrices, in particular with respect to the left spectrum of the former:
Proposition 3.5 (Circulant & Fourier Matrices). For any C ∈ HN ×N that is circulant, and any pure
unit µ ∈ H,

(1) Any column k = 1..N of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ        N is an eigenvector of C. Column k
    corresponds to the k th component of the vector of left eigenvalues λµ = [λµ1 λµ2 · · · λµN ]T ∈ HN .
                                          µ
    Vector λµ is equal to the right QFT FR∗   of the kernel of C.

(2) Any column k = 1..N of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ                                   H
                                                           N is an eigenvector of C . Column k
                        th                                               µ      µ µ
    corresponds to the k component of the vector of left eigenvalues κ = [κ1 κ2 · · · κµN ]T ∈ HN .
                                                               µ
    The conjugate of the vector κµ is equal to the left QFT FL∗  of the kernel of C.
                                                                                                √
where transforms denoted with an asterisk (*) refer to using a unitary coefficient instead of 1/ N :
                           N −1                                               N −1
                µ
                           X               −1                      µ
                                                                              X                    −1
               FL∗ [u] =          e−µ2πN        nu
                                                     f [n],       FR∗ [u] =          f [n]e−µ2πN        nu
                                                                                                             .   (9)
                           n=0                                                n=0

Note here that the left spectrum becomes important concerning the circulant matrix eigenstructure.
In general, quaternionic matrices have two different spectra, corresponding to left and right eigen-
values. For real matrices, the two spectra will coincide, however the exact way these two sets are
connected is largely unknown in the case of true quaternionic matrices (Zhang, 1997; Macı́as-Virgós
et al., 2022).
Corollary 3.5.1. For any pure unit axis µ ∈ H, the conjugates of the eigenvalues λµ and κµ are
also left eigenvalues of C H and C respectively.
Corollary 3.5.2. For any pure unit axis µ ∈ H, the vector of left eigenvalues λµ is a flipped version
of λ−µ , where the DC component and the (N/2)th component (zero-indexed) remain in place.
Proposition 3.6. A set of N left eigenvalues that correspond to the eigenvectors - columns of Q−µ   N
for some choice of axis µ ∈ H, uniquely defines a circulant matrix C. The kernel of C is computed
by taking the inverse right QFT of the vector of the N left eigenvalues.
Corollary 3.6.1. Given (a vector, or ordered set of) N left eigenvalues λµ , we can use the QFT to
reconstruct a circulant matrix C ∈ HN ×N with λµ ⊂ σ(C). The corresponding eigenvectors are
the columns of the QFT matrix Q−µN . The resulting matrix C is unique, in the sense that it is the only
matrix ∈ HN ×N with this pair of left eigenvalues and eigenvectors.


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 3.6.2. Writing proposition 3.5 in a matrix diagonalization form (A = SΛS −1 ), where
the columns of S are eigenvectors and Λ is a diagonal matrix of left eigenvalues, is not possible.
This would require us to be able to write CQ−µ      −µ µ
                                            N = QN Λ ; however, the right side of this equation
computes right eigenvalues, while proposition 3.5 concerns left eigenvalues.
Consequently, and despite an only partial generalization of the corresponding well-known properties
to quaternionic circulant matrices, we must note that quaternion circulant matrices have the rather
singular property of being relatively easy to numerically compute (part of its) left spectrum:
                                                                              µ
Corollary 3.6.3. For any Quaternionic Circulant C, any right-side QFT FR         (i.e., with respect to
arbitrary pure unit axis µ) of quaternionic convolution kernel kC will result to a vector of left
eigenvalues for C.
In general no procedure is known to be applicable to a generic (non-circulant) quaternionic matrix
(Zhang, 1997; Macı́as-Virgós et al., 2022). Only its right spectrum can be fully calculated using a
well-defined numerical procedure (Le Bihan & Sangwine, 2003).
Proposition 3.7 (Eigenstructure of sums, products and inverse of circulant matrices).
Let L, K ∈ HN ×N circulant matrices, then the following propositions hold. (Analogous results
hold for L, K doubly-block circulant).
(a) The sums L + K and products LK, KL are also circulant. Any scalar product pL or Lp where
p ∈ H also results to a circulant matrix.
(b) Given some pure unit axis µ ∈ H, let w be the ith column of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ     N ,
and λµi , κµi are left eigenvalues of L, K with respect to the shared eigenvector w. Then, w is an
eigenvector of. . .
i. L + K with left eigenvalue equal to λµi + κµi .
ii. pL with left eigenvalue equal to pλµi .
                                              −1
iii. Lp with left eigenvalue equal to λpµp
                                       i   p.
                                         κµ µ[κµ
                                               i ]
                                                   −1
iv. LK with left eigenvalue equal to λi i             κµi if κµi 6= 0 and equal to 0 if κµi = 0.
v. Provided L−1 exists, λµi w(λµi )−1 is an eigenvector of L−1 with left eigenvalue equal to (λµi )−1 .

3.4   Q UATERNIONIC D OUBLY-B LOCK C IRCULANT M ATRICES

Block-circulant matrices are block matrices that are made up of blocks that are circulant. Doubly-
block circulant matrices are block-circulant with blocks that are circulant themselves. These latter
are useful in representing 2D convolution (Jain, 1989). Results for circulant matrices in general are
valid also for doubly-block circulant matrices, where the role of the Quaternionic Fourier Matrix
Q−µ                                       −µ
  N is taken by the Kronecker product QM ⊗ QN .
                                                  −µ

Proposition 3.8 (Doubly Block-Circulant & Fourier Matrices). Let D ∈ HM N ×M N be doubly
block-circulant, with N × N blocks, and each block is sized M × M . Let µ ∈ H be a pure unit
quaternion. Then the product D · vec(x), implements the quaternionic circular left 2D convolution
kD ~ x. The operator vec(x) represents column-wise vectorization of signal x ∈ HM ×N .
                                         M
                                         X −1 N
                                              X −1
                      (kC ~ x)[i, j] =  kD [i − m, j − n]M,N x[m, n],              (10)
                                m=0 n=0

Proposition 3.9. Let R = Q−µ   −µ
                          M ⊗ QN and the invertible coordinate mapping k ↔ i + M j. For
          M N ×M N
any C ∈ H             that is doubly block-circulant and any pure unit µ ∈ H,
(1) Any column k = 1..M N of R is an eigenvector of C. Column k corresponds to the (i, j)
    component of the matrix of left eigenvalues λµ ∈ HM ×N . Matrix λµ is equal to the right QFT
      µ
    FR∗ of the kernel of C.
(2) Any column k = 1..M N of R is an eigenvector of C H . Column k corresponds to the (i, j)
    component of the matrix of left eigenvalues κµ ∈ HM ×N . The conjugate of the matrix κµ is
                           µ
    equal to the left QFT FL∗ of the kernel of C.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4   P ROOF - OF -C ONCEPT A PPLICATION : FAST COMPUTATION OF SINGULAR
    VALUES & B OUNDING OF THE L IPSCHITZ C ONSTANT

We present a method to bound the Lipschitz constant of a Neural Network that comprises Quater-
nionic Convolutions, based on our theoretical results. Bounding the Lipschitz constant has been
shown to be a way to control the generalization error (Prince, 2023). In turn, the value of the con-
stant depends on the product of the spectral norms of the weight matrices of the network. Given any
linear layer, a bound c on its spectral norm can be set by projecting the operation matrix onto the
set of linear transforms with a bounded norm (Lefkimmiatis et al., 2013; Sedghi et al., 2018). We
are interested in computing and constraining the maximum value of ||f ` (x)||, where f ` represents
the operator in layer l and x is the layer input, for all layers in the network. For an arbitrary lin-
earity expressed as matrix B ∈ HM ×N , this leads to dealing with a Rayleigh quotient of the form
xH B H Bx
   xH x
          , and from here we can use the Quaternion SVD (Sangwine & Le Bihan, 2006) to proceed.
We analyze B as U, Σ, V H = qsvd(B) and reconstruct the regularized operation as U Σ̌V H , where
Σ̌ contains singular values projected in the range [0, c]. Note that in H, singular values are related
to the right spectrum (cf. Appendix). When the linearity in question corresponds to a Quaternionic
Convolution, matrix B is circulant. While we can still use the QSVD over B to bound the spectrum,
the required related space and time complexity is prohibitive in practice (we refer to this method
as “brute-force”, see further below for a comparison and discussion). We can instead circumvent
computing the “expensive” doubly-block circulant matrix altogether, using our results.
We will present the approach as a two-step process. First, we will show how to compute singular
values for the convolution operation. Second, we will discuss how we can reconstruct a convolution
using the clipped singular values.
Fast Computation of Singular Values. We require the additional lemmas:
Lemma 4.1. For any pure unit µ ∈ H and any N ∈ N, the right span of the columns of QµN is HN .
For any pure unit µ ∈ H and any M, N ∈ N, the right span of the columns of QµM ⊗ QµN is HM N .
Lemma 4.2. Let A ∈ HN be block-diagonal. The left eigenvalues of each block of A are also left
eigenvalues of A. The right eigenvalues of each block of A are also right eigenvalues of A.

The first key result for computing singular values is:
Proposition 4.3. Let C ∈ HN ×N be quaternionic circulant. Then the square norm ||Cx||2 , given
some x ∈ HN , can be written as cH Ξc, where c, x ∈ HN are related by a bijection, and Ξ = ξ(kC )
is a block-diagonal matrix. All blocks of Ξ are either 1 × 1 or 2 × 2, and are Hermitian. The 1 × 1
blocks are at most two for 1D convolution, and at most four for 2D convolution.

Matrix Ξ is important, because it contains sufficient information to compute the spectrum of the
convolution. The notation ξ(kC ) stresses that we only need the kernel of the convolution to construct
Ξ. The structure of the 2 × 2 blocks of Ξ will be of the form:
                               "                                     #
                                                     k           ⊥ k
                                      |λm |2       λ̄m λ⊥n +  λ̄  λ
                                                                 m n ,
                                   k         ⊥ k
                                                                                                  (11)
                                 λ̄n λ⊥
                                      m + λ̄n λm         |λn |2

where k and ⊥ refer to simplex and perplex components w.r.t. axis µ (cf. Appendix, or e.g. Ell &
Sangwine 2007), and λ terms are left eigenvalues of the convolution kernel kC . Its 1 × 1 blocks
are simply equal to a square-magnitude |λm |2 . Indices m,n must form a pair as described in the
Appendix.
Proposition 4.4. All singular values can be computed exactly as either the magnitude of a left eigen-
value of C, or the square-root of one of the two eigenvalues of the 2 × 2 blocks of Ξ, again each
dependent on a pair of left eigenvalues of C. The maximum value of ||Cx||2 under the constraint
||x|| = 1 is given by the square of the largest right eigenvalue of Ξ = ξ(kC ).

The above results tell us that we can compute the spectrum of our convolution without building the
circulant matrix explicitly. Note that in the non-quaternionic case, Ξ would be diagonal, as off-
diagonal terms would vanish, and all 2 × 2 blocks would become diagonal. In H, we require the
extra step of computing singular values for the 2 × 2 blocks.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding the Lipschitz constant. In order to set a bound on the spectral norm, we need to be able to
move in the opposite direction – from a clipped Ξ̌ matrix, to new left eigenvalues, back towards the
new kernel. The following corrolary of the previous propositions is a necessary step:
Corollary 4.4.1. For any matrix Φ such that ΦH Φ = ξ(kC ), matrices C and Φ have the same
singular values.

The choice of Φ is not unique, and ideally we want a matrix that will be convenient in the context of
clipping and reconstruction. We choose Φ so that it is block-diagonal, with block "structure identical
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                         k
                                                                                        λm λ⊥  n 3 . It is
to that of Ξ. We pick the 1×1 blocks to be equal to [λm ], and 2×2 blocks equal to ⊥            k
                                                                                        λm λn
straightforward to confirm that this choice fulfills the requirement set in Corollary 4.4.1. Importantly,
this choice of Φ is related through a bijection with the left eigenvalues of kB . Another bijection exists
between left eigenvalues of kB (cf. corollary 3.6.1) for a given axis, so exact reconstruction of the
required clipped convolution is possible.
By making use of the above results, the spectral norm of a given convolutional layer can be clipped as
follows: 1) Compute left eigenvalues of the filter using the right QFT, given a choice of µ (following
the results of proposition 3.3). 2) Compute block-diagonal elements of Φ (cf. corollary 4.4.1). For
1 × 1 blocks we simply copy the appropriate left eigenvalue. For 2 × 2 blocks we decompose the
two left eigenvalues into simplex and perplex parts, as in eq. 11. 3) Compute QSVD for Φ; this
can be implemented as QSVDs for the 2 × 2 blocks of Φ. Clip singular values and reconstruct
Φ̌. 4) Reconstruct filters using inverse right QFTs (cf. proposition 3.6). 5) Clip spatial range of
resulting filters to original range (e.g. Sedghi et al. 2018, Section 3). All convolutions are clipped
and reconstructed with this process. The rest of the linear components are clipped and reconstructed
as described in the beginning of this Section.
Results and Discussion: Complexity of Space and Time Requirements. Direct clipping using QSVD
is very expensive both in terms of space and time complexity. The input to QSVD is the doubly-
block circulant matrix that corresponds to the convolution filter, and it consists of N 4 quaternionic
elements; our approach does not require computing the doubly-block circulant matrix at all. In
terms of time complexity, direct clipping using QSVD requires O(N 6 ), the cost of SVD over C.
Regarding our method, for the forward and inverse QFT, we need 4 FFTs, as each QFT is computed
via 2 standard FFTs (Ell & Sangwine, 2007). Also, we require ≈ N 2 /2 eigenvalue decompositions
for the 2 × 2 blocks of Φ (depending on how many 1 × 1 blocks exist, which in turn depends on
whether N is odd or even). Hence, total complexity is in the order of O(N 2 logN ).
Computing Singular Values Clipping Time Comparison versus Brute-force QSVD. We have tested
runtime of our method versus the brute-force QSVD approach, over a set of random filters. Results
can be examined in Table 1, where we compare runtimes using the method we described, versus
the brute-force method (direct clipping). Times to just compute singular values, or perform the full
clipping and reconstruction process, are also reported. Concerning the size parameter in a practical


Table 1: Runtime comparison for computation of Quaternionic Convolution Singular Values and
Spectral Norm Clipping & Reconstruction. Convolution size refers to 2D kernel side size. Average
CPU time in milliseconds is reported.
              Convolution size     4  8      16         32          64     128
                  SVs (ours)       4 16      80        210         708    1, 795
              SVs (brute-force) 5 95 1, 244 69, 319 hours hours
                  Full (ours)      5 20     113        280       1, 119 2, 590
              Full (brute-force) 8 121 1, 866 150, 000 hours hours

application, note that while small convolutional kernel sizes as much as 3×3 or 5×5 are prevalent in
both real-valued and hypercomplex network architectures, when we express convolution in terms of
a circulant or doubly-block circulant matrix we need to take into account the zero-padded version of
the kernel. In simple terms, when Cx expresses a convolution over input x ∈ HN , circulant C must
  3
    Another choice can be: Φ = Ξ1/2 . However it will allow us to reconstruct left eigenvalues only w.r.t their
magnitude.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


match the dimension of the input, so C ∈ HN ×N . Hence, when comparing resource requirements
for different sizes of convolution, larger magnitudes for N are more relevant to real-world practice.
On operation sizes N ≥ 128, using the brute-force method is practically impossible due to both
space and time constraints. On the contrary, our method scales well on larger sizes. A visualization
of a clipped and reconstructed filter can be examined in Appendix D.
Application on a Neural Network. We test a ResNet32 architecture on CIFAR10. We replaced
standard convolutional layers with depthwise convolutions and pointwise convolutions (Chollet,
2017) on the quaternionic domain. We report the results of training both architecture variants
considered (QResNet32-small and QResNet32-large), with and without clipping, in Table 2. We
observe that clipping always boosts final performance, regardless of the architecture considered.

To further understand the dynamics of the          architecture       w/o clipping    w/ clipping
clipping procedure, we present the loss and      QResNet32-small         82.77           84.16
accuracy curves in Figure 1 for the case of      QResNet32-large         80.73           85.29
QResNet32-small, where the per epoch loss
and accuracy are reported for both the with    Table 2: Comparison of final test accuracy, when set-
and without clipping variants. As we can       ting a bound on the Lipschitz constant (w/ clipping)
see, the clipping impact is mostly realized    versus not (w/o clipping). Figures for two considered
when the scheduling step occurs (i.e., at 40   architectures are reported. Spectral norms are clipped
epochs), indicating that it enables a finer    to value c = 1.0.
tuning of the network.


                        (a)                                                (b)

Figure 1: Per-epoch analysis of the impact of using the proposed technique. Training loss (a) and
test accuracy (b) curves are reported.

Please see the Appendix (Section E) for a detailed discussion and ablation over the compared archi-
tectures and hyperparameters.


5   C ONCLUSION

We have presented a set of results concerning the properties and relation between the Quater-
nion Fourier Transform and Quaternion Convolution, with respect to their formulations in terms
of Quaternionic matrices. This relation has been well-known to be very close and important on
the real and complex domains, and already used in a wide plethora of learning models and signal
processing methods. With our results, we show how and to what extend these properties generalize
to the domain of quaternions, opening up the possibility to construct analogous models built di-
rectly on quaternionic formulations. We have also presented a method for bounding of the Lipschitz
constant using our theoretical results. We plan on working on building competitive quaternionic
models, For example, circulant matrices have been used to represent prior terms in various inverse
problems, such as image restoration (Chantas et al., 2009) or color image deconvolution (Hidalgo-
Gavira et al., 2018). In the derivation of the solution for these models, properties analogous to the
ones presented here are a requirement. With the current work, quaternionic versions of these models
can in perspective be envisaged.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stephen L. Adler. Quaternionic quantum mechanics and quantum fields, volume 88 of International
  Series on Monographs on Physics. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995. 1

Dimitrios S. Alexiadis and Petros Daras. Quaternionic signal processing techniques for automatic
  evaluation of dance performances from MoCap data. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 16(5):
  1391–1406, 2014. 13

Daniel Alfsmann, Heinz G. Göckler, Stephen J. Sangwine, and Todd A. Ell. Hypercomplex algebras
  in digital signal processing: Benefits and drawbacks. In 2007 15th European Signal Processing
  Conference, pp. 1322–1326. IEEE, 2007. 13

Helmer Aslaksen. Quaternionic determinants.           In Mathematical Conversations, pp. 142–156.
  Springer, 2001. 2

Mawardi Bahri, Ryuichi Ashino, and Rémi Vaillancourt. Convolution theorems for Quaternion
 Fourier Transform: Properties and Applications. In Abstract and Applied Analysis, volume 2013.
 Hindawi, 2013. 2, 15

Mike Boyle. The Quaternion package: Add support for Quaternions to Python and Numpy. Zenodo,
 2018. 17

Giannis Chantas, Nikolaos P. Galatsanos, Rafael Molina, and Aggelos K. Katsaggelos. Variational
  Bayesian image restoration with a product of spatially weighted total variation image priors. IEEE
  transactions on image processing, 19(2):351–362, 2009. 9

Dong Cheng and Kit Ian Kou. Properties of Quaternion Fourier Transforms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.05100, 2016. 13

Dong Cheng and Kit Ian Kou. Plancherel theorem and quaternion Fourier transform for square
  integrable functions. Complex Variables and Elliptic Equations, 64(2):223–242, 2019. 2, 16

François Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1251–1258, 2017. 9, 17

Konstantinos Daniilidis. Hand-eye calibration using dual quaternions. The International Journal of
  Robotics Research, 18(3):286–298, 1999. 1

Giorgio DeMagistris, Danilo Comminiello, Christian Napoli, and Janusz T. Starczewski. Visual
  odometry with depth-wise separable convolution and quaternion neural networks. In 9th Italian
  workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. AIRO 2022, 2022. 17

Freeman J. Dyson. Quaternion Determinants. Helvetica Physica Acta, 45(2):289, 1972. 3

Ben Eater and Grant Sanderson. Visualizing quaternions.     https://eater.net/
  quaternions/video/intro, 2018. [Online; accessed 1-July-2023]. 1

Todd A. Ell and Stephen J. Sangwine. Hypercomplex Fourier Transforms of Color Images. IEEE
  Transactions on Image Processing, 16(1):22–35, 2007. 2, 7, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25

Todd A. Ell, Nicolas Le Bihan, and Stephen J. Sangwine. Quaternion Fourier transforms for signal
  and image processing. John Wiley & Sons, 2014. 2, 13, 15, 16

Wolfgang Förstner and Bernhard P. Wrobel. Photogrammetric Computer Vision. Springer, 2016. 1

John B. Fraleigh. A first course in abstract algebra, 7th, 2002. 13

Emil Fresk and George Nikolakopoulos. Full quaternion based attitude control for a quadrotor. In
  2013 European Control Conference (ECC), pp. 3864–3869. IEEE, 2013. 1

Artyom M. Grigoryan and Sos S. Agaian. Retooling of color imaging in the quaternion algebra.
  Applied Mathematics and Sciences: An International Journal (MathSJ), 1(3):23–39, 2014. 1


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Natalia Hidalgo-Gavira, Javier Mateos, Miguel Vega, Rafael Molina, and Aggelos K Katsaggelos.
  Fully automated blind color deconvolution of histopathological images. In International Confer-
  ence on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 183–191. Springer,
  2018. 9
Natalia Hidalgo-Gavira, Javier Mateos, Miguel Vega, Rafael Molina, and Aggelos K. Katsaggelos.
  Variational Bayesian blind color deconvolution of histopathological images. IEEE Transactions
  on Image Processing, 29(1):2026–2036, 2019. 3
Eckhard Hitzer. The quaternion domain Fourier transform and its properties. Advances in Applied
  Clifford Algebras, 26(3):969–984, 2016. 2
Heng-Wei Hsu, Tung-Yu Wu, Sheng Wan, Wing Hung Wong, and Chen-Yi Lee. QuatNet:
  Quaternion-based head pose estimation with multiregression loss. IEEE Transactions on Mul-
  timedia, 21(4):1035–1046, 2019. 1
Liping Huang and Wasin So. On left eigenvalues of a quaternionic matrix. Linear algebra and its
  applications, 323(1-3):105–116, 2001. 14
Anil K. Jain. Fundamentals of digital image processing. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1989. 2, 3, 4, 6, 16, 24
Mahdi Karami, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Dale Schuurmans, Laurent Dinh, and Daniel Duckworth.
 Invertible convolutional flow. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS), pp.
 5635–5645, 2019. 3
Jack B. Kuipers. Quaternions and Rotation Sequences: A primer with application to orbits,
  aerospace and virtual reality. Princeton University Press, 1999. 1
Nicolas Le Bihan. The geometry of proper quaternion random variables. Signal Processing, 138:
  106–116, 2017. 13
Nicolas Le Bihan and Jérôme Mars. Singular value decomposition of quaternion matrices: a new
  tool for vector-sensor signal processing. Signal processing, 84(7):1177–1199, 2004. 14, 25
Nicolas Le Bihan and Stephen J. Sangwine. Quaternion Principal Component Analysis of Color Im-
  ages. In Proceedings 2003 International Conference on Image Processing (Cat. No. 03CH37429),
  volume 1, pp. I–809. IEEE, 2003. 6
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis, John P. Ward, and Michael Unser. Hessian Schatten-norm regularization
  for linear inverse problems. IEEE transactions on image processing, 22(5):1873–1888, 2013. 7
Heng Li, Zhiwen Liu, Yali Huang, and Yonggang Shi. Quaternion generic Fourier descriptor for
  color object recognition. Pattern recognition, 48(12):3895–3903, 2015. 2
E. Macı́as-Virgós, M.J. Pereira-Sáez, and Ana D. Tarrı́o-Tobar. Rayleigh quotient and left eigenval-
   ues of quaternionic matrices. Linear and Multilinear Algebra, pp. 1–17, 2022. 5, 6, 27
Yuesong Nan, Yuhui Quan, and Hui Ji. Variational-EM-based deep learning for noise-blind im-
  age deblurring. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 3626–3635, 2020. 3
Titouan Parcollet, Mohamed Morchid, and Georges Linarès. A survey of quaternion neural net-
   works. Artificial Intelligence Review, 53(4):2957–2982, 2020. 1
Soo-Chang Pei, Jian-Jiun Ding, and Ja-Han Chang. Efficient implementation of quaternion Fourier
  transform, convolution, and correlation by 2-d complex fft. IEEE Transactions on Signal Pro-
  cessing, 49(11):2783–2797, 2001. 2
Simon J.D. Prince. Understanding Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2023. URL http://udlbook.
  com. 7
Stefano Rosa, Giorgio Toscana, and Basilio Bona. Q-PSO: Fast quaternion-based pose estimation
  from RGB-D images. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 92(3-4):465–487, 2018. 1


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen J. Sangwine. Fourier transforms of colour images using quaternion or hypercomplex num-
  bers. Electronics letters, 32(21):1979–1980, 1996. 1
Stephen J. Sangwine and Nicolas Le Bihan. Quaternion Singular Value Decomposition based on
  bidiagonalization to a real or complex matrix using quaternion householder transformations. Ap-
  plied mathematics and computation, 182(1):727–738, 2006. 7, 14
Hanie Sedghi, Vineet Gupta, and Philip M. Long. The singular values of convolutional layers. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference in Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. 3, 7, 8,
  17
Giorgos Sfikas, Dimosthenis Ioannidis, and Dimitrios Tzovaras. Quaternion Harris for Multispectral
  Keypoint Detection. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 11–
  15. IEEE, 2020. 27
Sahil Singla and Soheil Feizi. Fantastic four: Differentiable and efficient bounds on singular values
  of convolution layers. In Proceedings of the International Conference in Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2020. 3
John Stillwell. Naive Lie theory. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. 1, 21
Gilbert Strang. Linear algebra and learning from data. Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 2019. 4, 21, 23
Özlem N. Subakan and Baba C. Vemuri. A quaternion framework for color image smoothing and
   segmentation. International Journal of Computer Vision, 91(3):233–250, 2011. 1, 2
Leonard Susskind and Art Friedman. Quantum mechanics: the theoretical minimum. Basic Books,
  2014. 1
John Vince. Quaternions for computer graphics. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011. 1
Aston Zhang, Yi Tay, Shuai Zhang, Alvin Chan, Anh Tuan Luu, Siu Cheung Hui, and Jie Fu. Beyond
  fully-connected layers with quaternions: Parameterization of hypercomplex multiplications with
  1/n parameters. In Proceedings of the International Conference in Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2021. 1
Fuzhen Zhang. Quaternions and matrices of quaternions. Linear algebra and its applications, 251:
  21–57, 1997. 3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 22, 27
Xuanyu Zhu, Yi Xu, Hongteng Xu, and Changjian Chen. Quaternion convolutional neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 631–647, 2018. 16


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    N OTATION CONVENTIONS

Throughout the text, we have used the following conventions. Capital letters M, N will refer to
matrix dimensions, input or filter size. On the ”Proof-of-concept” Section 4, N refers to the side
size of the input and output images, or equivalently, the zero-padded kernels. Letters µ,ν refer to
pure unit quaternions, usually used as axes of a QFT. A QFT matrix is written as QµN , referring to
the matrix with side N × N and reference to axis µ. Letters κ,λ refer to left eigenvalues. They will
be used with an exponent, λµ , which is to refer to a left eigenvalue with respect to axis µ. When we
want to state that a left eigenvalue is related to a specific column of a QFT matrix as its eigenvector,
we add a subscript, λµi . Our “by default” ordering is hence with respect to the order of QFT columns
(and not e.g. left eigenvalue magnitude). A vector or set of left eigenvalues is denoted boldface, λµ .
A conjugate element is denoted by a bar (p̄). An element that has been produced after singular value
clipping in the sense discussed in Section 4 is denoted with a “check” character on top: Σ̌, Ξ̌.
Indexing, if not stated otherwise, is by default considered to be zero-indexed and “modulo-N” (so
index 0 is the same as index N , or −1 is the same as N − 1 and so on). This convention is used in
                      µ
order to match the wN   exponents definition of the QFT (eq. 5), which is very important for most of
the subsequent theoretical results.

B    P RELIMINARIES ON Q UATERNION A LGEBRA

In this Section, we shall attempt to outline a selection of important definitions, results and key con-
cepts concerning quaternions (Alfsmann et al., 2007; Cheng & Kou, 2016; Ell & Sangwine, 2007;
Ell et al., 2014; Le Bihan, 2017). The structure H represents the division algebra that is formed by
quaternions Quaternions share a position of special importance compared to other algebraic struc-
tures, as according to Frobenius’ theorem (Fraleigh, 2002), every finite-dimensional (associative)
division algebra over R must be isomorphic either to R, or to C, or to H. Quaternions q ∈ H share
the following basic form:
                                       q = a + bi + cj + dk,                                       (12)
where a, b, c, d ∈ R and i, j, k are independent imaginary units, Real numbers can be regarded as
quaternions with b, c, d = 0, and complex numbers can be regarded as quaternions with c, d = 0.
Quaternions with zero real part, i.e. a = 0, are called pure quaternions. For all three imaginary units
                  i2 = j 2 = k2 = −1. The length or magnitude of a quaternion is defined as |q| =
i, j, k, it holds √
√        √
   qq = qq = a2 + b2 + c2 + d2 , where q is the conjugate of q, defined as q = a − bi − cj − dk.
Quaternions with |q| = 1 are named unit quaternions. For any unit pure quaternion µ, the property
µ2 = −1 holds. Exponentials of quaternions ex for x ∈ H can be defined through their Taylor
series:
                                                    ∞
                                                   X    xn
                                            ex =           .                                       (13)
                                                   n=0
                                                        n!
From eq. 13, Euler’s identity extends for quaternions, for µ unit and pure:
                                        eµθ = cosθ + µ sin θ.                                      (14)
Note also the caveat that in general eµ+λ 6= eµ eλ . In particular, for α, β ∈ R+ and two distinct pure
unit quaternions µ, ν, we have eνα eµβ 6= eνα+µβ . Equality holds however, when quaternions µ, ν
commute. Hence,
                                eµα eµβ = eµα+µβ , eµα eβ = eµα+β .                                (15)
since real numbers commute with any quaternion. Furthermore, any quaternion can be written in
polar form as:
                                        q = |q|eµθ .                                     (16)
Unit pure quaternion µ and real angle θ are called the eigenaxis and eigenangle (or simply axis and
angle or phase) of the quaternion (Alexiadis & Daras, 2014). The eigenaxis and eigenangle can be
computed as: µ = V (q)/|V (q)|, θ = tan−1 (|V (q)|/S(q)). For pure q, hence S(q) = 0, we have
θ = π/2.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In terms of number of independent parameters, or “degrees of freedom” (DOF ), note that the mag-
nitude |q| corresponds to 1DOF , µ to 2DOF s (a point on a sphere), and θ to 1DOF , summing to
a total of 4DOF . An alternative way to represent quaternions, is by writing their real and collective
imaginary part separately. In particular:
                                           q = S(q) + V (q),                                       (17)
where S(q) = a and V (q) = bi+cj +dk. Quaternion multiplication is in general non-commutative,
with:
                          ij = −ji = k, jk = −kj = i, ki = −ik = j.                         (18)
Note the analogy of the above formulae to vector products of 3d standard basis vectors. Indeed,
these are generalized with the formula for the product of two generic quaternions p, q ∈ H:
                                 pq = S(p)S(q) − V (p) · V (q)
                           + S(p)V (q) + S(q)V (p) + V (p) × V (q),                                (19)
where · and × denote the dot and cross product respectively.
Quaternion matrices, eigenvalues and eigenvectors: Matrices where their entries are quaternions
will be denoted as A ∈ HM ×N . An important complication of standard matrix calculus comes with
matrix eigenstructure and determinants. Due to multiplication non-commutativity, we now have two
distinct ways to define eigenvalues and eigenvectors. In particular, solutions to Ax = λx are left
eigenvalues and eigenvectors, while solutions to Ax = xλ are right eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
The sets of left and right eigenvalues are referred to as left and right spectrum, denoted σl (·) and
σr (·) respectively. The two sets are in general different, with differing properties as well. Both sets
can have infinite members for finite matrices, unlike real and complex matrices. We note here the
following important lemmas on the left and right spectrum (Huang & So, 2001): We have
                                 σl (pI + qA) = {p + qt : t ∈ σl (A)},
              N ×N
where A ∈ H          , p, q ∈ H, I is the identity matrix in HN ×N . This property does not hold for the
right spectrum.
We have
                                        σr (U H AU ) = σr (A),
where A, U ∈ HN ×N and U is unitary. Also, λ ∈ σr (A) =⇒ q −1 λq ∈ σr (A) for q 6= 0. These
properties do not hold for the left spectrum. The interested reader is referred to Zhang (1997) for a
treatise on the properties of quaternionic matrices.
Quaternion Singular Value Decomposition: Zhang (1997) and Le Bihan & Mars (2004) have been
among the first works to discuss the extension of the SVD into the quaternionic domain, dubbed
Singular Value Decomposition for Quaternion matrices or simply Quaternion Singular Value De-
composition (QSVD). Sangwine & Le Bihan (2006) have proposed a bidiagonalization-based im-
plementation of QSVD.
The fundamental proposition is that, for any matrix A ∈ HM ×N , or rank r, there exist two quater-
nion unitary matrices U and V such that

                                                    Σr 0 H
                                A = U ΣV H = U             V ,                               (20)
                                                     0 0
where Σr is a real diagonal matrix and has r strictly positive entries on its diagonal (Le Bihan &
Mars, 2004, Proposition 10). The elements of the diagonal are termed singular values. Matrices
U ∈ HM ×M and V ∈ HN ×N are made up of columns that are each left and right eigenvectors of S.
Note that, perhaps confusingly, the adjectives “left” and “right” are not corresponding to the “left”
and “right” spectra of the matrix. Both sets of eigenvectors correspond to singular values which are
in turn rather more closely related to the right spectrum. We can see this by considering AH A or
AAH , which starting from eq. 20 equal to V Σ2 V H and U Σ2 U H respectively. Consequently, we
have AH AV = V Σ2 and AAH U = U Σ2 , which solve the right eigenvalue problem, Ãx = xλ.
Hence, the singular values are the non-zero right eigenvalues of either AH A or AAH . As these must
be in R, as eigenvalues of Hermitian matrices, they are also left eigenvalues. Left eigenvalues that
are not right eigenvalues may very well exist, even for Hermitian matrices (Zhang, 1997, Example
5.3).

                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cayley-Dickson form and symplectic decomposition: A quaternion may be represented as a complex
number with complex real and imaginary parts, in a unique manner. We write
                                               q = A + Bj,                                        (21)
with
                                    A = q1 + q2 i, B = q3 + q4 i.
An analogous operation can be performed for quaternion matrices, which can be written as a couple
of complex matrices (Zhang, 1997). This scheme can be easily generalized to using any other couple
of perpendicular imaginary units µ1 , µ2 instead of i, j. In that, more general case, it is referred to
as a symplectic decomposition (Ell & Sangwine, 2007), which is essentially a change of basis from
(1, i, j, k) to new imaginary units (1, µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ). We can in general write
                                               p = pk + p⊥ ,
where pk = p0 +p1 µ1 and p⊥ = (p2 +p3 µ1 )µ2 = p2 µ2 +p3 µ3 . Quaternions pk and p⊥ are referred
to as the parallel / simplex part and the perpendicular / perplex part with respect to some basis
(1, µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ). Given symplectic decompositions for quaternions p, q, their parts may commute or
conjugate-commute (Ell & Sangwine, 2007, Section 7C). Note the conjugate operator over pk in the
second relation:
                                    pk q k = q k pk , pk q ⊥ = q ⊥ p̄k .

C      Q UATERNIONIC C ONVOLUTION AND Q UATERNIONIC F OURIER
       T RANSFORM
C.1    Q UATERNIONIC C ONVOLUTION

In the continuous case, quaternionic convolution is defined as (Bahri et al., 2013):
                                              Z
                                (f ∗ g)(x) =      f (u)g(x − u)du,                                (22)
                                                    V
and cross-correlation (Ell et al., 2014) as:
                                                   Z
                                  (f ? g)(x) =          f (u)g(x + u)du,                          (23)
                                                    V

where V = R, R2 for 1D and 2D convolution/correlation respectively. Similarity of the above
to the well-known non-quaternionic formulae is evident. A number of useful properties of non-
quaternionic convolution also hold for quaternionic convolution. These properties include linearity,
shifting, associativity and distributivity (Bahri et al., 2013). Perhaps unsurprisingly, quaternionic
convolution is non-commutative (f ∗ g 6= g ∗ f in general), and conjugation inverses the order of
convolution operators (f ∗ g = g ∗ f ). In practice, discrete versions of 1D convolution and correla-
tion are employed. In this work we will use the following definitions of 1D quaternion convolution
(Ell et al., 2014, Section 4.1.3):
                                                       N
                                                       X −1
                                  (hL ∗ f )[n] =              hL [i]f [n − i],                    (24)
                                                       n=0
                                                       N
                                                       X −1
                                  (f ∗ hR )[n] =              f [n − i]hR [i],                    (25)
                                                       n=0
where the difference between the two formulae is whether the convolution kernel elements multiply
the signal from the left or right. Extending to 2D quaternion convolution, two of the formulae
correspond precisely to left and right 1D convolution:
                                               N
                                               X −1 M
                                                    X −1
                         (hL ∗ f )[n, m] =                  hL [i, j]f [n − i, m − j],            (26)
                                               n=0 m=0
                                               N
                                               X −1 M
                                                    X −1
                        (f ∗ hR )[n, m] =                   f [n − i, m − j]hR [i, j],            (27)
                                               n=0 m=0


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


while a third option is available, in which convolution kernel elements multiply the signal from both
left and right (Ell et al., 2014):
                                         (hL ≺ f   hR )[n, m] =
                                NX −1 M
                                      X −1
                                           hL [i, j]f [n − i, m − j]hR [i, j].                   (28)
                                n=0 m=0
This last variant, referred to as bi-convolution (Ell et al., 2014), has been used to define extension of
standard edge detection filters Sobel, Kirsch, Prewitt for color images. A variation of bi-convolution
has also been used in Zhu et al. (2018) as part of a quaternion convolution neural network, locking
hL = hR and adding a scaling factor.
We introduce circular variants to the above formulae. Circular left convolution is written as:
                                                   N
                                                   X −1
                                  (hL ∗ f )[n] =          hL [i]N f [n − i],                            (29)
                                                    n=0

where [·]N denotes modulo − N indexing (Jain, 1989).

C.2    Q UATERNIONIC F OURIER T RANSFORM

For 1D signals we have the definition4 of the left- and right-side QFT:
                                                  N −1
                                            1     X               −1
                                 FLµ [u] = √             e−µ2πN        nu
                                                                            f [n],                      (30)
                                               N n=0
                                                  N −1
                                            1 X               −1
                                 FRµ [u] = √       f [n]e−µ2πN nu ,                                     (31)
                                             N n=0
where µ is an arbitrary pure unit quaternion that is called the axis of the transform. For 2D signals,
these formulae are generalized to the following definitions (Ell & Sangwine, 2007):
                                         M −1 N −1
                                     1   X    X           −1   −1
                    FLµ [u, v] = √                 e−µ2π(M mv+N nu) f [n, m],                           (32)
                                     M N m=0 n=0
                                         M −1 N −1
                                     1   X    X                   −1   −1
                    FRµ [u, v] = √                 f [n, m]e−µ2π(M mv+N nu) .                           (33)
                                     M N m=0 n=0
                                                    µ
We shall also employ the short-hand hand notation FX  {g} with X = {L, R} to denote the left or
                                                                                    −µ
right QFT with axis µ of a signal g. The inverse transforms will be denoted as FX      , as we can
                     µ     −µ     −µ     µ
easily confirm that FX ◦ FX = FX ◦ FX is the identity transform. Asymmetric definitions√are
                            µ
       √ and we will use FX∗ to denote a transform with a coefficient equal to 1 instead of 1/ N
also useful,
and 1/ M N .

C.3    C ONVOLUTION THEOREM IN H

In the complex domain, the convolution theorem links together the operations of convolution and the
Fourier transform in an elegant manner. For most combinations of adaptation variants of convolution
and Fourier transform in the quaternionic domain, a similar theorem is not straightforward, if at all
possible (e.g. Cheng & Kou 2019). Ell & Sangwine (2007) have proved the following formulae for
right-side convolution (we have changed equations to represent n-dimensional signals in general):
                                       √
                       FLµ {f ∗ h} =           µ
                                           N {F1L [u]HLµ [u] + F2L
                                                                µ
                                                                   [u]µ2 HL−µ [u]},                     (34)
                                       √
                        µ
                       FR {f ∗ h} =        N {FRµ [u]H1R
                                                      µ
                                                         [u] + FR−µ [u]H2R
                                                                        µ
                                                                           [u]µ2 },                     (35)
   4
     As different transforms are obtained by choosing a different axis µ, we have chosen to denote the axis
explicitly in our notation. This formulation is slightly more generic than the one proposed by Ell & Sangwine
                                                                        −µ
(2007), and we have the correspondence of F −X (their notation) to FX       (our notation).


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which by symmetry are complemented by the following formulae for left-side convolution:
                             √
              FLµ {h ∗ f } = N {H1Lµ
                                     [u, v]FLµ [u, v] + H2L
                                                         µ
                                                            [u, v]µ2 FL−µ [u, v]},                            (36)
                     µ
                                 √      µ      µ         −µ       µ
                   FR  {h ∗ f } = N {HR   [u]F1R  [u] + HR   [u]F2R [u]µ2 }.                                  (37)
On the above formulae, transforms FLµ , HR
                                         µ
                                           are decomposed as:
                               FLµ = F1L
                                      µ     µ
                                         + F2L µ2 , FRµ = F1R
                                                           µ     µ
                                                              + F2R µ2 ,
                              HLµ = H1L
                                     µ     µ
                                        + H2L       µ
                                              µ2 , HR    µ
                                                      = H1R    µ
                                                            + H2R µ2 ,
where we use symplectic dempositions (cf. section B) with respect to the basis (1, µ, µ2 , µµ2 ). Note
that µ2 is an arbitrary pure quaternion conforming to µ ⊥ µ2 .

D    R ECONSTRUCTION V ISUALIZATION OF Q UATERNIONIC D OUBLY- BLOCK
     C IRCULANT M ATRIX
In Section 4, we refer to a kernel for our experiments, which was produced using the code that
follows. We report the code in the interest of reproducibility of the result. We used the “Quaternion”
Python package (Boyle, 2018) (as well as for all implementations required for this paper):
     i m p o r t numpy a s np
     import quaternion
     # U s i n g np . q u a t e r n i o n f r o m h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . com / moble / q u a t e r n i o n
     C f i l t e r = np . z e r o s ( [ N, N] , d t y p e =np . q u a t e r n i o n )
     f o r i i n r a n g e (N ) :
       f o r j i n r a n g e (N ) :
         lm1 = np . c o s ( i )
         lm2 = np . s i n ( i )
         lm3 = np . c o s ( i + . 3 )
         lm4 = np . s i n ( i − . 2 )
         C f i l t e r [ i , j ] = np . q u a t e r n i o n ( i +lm1 / N, j +lm2 / N, i * j * lm3 , i * j * lm4 )

In Figure 2 we show an example result of clipping and reconstruction using our method (the proof-
of-concept method of Section 4 applied over a single filter) versus applying directly the QSVD
(“brute-force”) on the corresponding doubly-block circulant matrix. The test filter used is a 32 × 32
quaternionic convolution. For reference, the mean (maximum) of the singular values of the original
    √ is 3005.2 (238519.9) and the clipping threshold was set to 4000. We have used µ = (i + j +
kernel
k)/ 3 as the QFT axis, following Ell & Sangwine (2007).
Both singular values and the reconstruction result are exact using our method. The discrepancy of
point-to-point difference between our reconstruction and brute-force is in the ballpark of 10−11 units
of magnitude, at worst (cf. last row in Figure 2). In terms of time requirements, our method required
280 milliseconds to obtain an exact reconstruction, compared to ∼ 3 minutes for the brute-force
method.

E    L IPSCHITZ CONSTANT BOUNDING TESTS ON CIFAR10
We follow Sedghi et al. (2018) and test a ResNet32 architecture. In our model, 3 convolutional
blocks, each one consisted of 5 basic residual blocks, are considered, followed by a fully connected
layer. Between each block a downsampling operation is used (with a strided convolution). An initial
convolutional layer transforms the 3d image input into a 16d feature tensor.
For our case, we replaced the convolutional layers of basic residual with depthwise convolutions
(Chollet, 2017; DeMagistris et al., 2022). Between the blocks, pointwise convolutions are also
added to change the number of dimensions and thus each block can safely proceed with depthwise
only operations, using the same number of channels. Of course, these depthwise and pointwise
operations are replaced with the quaternionic alternatives. Only the first 3 × 3 convolution and the
last fully connected layer are retained as they are. This model is referred to as QResNet32-small and
has only 98k parameters. An alternative, where between each depthwise convolution of the basic


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Constraining the spectral norm using QSVD directly on the doubly-block circulant matrix
(referred to as “brute-force” in text) vs our method. From top to bottom, we see: the original kernel,
the clipped kernel using our method, the point-to-point difference between our result and the brute-
force method. From left to right, we see log-magnitudes, phases and axes of respective doubly-
block circulant matrices (cf. Section B of the Appendix, or Ell & Sangwine 2007). The brute-force
method is considerably more expensive in terms of space as well as time requirements, both by
orders of magnitude. For this 32 × 32 kernel, our method required 280 milliseconds to obtain an
exact reconstruction, while brute-force took over 2 minutes. (see text of Section 4 for more details).


residual block, an extra pointwise convolutional layer is intervened. Its functionality is to assist in
the mixing of the channels, at the cost of greatly increasing the number of parameters. Specifically,
this version, dubbed as QResNet32-large has approximately 454k parameters.
Training was performed on CIFAR10, where each model was trained for 80 epochs. Initial learning
rate was 0.01 and was subsequently dropped by /10 at 40 and 60 epochs. Clipping is performed
every 100 iterations.
We show comparisons in Table 2 and Figure 1 in Section 4 of the main text. Also, to understand how
clipping may affect the result, we report the singular values of each quaternionic layer in Figure 3,
for training the QResNet32-small architecture without clipping. For visualization purposes, each
layer is depicted by a mean value and the standard deviation of the corresponding singular values of
the layer.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Distribution of the singular values for each layers, when training a QResNet32-small
architecture. The reported values are for the final model, after 80 epochs.


We can observe the following:

      • Clipping always boosts final performance, regardless of the architecture considered.
      • The large variant is more sensitive to training without clipping.
      • The overall performance of the two architectures is very close. To this end we continue out
        experimentation with the more “interesting” case of the small version.

Next, we investigate the impact of the clipping value c. The results are summarized in Table 3. As
we can see, choosing the clipping values affect the overall performance. Specifically, choosing a
value from 0.25 to 0.5 seems to be more beneficial, while lower or higher values over-”prune” or are
too modest to provide notable impact.

             architecture       c = 0.10    c = 0.25    c = 0.50    c = 1.00   c = 2.00
           QResNet32-small        83.09       85.65       85.74       84.16      82.17

          Table 3: Impact of the clipping value on the overall performance of the model.

Another aspect that we have test is the impact of the choice of the axis µ of the QFT. This acts as
a hyperparameter, as we need QFT to compute left eigenvalues, and reconstruct the filter from the
new left eigenvalues after singular value clipping. In theory, its impact on the performance should
be minimal. Towards this, we randomly generated three different µ axes. Their test accuracy curves
are visualized in Figure 4. As we can see, clipping seems to be equally effective, regardless of our
choice of the µ axis.
Note also that the non-quaternionic equivalent, with only depthwise convolutions in the residual
blocks, is under-performing, achieving 75.41% test accuracy, even when using more parameters,
namely 151K parameters in total. We explain this interesting result as follows: Cascades of depth-
wise convolutions in R are much less expressive than their counterpart in H, because the former
represent series of convolutions over a single real-valued channel. The latter however, do comprise
a form of “channel mixing” under the hood, due to the definition of the Hamilton product. Hence,


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Test accuracy curves during the training for the QResNet32-small architecture. Four
randomly initialized µ values are considered for a clipping value of c = 0.5. Baseline without
clipping is reported as a dashed line at 82.77%.


the quaternionic depthwise layers stand as an interesting trade-off between the completely indepen-
dent convolutions of real-valued depthwise convolution, and full convolution, taking into account
correlation between all possible pairs of channels.


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P ROOFS FOR PROPOSITIONS AND COROLLARIES IN THE MAIN TEXT
Corollary 3.2.1 Transpose C T and conjugate transpose C H are also quaternionic circulant matrices,
with kernels equal to [c0 cN −1 · · · c2 c1 ]T and [c0 cN −1 · · · c2 c1 ]T respectively.
Proof: We use P̃ H = P̃ T = P̃ −1 , and P̃ N −a P̃ a = I for any a = 0..N . We then have, by using
Proposition 3.2:
                     C T = c0 P̃ N + c1 P̃ N −1 + c2 P̃ N −2 + · · · + cN −1 P̃ ,             (38)
and
                             C H = c0 P̃ N + c1 P̃ N −1 + c2 P̃ N −2 + · · · + cN −1 P̃ ,                             (39)
hence both are polynomials over P̃ , thus quaternionic circulant.
Proposition 3.3 (General properties). (7) QµN QµN = P̌ , where P̌ is a permutation matrix that maps
column n to [N − n]N .
These properties are a straightforward generalization from C; let us only add a short comment on
the derivation of (7) however. We practically need to prove that each column of QµN is perpendicular
to exactly one other column of the same matrix, and this mapping is given by n → N − n (where we
use a zero/modulo-N convention, cf. Appendix A). For columns αu and αv , we compute the result
of the required product at position (u, v) as:
                 N −1                                         N −1
                            −µ2πN −1 nu −µ2πN −1 nv                            −1
                                                                                    nu −µ2πN −1 nv +µ2πN −1 N u
                 X                                            X
      αvT αv =          e                e                =           e−µ2πN          e           e               ,
                 n=0                                            n=0

which holds since eµ2πu = 1. This is subsequently equal to
                                N −1
                                                −1
                                                     n(N −u) −µ2πN −1 nv
                                X
                                       e+µ2πN               e                 H
                                                                           = αN −u αv ,
                                n=0

which is the inner product of columns v and N − u. This will result in zero for all pairs of v, N − u
except for when v = [N −u]N (because of e.g. Proposition 3.3(2)). Hence, the required product will
have all-zero columns save for exactly one element, different for each column; this is by definition
a permutation matrix (Strang, 2019).
Proposition 3.4 Let QµN , QνN Quaternionic Fourier matrices with non-collinear axes µ, ν. We can
always find unit p ∈ H such that
                                         QµN = pQνN p̄.                                     (40)
The required quaternion p is eξθ/2 , where ξ = νµ + V (ν) · V (µ) and θ = arccos(V (µ) · V (ν)).
Proof: For any wN µ and wN ν , we can find p ∈ H such that wN µ = pwN ν p−1 . Since any pure unit
quaternions ν, µ are situated on the unit sphere {t ∈ Ri + Rj + Rk : |t| = 1}, we can obtain the one
from the other by applying a rotation about the origin. Consequently, there exists p ∈ H so that µ =
pνp−1 (Stillwell, 2008) (note that wN µ ,wN ν are unit but not necessarily pure). From there, assuming
                                                                      −1
pure unit µ and real θ we have the following steps: eµθ = epνp θ = pp−1 cosθ + pνp−1 sinθ
= p(cosθ + νsinθ)p−1 = peνθ p−1 .
It suffices to plug θ = 2πN −1 in the previous equation to conclude the required wN µ = pwN ν p−1 .
The same transform can be used for all powers of wN µ , wN ν to any exponent γ, and indeed we have
    γ    −1                                                                   γ
pwN   µp     = pwN µ p−1 pwN µ p−1 p · · · wN µ p−1 = wN ν wN ν · · · wN ν = wN ν . Since any element of
QN can be written as a power wN µ for some natural exponent γ, we can write QµN = pQνN p−1 ,
   µ                               γ

which applies the same transform on all elements simultaneously. Intuitively, this action represents
a rotation of the unitary disc where all elements of QµN are situated.
The axis of rotation is given by the cross product of the two pure unit vectors µ, ν, as it is by
definition perpendicular to the plane that µ, ν form. The product V (ν) × V (µ) is equal to νµ +
V (ν) · V (µ) as S(µ) = S(ν) = 0, hence we compute ξ = νµ + V (ν) · V (µ). Also, V (µ) · V (ν) =
|µ||ν|cos(θ) =⇒ θ = arccos(V (µ) · V (ν)).
Proposition 3.5 (Circulant and Fourier Matrices). For any C ∈ HN ×N that is circulant, and any
pure unit µ ∈ H,


                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(1) Any column k = 1..N of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ      N is an eigenvector of C. Column k
    corresponds to the k component of the vector of left eigenvalues λµ = [λµ1 λµ2 · · · λµN ]T ∈ HN .
                        th
                                         µ
    Vector λµ is equal to the right QFT FR∗ of the kernel of C.
(2) Any column k = 1..N of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ                                   H
                                                           N is an eigenvector of C . Column k
    corresponds to the k component of the vector of left eigenvalues κ = [κ1 κ2 · · · κµN ]T ∈ HN .
                        th                                               µ      µ µ
                                                              µ
    The conjugate of the vector κµ is equal to the left QFT FL∗  of the kernel of C.
                                                                                                √
where transforms denoted with an asterisk (*) refer to using a unitary coefficient instead of 1/ N :
                           N −1                                                N −1
                µ
                           X               −1                       µ
                                                                               X                    −1
               FL∗ [u] =          e−µ2πN        nu
                                                     f [n],        FR∗ [u] =          f [n]e−µ2πN        nu
                                                                                                              .   (41)
                           n=0                                                 n=0


Proof: Let αk the k th column of Q−µ
                                  N . Its product with quaternionic circulant C is computed as:
                                      PN −1                      −kn
                                                                         
                                             n=0 h[0 − n]N wN µ
                                      PN −1 h[1 − n] w−kn 
                                                             N Nµ
                           √          Pn=0
                                                                        
                                             N −1                 −kn
                                                      −
                                                                         
                             N Cαk = 
                                            n=0  h[2      n]  w
                                                             N Nµ        ,                   (42)
                                                      ..
                                                                         
                                                                        
                                                      .                 
                                        PN −1                        −kn
                                           n=0 h[N  −    1 −  n]   w
                                                                 N Nµ

where k[i]N is the ith /modulo-N element of circulant matrix kernel k. The mth element of Cαk is
then:
                                   N −1                                        m−(N −1)
                          1 X               −kn    1                             X
                                                                                              −kn
               [Cαk ]m = √       h[m − n]N wN µ = √                                    h[l]N wN µ
                           N n=0                    N                            l=m
                                  m−(N −1)                             N −1
                          1 X          kl    −km              kl     1 −km
                                                                       X
                        =√ [    h[l]N wN µ ]wN µ =     h[l]N wN µ ] √ wN µ ,
                          N l=m                    l=0
                                                                     N
                                                                                                                  (43)
where we used l = m − n and in the last form of equation 43, the term inside the brackets
 PN −1          kl                  th                                     µ
( l=0 h[l]N wN    µ ) we have the k    element of the right-side QFT FR∗      of h. (Note that this is
                                                                                   −km
the asymmetric version of the QFT, cf. Appendix C). Outside the brackets, √1N wN     µ can be identi-
             th
fied as the m element of αk , shorthanded as [αk ]m . Therefore, Cαk = λαk , so αk is an eigenvector
of C; by the previous argument, λ is equal to the k th element of the right-side QFT. The second part
of the theorem, concerning C H , is dual to the first part.
Corrolary 3.5.1. For any pure unit axis µ ∈ H, the conjugates of the eigenvalues λµ and κµ are
also left eigenvalues of C H and C respectively.
Proof: We will prove the corrolary for λµ and C H as the case of κµ and C is dual to the former one.
We have Cw = λµi w =⇒ (C − λiµ I)w = 0 given non-zero eigenvector w, hence the nullspace of
C − λiµ I is non-trivial. From this, we have rank[C − λµi I] < N =⇒ rank[(C − λµi I)]H < N
and rank[C H − λµi ] < N , where we have used the property rank(A) = rank(AH ) (Zhang, 1997,
theorem 7.3). Thus, the nullspace of C H − λµi I is nontrivial, and λµi is an eigenvalue (Note that this
proof does not link these eigenvalues to specific eigenvectors, however).
Corollary 3.5.2. For any pure unit axis µ ∈ H, the vector of left eigenvalues λµ is a flipped version
of λ−µ , where the DC component and the (N/2)th component (zero-indexed) remain in place.
Proof. We want to prove that the ith component of λµ (λµi ) is equal to the [N − i]th  N component
of λ−µ (λµN −i ), (where ordering is w.r.t. modulo-N indexing). But the λµi is a left eigenvalue that
corresponds to the ith column of the QFT matrix with axis µ as its eigenvector, and also equal to the
                                                                 PN −1                −1
ith component of the right QFT by Proposition 3.5. It is equal to n=0 f [n]e−µ2πN ni , while the
                                             N −1            −1
                           −µ
[N − i]th                      is equal to n=0 f [n]e+µ2πN n(N −i) by definition. Note however
                                           P
       N component of λ


                                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that:
        N −1                               N −1                                              N −1
                             −1                                 −1
                                                                     ni +µ2πN −1 N n                              −1
        X                                  X                                                 X
               f [n]e−µ2πN        ni
                                       =          f [n]e−µ2πN          e                 =          f [n]e+µ2πN        n(N −i)
                                                                                                                                 ,
        n=0                                n=0                                               n=0

because eµ2πn = 1 for any n ∈ Z and pure unit µ. Hence λµi = λ−µ
                                                              [N −i]N . The only components for
which i = [N − i]N are i = 0 (DC component) and i = N/2, hence for these we have λµi = λ−µ
                                                                                        i .

Proposition 3.6. A set of N left eigenvalues that correspond to the eigenvectors - columns of Q−µ
                                                                                               N
for some choice of axis µ ∈ H, uniquely defines a circulant matrix C. The kernel of C is computed
by taking the inverse right QFT of the vector of the N left eigenvalues.
Note that while the analogous proposition is known to hold true for non-quaternionic matrices and
the inverse Fourier matrix, it is not completely straightforward to show for quaternionic matrices.
For complex matrices it can be proven true by using e.g. the spectral theorem (Strang, 2019), how-
ever no such or analogous proposition is known concerning quaternionic matrices and their left
spectrum.
Proof. We shall proceed by proving the required proposition by contradiction. Let C 6= D ∈ HN ×N
be circulant matrices; all columns of Q−µ
                                       N for a choice of axis µ are eigenvectors of both C and D
due to proposition 3.5. We then have:
                       N −1                                                            N −1
                       X
                                  kl     1 −km                                         X
                                                                                                    kl     1 −km
         [Cαk ]m = [       h[l]N wN µ ] √ wN µ ,                           [Dαk ]m = [       g[l]N wN µ ] √ wN µ ,
                       l=0
                                         N                                               l=0
                                                                                                           N

for all m ∈ [1, N ], where h, g are the convolution kernels of C, D respectively, and αk corresponds
to the k th column of Q−µ
                       N . By the assumption we have set in this proof, we have that left eigenvalues
are equal for corresponding eigenvectors for either matrix, hence:
                                             N
                                             X −1                      N
                                                                       X −1
                                                           kl                        kl
                                                    h[l]N wN µ =              g[l]N wN µ,
                                              l=0                      l=0

or, written in a more compact form,
                                                      FR∗ {h} = FR∗ {g}.
However due to the invertibility of the (either left or right-side) QFT, we have h = g =⇒ C = D,
which contradicts the assumption. Hence, circulant C must be unique.
Proposition 3.7. (Eigenstructure of sums, products and scalar products of circulant matrices).
Let L, K ∈ HN ×N circulant matrices, then the following propositions hold. (Analogous results
hold for L, K doubly-block circulant).
(a) The sums L + K and products LK, KL are also circulant. Any scalar product pL or Lp where
p ∈ H also results to a circulant matrix.
(b) Let w be the ith column of the inverse QFT matrix Q−µ         µ   µ
                                                        N , and λi , κi are left eigenvalues of L, K
with respect to the shared eigenvector w. Then, w is an eigenvector of. . .
i. L + K with left eigenvalue equal to λµi + κµi .
ii. pL with left eigenvalue equal to pλµi .
                                                       −1
iii. Lp with left eigenvalue equal to λpµp
                                       i   p.
                                                     κµ µ[κµ
                                                           i ]
                                                               −1
iv. LK with left eigenvalue equal to λi i                         κµi if κµi 6= 0 and equal to 0 if κµi = 0.
v. Provided L−1 exists, λµi w(λµi )−1 is an eigenvector of L−1 with left eigenvalue equal to (λµi )−1 .
Proof: (a) For proving L + K, pL and Lp are circulant, it suffices to use their matrix polynomial
form (cf. Proposition 3.2). Then summation and scalar product are easily shown to be also matrix
polynomials w.r.t. the same permutation matrix, hence also circulant.


                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the product LK, we decompose the two matrices as linear combinations of real matrices, writing

                   LK = (Le + Li i + Lj j + Lk k)(Ke + Ki i + Kj j + Kk k),

where Le , Li , Lj , Lk , Ke , Ki , Kj , Kk ∈ RN ×N and circulant. Computation of this product results
in 16 terms, which are all produced by multiplication of a real circulant with another real circulant,
and multiplication by a quaternion imaginary or real unit. All these operations result to circulant
matrices (for the proof that the product of real circulant matrices equals a circulant matrix see e.g.
Jain 1989), as does the summation of these terms. KL is also circulant by symmetry, however not
necessarily equal to LK, unlike in the real matrix case.
(b) i. (L + K)w = Lw + Kw = λµi w + κµi w = (λµi + κµi )w. Hence w is an eigenvector of L + K
with left eigenvalue equal to λµi + κµi .
ii. (pL)w = p(Lw) = (pλµi )w. Hence w is an eigenvector of pL with left eigenvalue equal to pλµi .
iii. Let pu a unit quaternion with pu = p/||p||, assuming p 6= 0.

                      (Lp)w = ||p||(Lpu )w = ||p||Lpu wp−1
                                                        u pu = ||p||Lzpu ,                         (44)

where z = pu wp−1 u represents a rotation of w to vector z which is also an eigenvector of L; that is
                                                   −1
because the k th element of w is equal to e−ikµ2πN . With a similar manipulation as in Proposition
                                                  −p µp−1
3.4, z is a column of the inverse QFT matrix QN u u , i.e. an inverse QFT matrix with an axis
different to the original µ. Thus, due to Proposition 3.5, z is an eigenvector of the circulant L, the
                              p µp−1
left eigenvalue of which is λi u u . Continuing eq. 44, we write:

                                      p µp−1               p µp−1
                   ||p||Lzpu = ||p||λi u  u
                                               zpu = ||p||λi u u
                                                                     pu wp−1
                                                                          u pu =⇒



                                                     p µp−1
                                       (Lp)w = (λi u     u
                                                              p)w,                                 (45)

                                                                     p µp−1
hence w is an eigenvector of Lp with left eigenvalue equal to λi u       u
                                                                              p.
                       q µq −1
iv. LKw = Lκµi w = λi u u κµi w, where q = κµi , qu = q/||q|| and we used the right scalar product
result of (iii), supposing that q 6= 0. Hence w is an eigenvector of LK with left eigenvalue equal to
  q µq −1
λi u u κµi . If q = 0, we cannot use the result of (iii); the resulting eigenvalue is simply equal to 0,
since LKw = 0.
v. Lw = λµi w =⇒ Lw(λµi )−1 = λµi w(λµi )−1 =⇒ w(λµi )−1 = L−1 λµi w(λµi )−1 =⇒
L−1 λµi w(λµi )−1 = (λµi )−1 λµi w(λµi )−1 =⇒ L−1 z = (λµi )−1 z where z = λµi w(λµi )−1 .

Proposition 3.9 (Doubly Block-Circulant & Fourier Matrices).
Let R = Q−µ          −µ
            M ⊗ QN and the invertible coordinate mapping $ : k ↔ i + M j. For any C ∈
  M N ×M N
H          that is doubly block-circulant and any pure unit µ ∈ H,

(1) Any column k = 1..M N of R is an eigenvector of C. Column k corresponds to the (i, j)
    component of the matrix of left eigenvalues λµ ∈ HM ×N . Matrix λµ is equal to the right QFT
      µ
    FR∗ of the kernel of C.

(2) Any column k = 1..M N of R is an eigenvector of C H . Column k corresponds to the (i, j)
    component of the matrix of left eigenvalues κµ ∈ HM ×N . The conjugate of the matrix κµ is
                           µ
    equal to the left QFT FL∗ of the kernel of C.

Proof:


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The proof for the doubly-block circulant / 2D case is analogous the 1D case. Let αk the k th column
of R = Q−µ        −µ
         M ⊗ QN . The `
                           th
                              element of Cαk is:
                                  M −1 N −1
                              1 1 X X                           −xm −yn
                   [Cαk ]` = √ √            h[q − m, s − n]M,N wM µ wN µ
                              M N m=0 n=0
                               M −1 N −1
                               X    X                  xp   yr        1   −xq −ys
                             [             h[p, r]M,N wM µ wN µ ] √      wM µ wN µ ,
                                 p=0 r=0
                                                                      MN
                                                                                                      (46)
where we used $(`) = (q, s) and p = q − m and r = s − n. Note that wM µ and wN µ commute
between themselves because they share the same axis µ, but they do not commute with the kernel
element h.
Lemma 4.1. For any pure unit µ ∈ H and any N ∈ N, the right span of the columns of QµN is HN .
For any pure unit µ ∈ H and any M, N ∈ N, the right span of the columns of QµM ⊗ QµN is HM N .
                                   PN
Proof. Let c ∈ HN , and let x = n=1 ak ck (Le Bihan & Mars, 2004, definition 2), where ak is the
k th column of QµN . In matrix-vector notation, we have x = QµN c. But QµN is invertible for any µ, N
(Proposition 3.3), so c = Q−µ                           N
                                N x. Thus, for any x ∈ H , we can compute right linear combination
coefficients [c1 c2 · · · cN ] = c. The proof for QM ⊗ QµN is analogous.
                              T                     µ


(An analogous result holds also for the left span; it suffices to take cH = Q−µ H
                                                                             N x ).

Lemma 4.2. Let A ∈ HN be block-diagonal. The left eigenvalues of each block of A are also left
eigenvalues of A. The right eigenvalues of each block of A are also right eigenvalues of A.
Proof. For a block Aab that is situated in the submatrix of A within rows and columns a : b, take
[0 · · · 0 x 0 · · · 0]T as an eigenvector of A, where x is an eigenvector of Aab .
Proposition 4.3. Let C ∈ HN ×N be quaternionic circulant. Then the square norm ||Cx||2 , given
some x ∈ HN , can be written as cH Ξc, where c, x ∈ HN are related by a bijection, and Ξ = ξ(kC )
is a block-diagonal matrix. All blocks of Ξ are either 1 × 1 or 2 × 2, and are Hermitian. The 1 × 1
blocks are at most two for 1D convolution, and at most four for 2D convolution.
Proof. We will treat the case of 1D convolution, and note where the proof changes in a non-
                                     PN −1
trivial manner for 2D. We write x =    n=0 ak ck , as in Lemma 4.2. From there we have Cx
      PN            PN    −µ
= C n=1 ak ck = n=1 λk ak ck . Then:
                                                                    N −1 N −1
           ||Cx||2 = (Cx)H Cx = cH Q−µ                                                 −µ −µ
                                          µ
                                                                    X    X
                                       H
                                    N C CQN c =                                 cm aH
                                                                                    m λm λn an cn .   (47)
                                                                    m=0 n=0
The caveat is that while we know that am , an are unit-length pairwise orthogonal, which would have
most terms in the above sum to vanish, it appears we can’t commute the λ−µ      −µ
                                                                             m λn quaternion scalar
                                                                     −µ
terms out of the way. We can however proceeding by writing λn as a sum of a simplex and a
                                                                            k
perplex part, with respect to axis −µ (Ell & Sangwine, 2007), i.e. λn = λn + λ⊥  n (we have dropped
the axis superscript in favor of a more clear notation). Eq. 47 follows up as:
                 N −1                             N −1 X
                 X                                X                   k        k⊥   ⊥
             =          cn aH   n 2
                            n |λ | an cn +                   cm aH
                                                                 m (λm + λm )(λn + λn )an cn
                 n=0                              n=0 m6=n
                 N −1                             N −1 X
                 X                                X                   k        k⊥   ⊥
             =          cn |λn |2 ||an ||2 cn +              cm aH
                                                                 m (λm + λm )(λn + λn )an cn
                 n=0                              n=0 m6=n
                         N −1                     N −1 X
                         X                        X                   k k       ⊥   ⊥
                   =             cn |λn |2 cn +              cm aH
                                                                 m (λm λn + λm λn )an cn
                         n=0                      n=0 m6=n
                                     N −1 X
                                     X
                                                           ⊥ k     k  ⊥
                                 +              cm aH
                                                    m (λm λn + λm λn )an cn =
                                     n=0 m6=n


                                                           25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        N −1                    N −1 X
                        X
                                   n 2     2
                                                X                       k  k             ⊥      ⊥
                    =          |λ | |cn | +                  cm (λm aH             T
                                                                     m an λn + λm am an λn )cn
                        n=0                       n=0 m6=n

                                         N −1 X
                                         X                     k
                                                               ⊥       k            ⊥
                                    +               cm aH
                                                        m (λm λn + λm λn )an cn =
                                         n=0 m6=n

                     N −1                      N −1 X
                     X                         X                    k    k              H ⊥ ⊥
                 =          |λn |2 |cn |2 +                cm (λm aH              H
                                                                   m an λn + λm [an am ] λn )cn
                     n=0                       n=0 m6=n

                                   N −1 X
                                   X                   k                                ⊥
                               +               cm (λm [aTn am ]H λ⊥       T     k
                                                                  n + λm am an λn )cn .                      (48)
                                   n=0 m6=n

In the above form, the simplex parts commute with eigenvectors an , am , while the perplex parts
conjugate-commute with the same eigenvectors. The reason is that all terms of an eigenvector -
column of a Fourier matrix - share the same axis µ. For n 6= m, we have am ⊥ an because any QFT
matrix is unitary (Proposition 3.3), and am , an are different columns of a QFT matrix by assumption.
Hence the second sum in eq. 48 vanishes.
The third sum is of special interest, because for each n ∈ [0, N − 1] there will be at most one index
m = n0 over which the term will not vanish. That is because aTn am is the inner product between
an and am (i.e. where the first term is conjugated), so in effect it is a product between a QFT
column and another column of the inverse QFT (cf. Proposition 3.3). If and only if indices are n
and m = [N − n]N , we have aTn am = 1. In other cases, the term vanishes. Consequently, we have:
                                           N −1
                                           X                                    k           ⊥
                            ||Cx||2 =             |λn |2 |cn |2 + cm {λm λ⊥       k
                                                                          n + λm λn }cn ,                    (49)
                                            n=0

where we use m = [N − n]N . Also, recall that all left eigenvalues λn are w.r.t. axis −µ.
Note that, if and only if n = 0 or n = N/2 the second sum will also vanish; these are the columns
of the QFT matrix that contain only real-valued terms. For a doubly-block circulant matrix these
will be at most four by construction. To see this, we can use Proposition 3.3.7, which in effect says
that the inner product of the mth and nth column of Q will equal to 1 only for m = n = 0 or N/2.
If the number of elements N is an odd number, only the case m = n = 0 is possible. In either
case, this coincides with the number of non-zero elements in the diagonal of the permutation matrix
P̌ = QQ.
For 2D convolution and a doubly-block circulant matrix of size N 2 × N 2 5 , we obtain an analogous
result. In this case we are interested in the product (QN ⊗QN )(QN ⊗QN ). This equals to QN QN ⊗
QN QN = P̌ ⊗ P̌ . The result P̌ ⊗ P̌ is another permutation matrix, which will have at most 4 non-
zero elements in the diagonal, the exact number of which will depend to whether N is odd or even.
For the second term in eq. 49 we need m = $([N − in , N − jn ]N,N ) with (in , jn ) = $−1 (n)
instead of m = [N − n]N of the 1D case, so again we have at most one non-vanishing second term
in eq. 49 for each n ∈ [0, N − 1].
We can proceed from eq. 49 by rewriting it in the form ||Cx||2 = cH Ξ0 c, where Ξ0 ∈ HN ×N is
Hermitian. For example, for N = 6 we have:
      |λ0 |2         0                  0             0           0                 0
                                                                                           
                                                                               k        ⊥ k
      0
                  |λ1 |2               0             0           0          λ1 λ⊥5 + λ1 λ5 
                                                             k         ⊥  k
      0             0                |λ2 |2          0    λ2 λ⊥
                                                               4 + λ2 λ4            0
                                                                                           
Ξ0 =                                                                                       ,
                                                                                            
      0             0                  0           |λ3 |2        0                 0       
                                  k            ⊥ k
                                λ4 λ⊥
                                                                    2
                                                                                            
      0             0               2  +  λ 4  λ 2   0         |λ4 |               0       
                      k              ⊥ k
            0      λ5 λ⊥
                       1 + λ5 λ1                      0                     0               0       |λ5 |2
   5
       This is trivially extensible to non-square-shaped filters, i.e. M N × M N .


                                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which, by rearranging indices of coefficients, and corresponding rows and columns, we have Ξ0
which is also Hermitian. For the previous example for Ξ0 , we would have:
      |λ0 |2    0             0                    0               0               0
                                                                                          
     0       |λ3 |2          0                    0               0               0       
                                 2          k ⊥           ⊥ k                             
     0         0          |λ 1 |        λ 1  λ 5  +   λ 1  λ5     0               0       
Ξ=                     k ⊥         ⊥ k                                                    .
                                                                                          
                                                       2
     0         0    λ5 λ1 + λ5 λ1               |λ5 |             0               0       
                                                                      2      k ⊥      ⊥ k
     0         0             0                    0             |λ4 |      λ4 λ2 + λ4 λ2 
                                                                 k          ⊥ k
        0       0              0                   0           λ2 λ⊥
                                                                   4 + λ2 λ4                |λ2 |2
Furthermore, Ξ is also block-diagonal, and all of its blocks are of size 2 × 2, with the exception of at
most two (four) 1 × 1 blocks for 1D (2D) convolution. We can then write the required rearranging
of coefficients as a multiplication by a permutation matrix P (not unique, and in general 6= P̌ , P̃ ).
                      0
Hence, ||Cx||2 = c H P T Ξ0 P c0 = cH Ξc, where we have switched places for c, c0 for clarity of
notation.
Proposition 4.4. All singular values can be computed exactly as either the magnitude of a left
eigenvalue of C, or the square-root of one of the two eigenvalues of the 2 × 2 blocks of Ξ, again each
dependent on a pair of left eigenvalues of C. The maximum value of ||Cx||2 under the constraint
||x|| = 1 is given by the square of the largest right eigenvalue of Ξ = ξ(kC ).
                                                                                        H     H
Proof. The required maximum is equal to the maximum of the Rayleigh quotient x xCH xCx , which
obtains its maximum for the maximum right eigenvalue (Macı́as-Virgós et al., 2022, Proposition
3.3-3.4). Now, since c, x are related through a bijection, maximizing the Rayleigh quotient of C H C
is equivalent to maximizing the Rayleigh quotient of Ξ.
As Ξ is Hermitian, we know that all of its right eigenvalues are real-valued (and are also left eigen-
values). Due to it being block-diagonal, its right eigenvalues will be the union of the eigenvalues of
its blocks, due to Lemma 4.3. As all blocks are either 1 × 1 or 2 × 2 by Proposition 4.1, the sought
right eigenvalue will either be: a) equal to the value of the 1 × 1 block, so equal to |λn |2 , where λn
is the left eigenvalue of C that corresponds to the nth column of QFT matrix with axis µ, or b) equal
to the right eigenvalues of the 2 × 2 Hermitian matrix:
                                                        k           ⊥ k
                              "                                         #
                                      |λm |2         λm λ⊥  n + λm λn .
                                   k         ⊥ k                                                    (50)
                                λn λ⊥ m + λn λm              |λn |2
The right eigenvalues for the latter case are real-valued and can in principle be computed through
a complex adjoint mapping and the spectral theorem (Sfikas et al., 2020). (Recall that by |λn | we
denote the left eigenvalue of C, produced by taking the nth element of the right QFT with respect
to axis minus µ (cf. Proposition 3.3, Lemma 4.3).
Corollary 4.4.1. For any matrix Φ such that ΦH Φ = ξ(kC ), matrices C and Φ have the same
singular values.
Proof. We can write the change of basis in eq. 47 as Q−µ   H     µ
                                                      N C CQN , and after we combine it with a
rearraging of rows and columns encoded as a left-right multiplication by permutation matrix P , we
have
                       Ξ = P T Q−µ   H      µ
                                N C CQN P = (QN P )
                                                      µ   −1
                                                             (C H C)QµN P,                    (51)
so Ξ and C H C are similar matrices, which entails that they have the same right eigenvalues (Zhang,
1997, Section 7). The same holds for ΦH Φ and C H C, by our assumption that ΦH Φ = ξ(kC ). The
singular values of Φ are the (non-zero) right eigenvalues of ΦH Φ, and the singular values of C are
the (non-zero) right eigenvalues of C H C, which proves the corollary.


                                                  27
