Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VALUE -B IASED M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD E STIMATION
FOR M ODEL - BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING IN
D ISCOUNTED L INEAR MDP S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We consider the infinite-horizon linear mixture Markov Decision Processes
         (MDPs), where the transition probabilities of the dynamic model can be linearly
         parameterized with the help of a predefined low-dimensional feature mapping.
         While the existing regression-based approaches have been theoretically shown to
         achieve nearly-optimal regret, they are computationally rather inefficient due to
         the need for a large number of optimization runs in each time step, especially
         when the state and action spaces are large. To address this issue, we propose to
         solve linear mixture MDPs through the lens of Value-Biased Maximum Likeli-
         hood Estimation (VBMLE), which is a classic model-based exploration principle
         in the adaptive control literature for resolving the well-known closed-loop identi-
         fication problem of Maximum
                               √          Likelihood Estimation. We formally show that (i)
         VBMLE enjoys O(d  e     T ) regret, where T is the time horizon and d is the dimen-
         sion of the model parameter, and (ii) VBMLE is computationally more efficient as
         it only requires solving one optimization problem in each time step. In our regret
         analysis, we offer a generic convergence result of MLE in linear mixture MDPs
         through a novel supermartingale construct and uncover an interesting connection
         between linear mixture MDPs and online learning, which could be of independent
         interest. Finally, the simulation results show that VBMLE significantly outper-
         forms the benchmark methods in both empirical regret and computation time.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is one fundamental paradigm that learns an optimal
policy by alternating between two subroutines: estimation of the transition dynamics and planning
according to the learned dynamics model. MBRL has been extensively studied in the tabular setting
from various perspectives, including (Auer et al., 2008; Azar et al., 2017), which have been shown
to achieve either optimal regret bounds or sample complexity. Despite the above success, the con-
ventional tabular MBRL methods are known to be computationally intractable in RL problems with
large state or action spaces due to the need for direct estimation and access to the per-state transition
probability. To enable MBRL for large state and action spaces, one important recent attempt is to
study Markov decision processes with linear feature mappings (Zhou et al., 2021b), which is termed
linear mixture MDP subsequently in this paper. Specifically, linear mixture MDPs assume that
the probability of each transition can be represented by ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ ∗ ⟩, where ϕ(·|·, ·) is a known
feature function for each possible transition, and θ ∗ parametrizes the transition probabilities to be
learned. This framework can readily encompass various related formulations, such as tabular MDPs,
feature-based linear transition models (Yang & Wang, 2019), the linear combination of base models
(Modi et al., 2020), and linear value function frameworks (Zanette et al., 2020).
Based on the existing literature of linear mixture MDPs, the existing approaches could be divided
into two primary categories depending on the length of the learning horizon: episodic MDPs and
infinite-horizon discounted MDPs. In episodic MDPs, one important feature is that the environment
state could be conveniently reset to some initial state when a new episode starts. Several recent
works have explored episodic MDPs through the use of value-targeted regression techniques, e.g.,
(Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a). A more detailed survey of the related works for episodic
MDPs is deferred to Section 2. By contrast, in infinite-horizon linear mixture MDPs, due to the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


absence of the periodic restart, addressing exploration and conducting regret analysis could be even
more challenging than that in episodic MDPs. Some recent attempts tackles infinite-horizon linear
mixture MDPs by designing regression-based approaches and establishing theoretical guarantees
(Zhou et al., 2021a;b; Chen et al., 2022). However, their algorithms could suffer from high com-
putational complexity and be intractable in practice for the following reasons: (i) In the existing
regression-based approaches, in each time step, one would need to solve a constrained optimization
problem of the action-value function for each state-action pair. (ii) Moreover, in order to represent
the value function as a linear combination of the learned parameter P  vector θ, it is necessary for
those regression-based approaches to construct a vector ϕV (s, a) := s′ ∈S ϕ(s′ |s, a)V (s′ ). As a
result, the action-value function can be expressed as follows: Q(s, a) = ⟨ϕV (s, a), θ⟩. However,
constructing ϕV could be computationally intractable when dealing with a large state space. These
limitations render the regression-based approaches mentioned above rather challenging to imple-
ment and deploy in practice. Therefore, one important research question remains to be answered:
How to design an efficient model-based RL algorithm for infinite-horizon discounted linear mixture
MDPs with provable regret guarantees?
In this paper, we answer the above question affirmatively. Specifically, to address the above lim-
itations, we design a tractable approach based on the classic principle of Value-Biased Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (VBMLE) (Kumar & Lin, 1982), which has shown promising results in re-
cent developments in bandits (Hung et al., 2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023) and tabular RL (Mete et al.,
2021), and leverage the value biasing technique to enforce exploration. The major advantage of
VBMLE is that with the help of value biasing, it requires solving only one optimization problem for
learning the dynamics model parameter at each time step and thereby enjoys a significantly lower
computational
     √          complexity than the regression-based approaches. Moreover, we formally establish
Õ(d T ) regret bound based on the following novel insights: (i) We establish a convergence result
on the Maximum Likelihood Estimator for linear mixture MDPs by using a novel supermartingale
approach. (ii) Through this construct, we also find useful connections between (i) the linear mixture
MDPs and online portfolio selection problem as well as (ii) VBMLE and the Follow-the-Leader
algorithm in online learning. We highlight the main contributions as follows:

• We adapt the classic VBMLE principle to the task of learning the dynamic model for linear mix-
  ture MDPs. Our proposed algorithm addresses model-based RL for linear mixture MDPs from
  a distributional perspective, which learns the parameterized transition directly by maximum like-
  lihood estimation without resorting to regression, and guides the exploration via value biasing
  instead of using concentration inequalities.
• We establish the theoretical regret bound of VBMLE by providing a novel theorem connected
  to the confidence ellipsoid of MLE. Furthermore, we uncover an interesting connection between
  online learning and our regret analysis.
• We conduct an empirical analysis to assess both the computational complexity and empirical regret
  performance. The simulation results demonstrate that VBMLE exhibits a clear advantage in terms
  of both effectiveness in regret and computational efficiency.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

VBMLE for Multi-Armed Bandits and RL. Regarding VBMLE, various prior works have ap-
plied this method to different bandit settings and tabular MDP. Firstly, (Liu et al., 2020) focuses
on solving non-contextual bandits with exponential family reward distributions. Next, (Hung et al.,
2021) introduces two variations of VBMLE: LinRBMLE and GLM-RBMLE. These methods are
designed for solving linear contextual bandits and result in an index policy. Furthermore, (Hung &
Hsieh, 2023) leverages the representation power of neural networks and proposes NeuralRBMLE.
This approach is specifically designed for solving neural bandits, making no assumptions about the
unknown reward distribution. As for the MDP setting, (Mete et al., 2021) has adapted VBMLE to
solve tabular MDPs, where the states and actions belong to a known finite set, while (Mete et al.,
2022) analyzed the finite performance of a constrained version of VBMLE. By contrast, this paper
takes the very first step towards understanding the theoretical regret performance of VBMLE in RL
beyond the tabular settings.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Episodic MDPs with Function Approximation. Based on the class of transition dynamics models,
the episodic MDPs with function approximation could be divided into the following categories:

• Linear mixture MDPs: To tackle large MDPs, one common approach is to leverage linear mixture
  MDPs, which enables a compact model representation through feature mapping. For instance,
  from a model-free perspective, (Cai et al., 2020) proposes an optimistic variant of Proximal Pol-
  icy Optimization algorithm (OPPO) to address exploration in linear mixture MDPs. (Ayoub et al.,
  2020) addresses linear mixture MDPs by proposing UCRL-VTR, which extends the classic UCRL
  algorithm (Jaksch et al., 2010) by using the value-targeted model regression as an√optimistic ap-
  proach for constructing the confidence set. Both the above methods achieve Õ(d H 3 T ) regret
  bound, where H is the episode length , d is the feature dimension, and T is the total steps. Later,
  (Zhou et al., 2021a) provides a new tail inequality
                                                   √ and adapts the weighted ridge regression to
  UCRL-VTR to improve the regret bound Õ(dH T ). Moreover, (Yang & Wang, 2020) studies
  an interesting type of linear mixture√MDPs that are bilinear in two feature embeddings and pro-
  poses MatrixRL to achieve Õ(dH 2 T ) regret bound. More recently, (He et al., 2022)   √ proposes
  to improve OPPO with a new Bernstein-type bonus and achieve a near-optimal Õ(dH T ) regret.
• Linear MDPs: Another related but different type of linear models is the linear MDP, where the
  transition model takes the form of the inner product between a state-action feature vector and
  the vector of unknown measures over states. For instance, (Jin√et al., 2020) presents an opti-
  mistic variant of Least-Squares Value Iteration that achieves Õ( d3 H 3 T ) regret. (Wang et al.,
  2019) studies another related but more general class of MDPs with generalized linear function
  approximation
        √         and an optimistic closure assumption and presents value-based approaches with
           3
  Õ(H d T ) regret bound.
• General model classes: Recently, there are several works that address episodic MDPs under gen-
  eral function approximation, where a class of possible transition models is given to the algorithm.
  For instance, (Zhang, 2022) proposes a variant of Thompson sampling to favor models with high
  rewards for more aggressive exploration. Later, (Zhong et al., 2022) presents a new complexity
  measure, namely the generalized eluder coefficient, and proposes a variant of posterior sampling
  algorithm under a general model class.

Infinite-Horizon Discounted MDPs With Function Approximation. Without the restart capa-
bility of episodic MDPs, infinite-horizon discounted MDPs pose a unique challenge of tackling
planning and exploration in the same single trajectory. As a result, the theoretical understanding of
this setting under function approximation remains limited. For example, under linear MDPs, (Yang
& Wang, 2019) proposes a variant of Q-learning that requires Õ(d/(1 − γ)2 ϵ2 ) samples to find
an ϵ-optimal policy, where γ is the discount factor. Under the linear mixture MDPs, (Zhou et al.,
2021b) proposes the UCLK algorithm, which takes into consideration the confidence √    set of the least-
square estimator of the model parameter and establishes a regret upper bound of Õ(d T /(1 − γ)2 ).
Subsequently, (Zhou et al., 2021a) introduces an improved version of UCLK, called UCLK+ , by
incorporating the weighted ridge √regression into the original UCLK and achieves a regret bound that
matches the lower bound of Õ(d T /(1 − γ)1.5 ) established by (Zhou et al., 2021b). On the other
hand,√(Chen et al., 2022) √also provides a variant of UCLK, namely UPAC-UCLK, which achieves
Õ(d T /(1 − γ)2 ) + Õ( T /(1 − γ)3 ) regret bound along with uniform-PAC sample complexity
guarantee. However, the above UCLK-based approaches are computationally inefficient as they all
require the costly extended value iteration for each state-action pair in each policy update, and this
is already not tractable in MDPs of moderate sizes. Our work falls in this category and presents
VBMLE as a computationally efficient solution to infinite-horizon linear mixture MDPs.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Markov Decision Processes (MDP) and Linear Feature Mapping. An MDP is denoted by M :=
⟨S, A, P, R, T, µ0 ⟩, where S and A represent the state and action spaces, respectively, P is the
dynamic model, R : S × A → [0, 1] is the reward function, T is the time horizon, and µ0 is the
initial state distribution with µ0 (s) > 01 . A linear mixture MDP is defined by the following:
    1
      As there is a policy that achieves optimal value for all initial states s, or equivalently, for all initial distri-
butions µ0 , without loss of generality, it is common to take a strictly positive initial distribution.


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• There exist an unknown parameter θ ∗ ∈ Rd , and a known feature mapping ϕ(·|·, ·) :
  S × A × S → Rd , such that P (s′ |s, a) = ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ ∗ ⟩, ∀s′ , s ∈ S, a ∈ A.
           √
• ∥θ ∗ ∥2 ≤ d and ∥ϕ(s′ |s, a)∥2 ≤ L, ∀s′ , s ∈ S, a ∈ A.
Moreover, let P denote the set of parameters that correspond to the product of the simplices for each
(state, action) pair:
                   (                                                                  )
                                               X
                                                        ′
             P := θ : 0 ≤ ⟨ϕ(·|s, a), θ⟩ ≤ 1,      ⟨ϕ(s |s, a), θ⟩ = 1, ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A ,           (1)
                                                     s′ ∈S

where θ denotes the parameter of the transition dynamics model and ϕ(·|s, a) is the known feature
mapping function.
A policy π : S → ∆(A), where ∆(A) is the set of all probability distributions on A, designed to
maximize the sum of discounted reward, which is denoted by the value function:
                                                  "∞                         #
                                                   X
                  V π (s; θ) := E   ai ∼π(·|si )       γ i r(si , ai ) s0 = s .             (2)
                                      si+1 ∼⟨ϕ(·|si ,ai ). θ⟩      i=0
                                          π
Similarly, the action value function Q (s, a; θ) is defined as
                                                    "∞                               #
                                                     X
                  π                                       i
                Q (s, a; θ) := E     ai ∼π(·|si )        γ r(si , ai ) s0 = s, a0 = a .               (3)
                                   si+1 ∼⟨ϕ(·|si ,ai ). θ⟩       i=0
Moreover, we let J(π; θ) := Es∼µ0 [V ∗ (s; θ ∗ )] denote the mean reward achievable for the MDP
with parameter θ under policy π over the initial probability distribution µ0 .
Optimal Value and Regret. We then define the optimal value function to be the maximum value
obtained by a policy: V ∗ (s; θ) = maxπ V π (s; θ). In the discounted linear mixture MDP setting
(Zhou et al., 2021b), the cumulative regret R(T ) for the MDP with parameter θ ∗ is defined to be
the total difference of value function between the optimal policy and the learned policy πt , where
                                   T
                                   X
                        R(T ) :=         [V ∗ (st ; θ ∗ ) − V πt (st , θ ∗ )] ,   s1 ∼ µ0 .           (4)
                                   t=1

Based on the fundamental result that there exists a policy that achieves optimal value for all states,
we use π ∗ (θ) to denote an optimal policy with respect to a given model parameter θ as
                                         π ∗ (θ) := argmax J(π; θ).                                   (5)
                                                             π


4    VBMLE FOR L INEAR MDP S
Introduction to the VBMLE Principle. We now introduce the idea behind the classic value biasing
principle. Consider first the certainty equivalence principle (Kumar & Varaiya, 2015) employing the
straightforward Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) as
                                              (t−1                        )
                                                Y
                               θ t := argmax
                               b                    p(si+1 |, si , ai ; θ) ,                    (6)
                                          θ∈P        i=1

That is, at each time step t, the learner employs the policy πtMLE that is optimal for the current
estimate θbt . Under appropriate technical conditions, it has been shown in (Borkar & Varaiya, 1979)
that θ t converges almost surely to a random θ
     b                                          b∞ , for which
                                          b∞ ) = p(s′ |s, π MLE (s); θ ∗ ), ∀s, s′ ∈ S,
                      p(s′ |s, π MLE (s); θ                                                      (7)
                               ∞                                   ∞
       MLE
where π∞   represents the optimal policy corresponding to θ
                                                          b∞ . This convergence property is called
the closed-loop identification property; it means that asymptotically the transition probabilities re-
                                             MLE
sulting from the application of the policy π∞    are correctly estimated. An important consequence is
                                       ∗
         ∗ b                 ∗ b
that J(π (θ ∞ ); θ ∞ ) = J(π (θ ∞ ); θ ). Since π∞
                 b                                 MLE
                                                        is not necessarily optimal for θ ∗ , this implies
                                              b∞ ) ≤ J(π ∗ (θ ∗ ); θ ∗ ).
                                   J(π ∗ (v); θ                                                        (8)


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 VBMLE for Reinforcement Learning in Linear Mixture MDPs
 1: Input: α(t)
 2: for t = 1, 2, · · · do     t−1
        θV                                                     λ    2            ∗
                               P
 3:       t := argmax     θ∈P      log⟨ϕ(si+1 |si , ai ), θ⟩ + 2 ∥θ∥2 + α(t) · V   (st ; θ)  .
                               i=1
 4:     at = argmax Q∗ (st , a; θ R
                                  t)
                 a∈A
 5: end for


The idea of the Value-Biased method is to try to undo the bias in (8) by adding a bias term that favors
parameters with larger optimal total return. This leads to the principle of Value-Biased Maximum
Likelihood Estimate (VBMLE) originally proposed in the adaptive control literature by (Kumar &
Lin, 1982) as follows:
                                  ( t−1                                                 )
                                    X
              θ VBMLE
                t      := argmax         log p(si+1 |si , ai ; θ) + α(t) · J(π ∗ (θ); θ) ,          (9)
                               θ∈P      i=1

where α(t) is a positive increasing sequence that weights the bias in favor of parameters with larger
total return. VBMLE employs this biasing method to handle the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
VBMLE for Discounted Linear Mixture MDPs. In this paper, we adapt the VBMLE principle to
the RL problem in the linear mixture MDP setting. Specifically, at each step, the learner would (i)
choose the parameter estimate that maximizes the regularized log-likelihood plus the value-bias as
                          ( t−1                                                         )
                             X                              λ
            θV
             t := argmax         log⟨ϕ(si+1 |si , ai ), θ⟩ + ∥θ∥22 + α(t) · V ∗ (st ; θ) ,     (10)
                    θ∈P      i=1
                                                            2

where λ is a positive constant for regularization, and then (ii) employ an optimal policy with respect
to θ V                             ∗
     t . Notice that the term V (st ; θ) can be computed by using the standard Value Iteration pre-
sented as Algorithm 2 in Appendix. If there are multiple maximizers for (10), then one could break
the tie arbitrarily. For clarity, we also summarize the procedure of VBMLE in Algorithm 1.
Features of VBMLE for Linear Mixture MDPs. We highligh the salient features of the VBMLE
method in Algorithm 1 as follows.

• Computational Efficiency: As mentioned earlier, UCLK (Zhou et al., 2021b) suffers from high
  computational complexity as it requires computing an estimate of the model parameter for each
  state-action pair in each iteration. This renders UCLK intractable when either the state space or
  the action space is large. By contrast, the VBMLE approach, which applies value-bias to guide
  the exploration under the MLE, only requires solving one single maximization problem for the
  dynamics model parameter θ in each iteration, making it computationally efficient and superior.
  Accordingly, VBMLE could serve as a more computationally feasible algorithm for RL in linear
  mixture MDPs in practice.
• VBMLE is Parameter-Free: As shown in Algorithm 1, the only parameter required by VBMLE
  is α(t), which determines
                          √ the weight of the value bias. As will be shown in Section 5, one could
  simply choose α(t) = t to achieve the required regret bound, and moreover this simple choice
  also leads to superior empirical regret performance. As a result, VBMLE is parameter-free and
  therefore does not require any hyperparameter tuning.
• Distributional Perspective: In contrast to the existing RL methods for linear mixture MDPs (Ay-
  oub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a;b; Chen et al., 2022) that aim to learn the unknown parameter
  via regression on the value function (or termed value-targeted regression), the proposed VBMLE
  takes a distributional perspective through directly learning the whole collection of transition prob-
  abilities through value-biased maximum likelihood estimation. This perspective has also been
  adopted by the prior works on applying VBMLE to the contextual bandit problems (Hung et al.,
  2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023).

We also highlight the differences between VBMLE for RL and VBMLE for bandits in Appendix C.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1. Due to the non-concavity of VBMLE, we propose to solve VBMLE by Bayesian op-
timization (BO), which is a powerful and generic method for provably maximizing (possibly non-
concave) black-box objective functions. As a result, BO can provably find an ϵ-optimal solution to
VBMLE within finite iterations. Specifically:

• We have applied the GP-UCB algorithm, which is one classic BO algorithm and has been shown
  to provably find an ϵ-optimal solution within Õ(1/ϵ2 ) iterations under smooth (possibly non-
  concave) objective functions (Srinivas et al., 2012). Each sample taken by GP-UCB requires only
  one run of standard Value Iteration in Algorithm 2.

• To further demonstrate the compatibility of VBMLE and BO, we have extended the regret analysis
  of VBMLE to the case where only an ϵ-optimal VBMLE solution is obtained. Specifically, let H
  denote the number of samples taken by GPUCB in each maximization run of finding VBMLE.
  We show that VBMLE augmented with BO can achieve sub-linear regret as shown in Theorem
  4. By using a moderate H, one could easily recover the same regret bound as that of VBMLE
  with an exact maximizer. In our experiments, we find that choosing H = 25 is sufficient and also
  computationally efficient.

• The complexity of VBMLE with GP-UCB for finding θ V        t is to solve the standard Value Iteration
  for only H + 1 times (H is for BO, each sample requires one value iteration in our objective
  function, and another 1 for value iteration for θ V
                                                    t ). This is a clear computational advantage over
  the EVI in UCLK.

5   R EGRET A NALYSIS
In this section, we formally present the regret analysis of the VBMLE algorithm. To begin with, we
introduce the following useful notations:
                                   t−1
                                   X                              λ
                         ℓt (θ) :=     log⟨ϕ(si+1 |si , ai ), θ⟩ + ∥θ∥22                      (11)
                                   i=1
                                                                  2
                          θ MLE
                            t   := argmax ℓt (θ),                                                   (12)
                                         θ∈P
                                      t−1
                                      X
                              At :=           ϕ(si+1 |si , ai )ϕ(si+1 |si , ai )⊤ + λI.             (13)
                                      i=1

If there are multiple maximizers for (12), then one could break the tie arbitrarily.
Assumption 1. The following information for the transition probability P is known:

       • The set of zero transition P0 := {(s, a, s′ )|P (s′ |s, a) = 0, ∀s, s′ ∈ S, a ∈ A}.

       • The lower bound non-zero transition probabilities pmin := min(s,a,s′ )̸∈P0 P (s′ |s, a).

We then redefine the probability simplex based on the above assumption as follows:

                       P :=       θ pmin ≤ ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ⟩ ≤ 1, ∀(s, a, s′ ) ̸∈ P0 ;

                                     ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ⟩ = 0, ∀(s, a, s′ ) ∈ P0 ;
                                      X
                                         ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ⟩ = 1, ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A .                      (14)
                                      s′ ∈S

Remark 2. This assumption suggests that the magnitude of the gradient of the log probability for
the observed transition, denoted as ∥∇θ log ⟨ϕ(si+1 |si , ai ), θ MLE
                                                                  t   ⟩∥2 , is bounded from above. A
similar assumption is made in (Kumar & Lin, 1982; Mete et al., 2021). In some scenarios, the
knowledge of pmin may not be readily available. To address this, we introduce an alternative version
of VBMLE, termed Adaptive VBMLE, to address this issue. This variant employs the following


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adaptive constraint, resembling a probability simplex, to solve θ V  t.

                                    1
                      Pt := θ            ≤ ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ⟩ ≤ 1, ∀(s, a, s′ ) ̸∈ P0 ;
                                  log t
                                  ⟨ϕ(s′ |s, a), θ⟩ = 0, ∀(s, a, s′ ) ∈ P0 ;
                                   X
                                             ′
                                       ⟨ϕ(s |s, a), θ⟩ = 1, ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A .                                       (15)
                                             s′ ∈S
The regret bound for this variant is detailed in Theorem 3.

5.1   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF MLE IN L INEAR M IXTURE MDP S

To begin with, we highlight the main technical challenges as follows: A natural idea is to leverage
the Azuma–Hoeffding inequality on the log-likelihood ratio: ℓt (θ MLE
                                                                    t   ) − ℓt (θ ∗ ), and then find the
                    MLE                           ∗
distance between θ t and the true parameter θ . However, it is known that the stochastic process
induced by the maximum log-likelihood ratio is actually a sub-martingale (shown in Lemma 6 in
Appendix for completeness). To address these issue, we propose several novel techniques: (i) We
first propose to construct a novel super-martingale (cf. Lemma 1) to characterize the convergence
rate of the MLE in linear mixture MDPs, which could be of independent interest beyond RL prob-
lems. Interestingly, this supermartingale consists of a term that could be interpreted as the regret in
the online portfolio selection problem and thereby offers an interesting connection between linear
mixture MDPs and online learning. (ii) Built on (i), to utilize Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, we need
to carefully handle the sum of squared supermartingale differences, which do not have an explicit
uniform upper bound and require a more sophisticated argument.
To begin with, we provide several useful definitions as follows. Define the likelihood ratio as
                                  t−1
                                  Y Pr(si+1 |si , ai ; θ)
                                                                       λ    2
                       Lt (θ) :=                               · exp     ∥θ∥2 .                 (16)
                                  i=1
                                      Pr(si+1 |si , ai ; θ ∗ )         2
We proceed to construct two useful helper stochastic processes as follows: For each t ∈ N,
                                                                             t−1
                                                                             X
                                                                    ∗
                                           Xt := ℓt (θ MLE
                                                       t−1 ) − ℓt (θ ) +           zi ,                           (17)
                                                                             i=1

                                            zt := ℓt (θ MLE
                                                        t   ) − ℓt (θ MLE
                                                                      t−1 ).                                      (18)
                                                                    Qt−1
Lemma 1.       For all λ ≥ 0, the stochastic process {Lt (θ MLE
                                                            t−1 ) ·  i=1 exp(−zi )} is a martingale, i.e.,
                                     "                    t
                                                                            #                  t−1
                                                          Y                                    Y
          Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ )       Lt+1 (θ MLE
                                                 t   )·         exp(−zi ) Ft = Lt (θ MLE
                                                                                     t−1 ) ·         exp(−zi ),   (19)
                                                          i=1                                  i=1
where Ft := {s1 , a1 , · · · , st , at } denotes the causal information up to time t.
Corollary 1. For all λ ≥ 0, the stochastic process {Xt } is a supermartingale, i.e.,
                     "                                   t
                                                                 #                             t−1
                                                        X                                      X
                                   MLE             ∗                                     ∗
          E             ℓt+1 (θ t ) − ℓt+1 (θ ) −           zi Ft ≤ ℓt (θ MLE
                                                                          t−1  ) − ℓt (θ   ) −     zi .           (20)
   st+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ ∗ )
                                                                 i=1                                     i=1
This corollary can be proved by applying Jensen’s inequality to (19),
Notably, Corollary 1 offers a useful insight that a supermartingale that involves the log-likelihood
ratio could still be constructed despite that ℓt (θ MLE
                                                    t   ) − ℓt (θ ∗ ) is a submartingale. This result gen-
eralizes the classic result in (Kumar & Lin, 1982, Lemma 3) for tabular MDPs to the linear mixture
MDP setting, and is also holds for non-regularized MLE (λ = 0). To establish Theorem 1, we define
a useful quantity ∆t as
                                    t−1       t−1
                                                          ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                    X         X
                                                                         t
                              ∆t :=     zi =       log                         ,                      (21)
                                    i=1       i=1
                                                          ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                         i

where ϕi (s) := ϕ(s|si , ai ) is a shorthand for the feature vector. In the following lemma, we present
an upper bound for ∆t . Recall that ∥ϕ(s′ |s, a)∥2 ≤ L, for all s, s′ ∈ S and a ∈ A.


                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. For all λ ≥ 0, we have
                                           8d2         dλ + (t − 1)L2

                                  ∆t ≤           log                    .                          (22)
                                           p2min              d
Remark 3 (Connection between linear mixture MDPs and online learning). Through ∆t and
Lemma 2, we could build an interesting connection between MLE in linear mixture MDPs and
the Follow-the-Leader algorithm (Gaivoronski & Stella, 2000) in online learning. The connection
is two-fold: (i) MLE in linear mixture MDPs can be viewed as a variant of online portfolio se-
lection problem: We find that the MLE optimization problem in linear mixture MDPs takes the
same form as the classic online portfolio selection problem (Hazan et al., 2016). Specifically, the
feature vectors and the dynamics model parameter in linear mixture MDPs correspond to the price
vectors and the asset allocation, respectively. The main difference of the two problems lies in the
feasible set and the constraints. (ii) Iterative MLE is equivalent to Follow-the-Leader algorithm: An-
other interesting connection is that applying MLE in each time step would correspond to the classic
Follow-the-Leader algorithm (Gaivoronski & Stella, 2000). Moreover, the term ∆t in 22 could be
interpreted as the regret of the Follow-the-Leader algorithm in online learning. With that said, one
could verify that Lemma 2 is consistent with the regret quantified in (Gaivoronski & Stella, 2000).
Based on the supporting lemmas introduced above, we are ready to formally present the convergence
result of MLE in linear mixture MDPs.
Theorem 1. With probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                           37d2          dλ + tL2

                                                                         1
                        ∥θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                 t   ∥2
                                      At ≤       · log              · log ,                  (23)
                                           p2min            d            δ
The complete proof of Theorem 1 is provided in Appendix B.1, and here we provide a proof sketch:
Proof Sketch. Based on the result in Lemma 1, we can apply Azuma–Hoeffding inequality presented
in Lemma 5 to get the high probability bound of log-likelihood ratio. There are two main challenges
that need to be handled: (i) The first one is the additional term ∆t , we find a connection to the anal-
ysis of the online portfolio selection problem and use a similar approach to handle it. (ii) The other
one is Mt , which represents the cumulative difference of the super-martingale. We adopt a similar
approach by considering a stopping time to ensure that this theorem holds with high probability.

5.2   R EGRET B OUND OF VBMLE

In this subsection, we formally provide the regret bound of the proposed VBMLE algorithm.
Theorem 2. For all linear mixture
                              √      MDP M = ⟨S, A, P, R, T, µ0 ⟩, with probability at least 1 −
 1
T  −  3δ and choosing  α(t) =   t, VBMLE   in Algorithm 1 has a regret upper bound as
                                                    √           !
                                                  d T log T
                                   R(T ) = O                      .                          (24)
                                                 p4min (1 − γ)2

The complete proof of Theorem 2 is provided in Appendix B.2, and here we provide a proof sketch:
1. Similar to the analysis of the upper-confidence bound approach, which uses the concentration
   inequality to replace the term associated with an optimal policy, under VBMLE we can replace
   V ∗ (st , θ ∗ ) by applying the objective function of VBMLE.
2. Then, there are two terms that need to be handled: (i) ∥θ MLE        t   − θ ∗ ∥At and (ii) ∥θ V     ∗
                                                                                                  t − θ ∥At .
   We provide a novel theorem of the confidence ellipsoid of the maximum likelihood estimator in
   linear mixture MDPs in Theorem 1 to deal with (i).
3. In contrast to the regret analysis presented in (Hung et al., 2021), where the likelihood of an
   exponential family distribution was considered, analyzing regret in the linear mixture MDP set-
   ting is more complex due to the absence of simple closed-form expressions for both θ MLE           t   and
   θVt . Additionally,  in  this context, the bias term   is not   linear  with respect to θ, even if  we rep-
   resent it as Q∗ (st , at ; θ) = ⟨ s′ ∈S ϕ(s′ |st , at )V ∗ (st , θ), θ⟩. To address these challenges, we
                                    P
                                                                         ∗
   adopt a novel approach by completing the square of ∥θ V       t − θ ∥At and successfully overcome the
   problems mentioned above.
We also provide the regret analysis for this variant of VBMLE in Appendix D.

                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
We demonstrate the empirical performance of VBMLE in terms of both regret and computation
time in this section. we conduct experiments on a simple environment with discrete state and action
spaces. To provide a detailed understanding of how we transition from the tabular MDPs to the
linear mixture MDP setting, we have outlined the procedure in the Appendix F.1. The following
result includes a comparison between VBMLE, UCLK (Zhou et al., 2021b) and UCLK+ (Zhou
et al., 2021a), which are both well-known algorithms used in the context of infinite-horizon linear
mixture MDPs. Another baseline algorithm is PSRL (Osband et al., 2013), a popular benchmark
method for tabular RL. Details regarding the selected hyperparameters can be found in Appendix
F.2. In the following
• Empirical Regret: Figure 1 provides the empirical regret of VBMLE, UCLK, UCLK+ and PSRL
   across various sizes of linear MDPs, and the results demonstrate that the two varients, where
   VBMLE (TR) is VBMLE with trust-region constrained algorithm for solving θ V             t and VBMLE
   (BO) is VBMLE with GP-UCB for optimization, outperform the other baselines in terms of regret
   performance. In Figure 1(b), only the results of VBMLE with GP-UCB proposed in Appendix E
   and PSRL are presented, as the other approaches are intractable for the larger MDP (|S| = 100) of
   the MDP. The result shows that though PSRL has sub-linear regret in small-scale MDP (|S| = 5),
   it has linear regret due to that it does not leverage the structure of linear feature mapping. We also
   provide the standard deviation of the regret at the final step in Table G.1. VBMLE also has better
   robustness with an order of magnitude smaller standard deviation than UCLK.
• Computation Time: UCLK requires U |S||A| times of solving the constrained quadratic opti-
   mization problem per step, where U is the times of value iteration, and VBMLE with BO only
   requires once K + 1 times, where K is the time horizon for BO. Table 6 displays the computa-
   tion time per step within the same environment as depicted in Figure 1(a). It is evident that the
   computational complexity of UCLK and UCLK+ render the algorithm impractical in large MDPs.

                                               350                                                                        300
                                                         UCLK+                                                                      PSRL
                                                         UCLK                                                                       VBMLE (BO)
                   Average Cumulative Regret


                                                                                              Average Cumulative Regret


                                               300                                                                        250
                                                         PSRL
                                                         VBMLE (BO)
                                               250
                                                         VBMLE (TR)                                                       200
                                               200
                                                                                                                          150
                                               150
                                                                                                                          100
                                               100

                                                50                                                                         50

                                                 0                                                                          0
                                                     0   100    200   300     400   500                                         0   200    400   600     800   1000
                                                               Time Horizon                                                               Time Horizon

                                                     (a) |S| = 5, |A| = 4                                                  (b) |S| = 100, |A| = 4

                                                               Figure 1: Regret averaged over 10 trials.

     Table 1: Computation time per step under different sizes of linear mixture MDPs.
               |S| = 3, |A| = 2 |S| = 5, |A| = 4 |S| = 15, |A| = 4 |S| = 100, |A| = 4
 VBMLE (TR)         0.793s             2.359s               42.232s                 -
 VBMLE (BO)          2.06s             2.232s                3.999s              19.687s
   UCLK             3.135s            49.763s               ≥ 35hr                  -
   UCLK+            0.741s            20.128s               ≥ 37hr                  -


7   C ONCLUSION
We proposed a provably effective and computationally efficient algorithm for solving linear MDPs,
called
    √VBMLE. The sample  complexity of the proposed is proved to be upper bounded by
O d T log T /(p4min (1 − γ)2 ) . The proposed algorithm is different from the existing value-target
regression approach and leverages the MLE with value bias to learn the dynamic. We provide a
novel theorem to show the confidence ellipsoid of MLE and the simulation result demonstrates the
empirical performance of VBMLE.


                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24:2312–2320, 2011.
Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463–474. PMLR, 2020.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.
Vivek Borkar and P Varaiya. Adaptive control of Markov chains, I: Finite parameter set. IEEE
  Transactions on Automatic Control, 24(6):953–957, 1979.
Richard H Byrd, Robert B Schnabel, and Gerald A Shultz. A trust region algorithm for nonlinearly
  constrained optimization. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 24(5):1152–1170, 1987.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1283–1294. PMLR, 2020.
Yuanzhou Chen, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. On the sample complexity of learning infinite-
  horizon discounted linear kernel mdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  3149–3183. PMLR, 2022.
Alexei A Gaivoronski and Fabio Stella. Stochastic nonstationary optimization for finding universal
  portfolios. Annals of Operations Research, 100:165–188, 2000.
Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Opti-
  mization, 2(3-4):157–325, 2016.
Jiafan He, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Near-optimal policy optimization algorithms for
   learning adversarial linear mixture MDPs. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 4259–4280, 2022.
Yu-Heng Hung and Ping-Chun Hsieh. Reward-biased maximum likelihood estimation for neural
  contextual bandits: A distributional learning perspective. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7944–7952, 2023.
Yu-Heng Hung, Ping-Chun Hsieh, Xi Liu, and P. R. Kumar. Reward-biased maximum likelihood
  estimation for linear stochastic bandits. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 7874–7882, 2021.
Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1563–1600, 2010.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143,
  2020.
P Kumar and Woei Lin. Optimal adaptive controllers for unknown markov chains. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Automatic Control, 27(4):765–774, 1982.
PR Kumar and Pravin Varaiya. Stochastic Systems: Estimation, Identification, and Adaptive Control,
  volume 75. SIAM, 2015.
H. J. Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in the
  presence of noise. Journal of Basic Engineering, 86:97–106, 1964.
Xi Liu, Ping-Chun Hsieh, Yu Heng Hung, Anirban Bhattacharya, and P. R. Kumar. Exploration
  Through Reward Biasing: Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Stochastic Multi-
  Armed Bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6248–6258. PMLR, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Akshay Mete, Rahul Singh, Xi Liu, and P. R. Kumar. Reward biased maximum likelihood estimation
  for reinforcement learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 815–827, 2021.
Akshay Mete, Rahul Singh, and P. R. Kumar. Augmented RBMLE-UCB Approach for Adaptive
  Control of Linear Quadratic Systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Jonas Močkus. On Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization Techniques IFIP
  Technical Conference, pp. 400–404. Springer, 1975.
Aditya Modi, Nan Jiang, Ambuj Tewari, and Satinder Singh. Sample complexity of reinforcement
  learning using linearly combined model ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2010–2020. PMLR, 2020.
Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process opti-
  mization in the bandit setting: no regret and experimental design. In Proceedings of International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1015–1022, 2010.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias W Seeger. Information-theoretic
  regret bounds for gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting. IEEE transactions on infor-
  mation theory, 58(5):3250–3265, 2012.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in reinforcement
  learning with generalized linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04136, 2019.
Stephen J Wright. Coordinate descent algorithms. Mathematical programming, 151(1):3–34, 2015.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Sample-optimal parametric Q-learning using linearly additive features.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6995–7004, 2019.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels, and
  regret bound. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10746–10756, 2020.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020.
Tong Zhang. Feel-good thompson sampling for contextual bandits and reinforcement learning. SIAM
  Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 4(2):834–857, 2022.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  GEC: A unified framework for interactive decision making in MDP, POMDP, and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.01962, 2022.
Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvari. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learn-
  ing for linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4532–
  4576. PMLR, 2021a.
Dongruo Zhou, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning for dis-
  counted mdps with feature mapping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12793–12802. PMLR, 2021b.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS OF THE S UPPORTING L EMMAS
Recall that
                                       t−1
                                       Y  Pr(si+1 |si , ai ; θ)                      λ
                             Lt (θ) =                         ∗ · exp                  ∥θ∥22                     (25)
                                      i=1
                                          Pr(si+1 |si , ai ; θ )                     2
                                                                    t−1
                                                                    X
                                                        ∗
                                Xt = ℓt (θ MLE
                                           t−1 ) − ℓt (θ ) +              zi ,                                   (26)
                                                                    i=1

                                 zt = ℓt (θ MLE
                                            t   ) − ℓt (θ MLE
                                                          t−1 ),                                                 (27)
we then introduce some supporting lemmas for the proof of regret.
Lemma 3 (Lemma C.2 in (Zhou et al., 2021b), Lemma 11 in (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011)). Given
any {ϕ(st+1 |st , at )}Tt=1 ∈ Rd satisfying that ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥2 ≤ L. For all λ > 0, we have
                             T
                                                                   dλ + T L2
                            X
                                                   2
                                ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥A−1 ≤ 2d log                .                  (28)
                            t=1
                                                     t                 d

Lemma 4. ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and θ ∈ P, we have Q∗ (s, a, θ) ≤ 1−γ
                                                           1
                                                              .

Lemma 4 is a direct result of that the reward function is bounded by 1, i.e., R(·, ·) ≤ 1.
Lemma 5 (Azuma–Hoeffding Inequality). Suppose {X1 , X2 , · · · } is a martingale or super-
martingale. Then for all positive integers t and all positive reals δ, we have
                                                  r             !
                                                              1
                                Pr Xt − X0 ≥ 2Mt log               ≤ δ,                    (29)
                                                              δ
             Pt
where Mt := i=1 (Xt − Xt−1 )2 .
Lemma 6.
                                          Lt (θ MLE
                                                t   ) := max Lt (θ)                                              (30)
                                                              θ∈P

is a sub-martingale.

Proof. Given the causal information Ft , we have


 Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) max Lt+1 (θ) Ft ≥ max Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) Lt+1 (θ) Ft                       (31)
                           θ∈P               θ∈P
                                                 (                                                          )
                                                   X
                                                            ′             ∗   Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ)
                                           = max       Pr(s |st , at ; θ ) ·                        · Lt (θ)
                                             θ∈P   ′
                                                                             Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ ∗ )
                                                          s ∈S
                                                                                                                 (32)
                                                =Lt (θ MLE
                                                       t   ),                                                    (33)
                                                     ′
where (31) holds by max Lt+1 (θ) ≥ Lt+1 (θ ), and
                       θ∈P

                          θ ′ := argmax Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) Lt+1 (θ) Ft .

                                                                                                                 (34)
                                    θ∈P



Remark 4. The lemma shows that it is not able to apply Azuma–Hoeffding inequality on the max-
imum likelihood ratio. However, we can still add an additional term to construct a supermartingale:
                                                    !−1                                      !−1
                                         t
                                         Y X                                  t−1
                                                                              Y X
                                                   ′                   MLE                   ′
Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) max Lt+1 (θ) ·      ht (s )     Ft  = Lt (θ t ) ·            ht (s )
                       θ∈P
                                          i=1    s′ ∈S                                             i=1   s′ ∈S
                                                                                                                 (35)


                                                         12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                               Lt (θ)
                                 ht (s′ ) := max          · Pr(s′
                                                                  |s ,
                                                                    t ta ; θ)  .                            (36)
                                       θ∈P    Lt (θ MLE
                                                    t   )
It’s important to note that there are two primary challenges when dealing with ht (s′ ):
        • Dependency on state space size: The first challenge arises from the fact that s′ ∈S ht (s′ )
                                                                                       P
          exhibits a dependency on the size of the state space. This dependence can complicate the
          regret analysis, especially in cases where the state space is large.
        • State-dependent maximization: The second challenge is related to the maximization inside
          ht (s′ ), which is also influenced by the specific state s′ under consideration. Formally, the
          absence of a closed-form expression for this maximization makes it challenging to conduct
          a straightforward analysis.
To address the above two challenges, we then introduce a new supermartingale associate to the
likelihood ratio evaluated on the previous step’s maximum likelihood estimator.

A.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Recall that
                                                                             t−1
                                                                             X
                                                                  ∗
                                         Xt := ℓt (θ MLE
                                                     t−1 ) − ℓt (θ ) +              zi ,                    (37)
                                                                              i=1

                                    zt := ℓt (θ MLE
                                                t   ) − ℓt (θ MLE
                                                              t−1 ).                                        (38)
For ease of exposition, we restate Lemma 1 as follows.
                                                    Qt−1
Lemma. The stochastic process {Lt (θ MLE   t−1 ) ·    i=1 exp(−zi )} is a martingale, i.e.,
                                "                 t
                                                                   #              t−1
                                                Y                                 Y
                                         MLE                               MLE
         Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ ) Lt+1 (θ t ) ·
                              ∗                     exp(−zi ) Ft = Lt (θ t−1 ) ·       exp(−zi ),           (39)
                                                        i=1                                    i=1
where Ft := {s1 , a1 , · · · , st , at } denotes the causal information up to time t.

Proof. Recall the definition of likelihood ratio in (16). We have
                                        "              t
                                                                      #
                                                       Y
                                                 MLE
                Est+1 ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) Lt+1 (θ t ) ·   exp(−zi ) Ft
                                                                   i=1
                                                                                             t
                   X                                               Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ MLE ) Y
               =           Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ ∗ ) · Lt (θ MLE )·                      t
                                                                                           ·   exp(−zi ),   (40)
                                                          t
                                                                    Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ ∗ ) i=1
                   s′ ∈S
                                   t
                                   Y
               =Lt (θ MLE
                      t   )·             exp(−zi ),                                                         (41)
                                   i=1
                                   t−1
                                   Y
               =Lt (θ MLE
                      t−1 ) ·            exp(−zi ),                                                         (42)
                                   i=1

where (40) holds by the definition of the expectation, (41) holds due to θ MLE   t ∈ P and Ft -
                                            Lt (θ MLE )
measurability, and (42) holds by exp(zt ) = Lt (θMLE ) . We complete this proof.
                                                  t
                                                              t−1



A.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Recall the definition of ∆t from (21) as
                         t−1
                                   ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE

                         X                               λ
                                                 t
                                                           ∥θ MLE ∥22 − ∥θ MLE ∥22 ,

                  ∆t :=      log                 MLE
                                                       +      t            0                                (43)
                                             ⊤
                                   ϕi (si+1 ) θ i        2
                         i=1
where ϕi (s) := ϕ(s|si , ai ) is a shorthand for the feature vector. For ease of exposition, we restate
Lemma 2 as follows.


                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma. For all λ ≥ 0, we have that
                                          8d2           dλ + (t − 1)L2

                                     ∆t ≤ 2 log                                  .                       (44)
                                         pmin                  d

Proof. To begin with, we have
                             t−1
                             X                               t−1
                                                             X
                  ∆t+1 =           log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                     t+1 −         log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                                     i
                             i=1                             i=1

                                 λ                               ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                               t+1
                                   ∥θ MLE  2      MLE 2

                             +            ∥
                                      t+1 2  − ∥θ 0  ∥ 2   + log                                         (45)
                                 2                               ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                               t
                             t−1
                             X                               t−1
                                                             X
                         ≤         log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                     t   −         log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                                     i
                             i=1                             i=1

                                 λ                               ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                               t+1
                                   ∥θ MLE ∥22 − ∥θ MLE ∥22 + log

                             +        t            0                           MLE
                                                                                                         (46)
                                 2                                         ⊤
                                                                 ϕt (st+1 ) θ t
                             t−1
                             X                               t−1
                                                             X
                         ≤         log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                     t   −         log ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                                     i
                             i=1                             i=1

                               λ                         ⟨ϕt (st+1 ), θ MLE     MLE
                                                                        t+1 − θ t   ⟩
                             +   ∥θ MLE
                                    t   ∥2
                                         2 − ∥θ MLE 2
                                                0  ∥ 2  +                   MLE
                                                                                                         (47)
                               2                                         ⊤
                                                              ϕt (st+1 ) θ t
                                          ϕt (st+1 )
                         ≤∆t +                                   · ∥θ MLE     MLE
                                                                      t+1 − θ t   ∥A ,                   (48)
                                      ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                    t
                                                          A−1

where (46) holds by θ MLE
                        t      = argmaxθ∈P ℓt (θ), (47) holds by the fact that log(x + 1) ≤ x,
and (48) holds by Cauchy–Schwarz inequality under any positive definite matrix A. To handle
∥θ MLE     MLE
   t+1 − θ t   ∥A , we start from the fact that θ MLE
                                                  t+1 = argmaxθ∈P ℓt+1 (θ), which leads to the fol-
lowing inequality:
  0 ≤ℓt+1 (θ MLE             MLE
             t+1 ) − ℓt+1 (θ t   )                                                                       (49)
                MLE ⊤                                                       1
    =(θ MLE        ) ∇θ ℓt (θ) + log ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ                         − ∥θ MLE − θ MLE ∥2At+1 (θ′ ) (50)

        t+1 − θ t                                                θ=θ MLE
                                                                     t      2 t+1       t            t+1

            ϕt (st+1 )⊤                     1
    ≤                     (θ MLE     MLE
                             t+1 − θ t   ) − ∥θ MLE − θ MLE ∥2At+1 (θ′ ) ,                               (51)
                   ⊤
        ϕt (st+1 ) θ tMLE                   2 t+1       t            t+1


where (50) holds by Taylor’s theorem and At+1 (θ ′t+1 ) := −∇2θ ℓt+1 (θ)|θ=θ′t+1 (θ ′t+1 is some
convex combination between θ MLE         MLE
                               t+1 and θ t    ), and (51) holds due to the necessary condition of
optimality for constrained problem as ∇θ ℓt (θ)|⊤θ=θ MLE
                                                         (θ MLE     MLE
                                                            t+1 − θ t   ) ≤ 0. Then, by reordering
                                                     t
(51) and applying Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we have
                    1 MLE                                   ϕt (st+1 )
                      ∥θ t+1 − θ MLE
                                 t   ∥At+1 (θ′t+1 ) ≤ ∥                   ∥A−1 (θ′ ) .                   (52)
                    2                                   ϕt (st+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                                      t
                                                                            t+1  t+1


By plugging A = At+1 (θ ′t+1 ) into (48) as well as combining (48) and (52), we have
                                                 ϕt (st+1 )     2
                              ∆t+1 ≤∆t + 2                 MLE A−1 (θ ′ )
                                                                          ,                              (53)
                                                       ⊤
                                             ϕt (st+1 ) θ t       t+1 t+1

                                            2
                                      ≤∆t + 2 · ∥ϕt (st+1 )∥2A−1 ,                                       (54)
                                           pmin               t

                                               ′
where (54) holds by Assumption 1 and A−1                −1     −1
                                        t+1 (θ t+1 ) ⪯ At+1 ⪯ At   given the definition in (13).
Then, by applying Lemma 3 to (54), we have
                                   8d2        dλ + tL2

                         ∆t+1 ≤ 2 log                    , ∀t ∈ N.                          (55)
                                   pmin            d



                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      P ROOFS OF THE M AIN T HEOREMS

B.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

For ease of exposition, we restate Theorem 1 as follows.
Theorem. At each time t, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have

                                                      ∥θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                                               t   ∥2At ≤ βt ,                                       (56)

                       2

                                   dλ+tL2
where βt := 37d
            p2
                · log                d          · log 1δ .
                  min


Proof. By Corollary 1 and Azuma–Hoeffding inequality in Lemma 5, we have

                                                                   t            r               !
                                                                   X                     1
                           Pr ℓt+1 (θ MLE
                                      t   ) − ℓt+1 (θ ∗ ) −              zi ≥    2Mt log            ≤ δ,             (57)
                                                                   i=1
                                                                                         δ

                  Pt                                                   2
where Mt :=             i=1   log Li+1 (θ MLE
                                          i   ) − log Li (θ MLE
                                                            i−1 ) − zi .


• Regarding ℓt+1 (θ MLE
                    t   ) − ℓt+1 (θ ∗ ), we have

                                                                            ϕ(st+1 |st , at )⊤ θ MLE
        ℓt+1 (θ MLE ) − ℓt+1 (θ ∗ ) = ℓt (θ MLE ) − ℓt (θ ∗ ) + log                              t
                                                                                                                     (58)
                t                           t
                                                                             ϕ(st+1 |st , at )⊤ θ ∗
                                         1 MLE                                ϕ(st+1 |st , at )⊤ θ MLE
                                        ≥  ∥θ t − θ ∗ ∥2−∇2 ℓt (θ)|θ=θ′ + log                      t
                                                                                                                     (59)
                                         2                  θ                  ϕ(st+1 |st , at )⊤ θ ∗
                                         1                       1
                                        ≥ ∥θ MLE − θ ∗ ∥2At −       ,                                                (60)
                                         2 t                   pmin

    where (59) holds by Taylor’s theorem, the necessary condition of optimality for constrained prob-
    lems ∇θ ℓt (θ)|⊤
                   θ=θ MLE
                           (θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                    t   ) ≤ 0, and θ ′ is some convex combination of θ MLE
                                                                                       t   and θ ∗ , and
                       t
    (60) holds by At ⪯ −∇2θ ℓt (θ)|θ=θ′ , θ ∗ ∈ P and Assumption 1.
        Pt
• For       i=1 zi , denoting ϕt (s) := ϕ(s|st , at ), we have

     t
                                                                                 !
     X                     Lt (θ MLE
                                 t   ) Lt−1 (θ MLE
                                               t−1 )           L1 (θ MLE
                                                                     1   )
            zi = log             MLE
                                      ·        MLE
                                                     · · · · ·       MLE
                                                                                                                     (61)
      i=1
                           Lt (θ t−1 ) Lt−1 (θ t−2 )           L1 (θ 0 )
                                                                                    !
                              ϕt−1 (st )⊤ θ MLE ·ϕt−2 (st−1 )⊤ θ MLE ····                   λ
                                            t                    t
                                                                                              ∥θ MLE ∥22 − ∥θ MLE ∥22 (62)

                 = log                      MLE                  MLE
                                                                                        +        t            0
                                        ⊤                    ⊤
                              ϕt−1 (st ) θ t−1 ·ϕt−2 (st−1 ) θ t−2 · · · ·                  2
                     t−1
                     X  ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE   λ
                                      t
                                                 ∥θ MLE ∥22 − ∥θ MLE ∥22

                 =          log       MLE
                                          +         t            0                                                   (63)
                                  ⊤
                        ϕi (si+1 ) θ i       2
                  i=1
                     2                    2

                   8d       dλ + (t − 1)L
                 ≤ 2 log                       ,                                                                     (64)
                  pmin             d

    where (64) holds by Lemma 2.


                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• For Mt , we have
                                    t
                                    X                                                   2
                           Mt =             log Li+1 (θ MLE
                                                        i   ) − log Li (θ MLE
                                                                          i−1 ) − zi             (65)
                                    i=1
                                    t
                                                                     !2
                                    X            ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ MLE
                                                               i
                              =              log                                                 (66)
                                    i=1
                                                  ϕi (si+1 )⊤ θ ∗
                                     t
                                1 X
                              ≤ 2       ∥ϕi (si+1 )∥2A−1 · ∥θ MLE
                                                              i   − θ ∗ ∥2Ai                     (67)
                               pmin i=1               i



                                maxi≤t ∥θ MLE
                                          i    − θ ∗ ∥2Ai X  t
                              ≤                                ∥ϕi (si+1 )∥2A−1                  (68)
                                         p2min             i=1
                                                                             i


                                                                       dλ + tL2

                                                 ∗ 2      2d
                              ≤ max∥θ MLE
                                      i     −  θ  ∥ Ai ·       · log              ,              (69)
                                i≤t                      p2min             d
  where (67) holds by Assumption 1 and Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, and (69) holds by Lemma 3.

Then, combining (60), (64) and (69) into (57), for all t, we have
                                     8d2         dλ + tL2

                    ∗ 2       1
         ∥θ MLE
            t   − θ   ∥At ≤       +        log
                             pmin    p2min           d
                                                        s
                                                                         dλ + tL2

                                        MLE      ∗          4d                            1
                             + max∥θ i − θ ∥Ai ·                 · log              · log        (70)
                                 i≤t                       p2min            d             δ

holds with probability at least 1 − δ. Letting kt := argmaxi≤t ∥θ MLE
                                                                    i   − θ ∗ ∥Ai ≤ t and denoting the
following indicator functions:
                                                  37d2          dλ + tL2

                                                                                 1
                  J := 1 ∥θ MLE t   −  θ ∗ 2
                                          ∥At  ≥        · log              · log                  (71)
                                                  p2min            d             δ
                  Di := 1{kt = i}, ∀i ≤ t,                                                        (72)
Then, by (70) and the definition of kt , we have
            ∥θ MLE
               t   − θ ∗ ∥2At ≤ ∥θ MLE     ∗ 2
                                   kt − θ ∥Akt                                                   (73)
                                         8d2          dλ + kt L2

                                 1
                              ≤      + 2 log
                                pmin     pmin             d
                                                         s
                                                                         dλ + kt L2

                                                ∗           4d                              1
                                + ∥θ MLE
                                      kt   −  θ   ∥Akt ·         · log                · log      (74)
                                                           p2min             d              δ
holds with probability at least 1 − δ, which implies
                                         37d2          dλ + tL2

                                 ∗ 2                                   1
                     ∥θ MLE
                        t    − θ  ∥At  ≤   2   · log              · log := βt .         (75)
                                         pmin             d            δ
                Pt
By the fact that i=1 Pr(Di = 1) = 1 and Pr(J|Di = 1) ≤ δ, ∀i ∈ [t] shown above, we have
                                              t
                                              X
                              Pr(J) =               Pr(Di = 1)Pr(J|Di = 1) ≤ δ.                  (76)
                                              i=1

We complete the proof.
Lemma. At each time t, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                         ∇θ ℓt (θ)|⊤          MLE
                                                   θ=θ MLE (θ t   − θ ∗ ) ≤ βt′ ,                (77)
                                                        t

                 2
                                   2

where βt′ := 22d
             p2
                 log       dλ+tL
                             d           · max{1, log 1δ }.
               min


                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. This lemma can be proved by the same argument as Theorem 1. By the fact that
ℓt+1 (θ MLE
        t   ) − ℓt+1 (θ ∗ ) ≥ ∇θ ℓt (θ)|⊤
                                        θ=θ MLE
                                                (θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                                         t
                                                                   1
                                                             ) − pmin , (57), (64), and (69), we also have
                                            t


                                                8d2        dλ + kt L2

              ⊤         MLE     ∗       1
   ∇θ ℓt (θ)|θ=θMLE (θ t − θ ) ≤            + 2 log
                  t                   pmin     pmin             dλ
                                                               s
                                                                                 dλ + kt L2

                                            MLE       ∗            4d                               1
                                       + ∥θ kt − θ ∥Akt ·          2     · log                · log     (78)
                                                                  pmin               d              δ
                                      22d2          dλ + tL2

                                                                                  1
                                     ≤ 2 log                     · max{1, log } := βt′ ,                (79)
                                       pmin             d                         δ
where (79) holds by plugging (75) into (78).

B.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Recalling that
                                      37d2           dλ + tL2

                                                                       1
                                βt :=        · log               · log                                    (80)
                                       p2min             d             δ
                                          2                2

                                     22d           dλ + tL                 1
                                βt′ = 2 log                    · max{1, log },                            (81)
                                      pmin             d                   δ
we then state the detailed form of the regret upper bound.
Theorem. For all linear kernel MDP M = ⟨S, A, P, R, T, µ0 ⟩, with probability at least 1 − T1 − δ,
VBMLE, proposed in Algorithm 1, has regret upper bound satisfies that
                 T
                 X
      R(T ) =          (V ∗ (st , θ ∗ ) − V πt (st ; θ ∗ ))
                 t=1
                             X    T                r
                      βT              1       4γ           1
           ≤                + βT′
                               ·          +          T log
                     2p2min      t=1
                                     α(t) 1 − γ            δ
                              r                √               s                        !
                                                                             dλ + T L2

                      2γ                1         βT γ
             +                    T log +                   1 + T · 2d log
                pmin (1 − γ)2           δ   pmin (1 − γ)2                        d
                                            2

                2d · α(T )          dλ + T L
             +             · log                .                                         (82)
                 (1 − γ)                d
                   √                           √
By choosing α(t) = t, we have R(T ) = O(d T log T /(p4min (1 − γ)2 )).

Proof. By the definition of the cumulative regret in (4), we have
                                  T
                                  X
                       R(T ) =          (V ∗ (st , θ ∗ ) − V πt (st ; θ ∗ ))                              (83)
                                  t=1
                                  T
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                 ∗
                                  X                                             ℓt (θ V
                                                                                      t ) − ℓt (θ )
                              ≤           V   ∗
                                                  (st , θ V
                                                          t)−V
                                                               πt
                                                                  (st ; θ ∗ ) +                           (84)
                                  t=1
                                                                                       α(t)
                                                  T
                                                  X ℓt (θ V ) − ℓt (θ ∗ )
                              =R′ (T ) +                    t
                                                                                                          (85)
                                                  t=1
                                                                α(t)

where (84) holds due to the following inequality:
                                                ∗                   ∗         ∗       ∗
                               ℓt (θ V                   V
                                     t ) + α(t)V (st ; θ t ) ≥ ℓt (θ ) + α(t)V (st ; θ )                  (86)
                                                                                        ∗
                                                                       ℓt (θ V
                                                                             t ) − ℓt (θ )
                         =⇒ V ∗ (st ; θ ∗ ) ≤ V ∗ (st ; θ V
                                                          t)+                                ,            (87)
                                                                               α(t)


                                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                         PT                                                                 PT
and (85) holds by R′ (T ) :=                   t=1 (V
                                                         ∗
                                                             (st , θ V
                                                                     t) − V
                                                                            πt
                                                                               (st ; θ ∗ )). For the term               V
                                                                                                             t=1 (ℓt (θ t ) −
ℓt (θ ∗ ))/α(t), we have



    T                                T                                         T
    X ℓt (θ V ) − ℓt (θ ∗ )
              t
                                     X ℓt (θ V ) − ℓt (θ MLE )
                                                     t            t
                                                                               X ℓt (θ MLE ) − ℓt (θ ∗ )
                                                                                        t
                                 =                                         +                                            (88)
    t=1
                  α(t)               t=1
                                                         α(t)                  t=1
                                                                                            α(t)
                                         T                            T
                                         X1                          X     1
                                 ≤−              V     MLE 2
                                              ∥θ t − θ t ∥At (θ′ ) +           ∥θ MLE
                                                                                  t   − θ ∗ ∥2At (θ′′ )
                                    t=1
                                        2α(t)                        t=1
                                                                         2α(t)
                                         T ∇ ℓ (θ)|⊤
                                         X  θ t    θ=θ MLE
                                                           (θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                                                    t   )
                                     −                                t
                                                                                                                        (89)
                                         t=1
                                                                   α(t)
                                     T
                                     X       1                        XT ∇ ℓ (θ)|⊤
                                                                          θ t    θ=θ MLE
                                                                                         (θ ∗ − θ MLE
                                                                                                  t   )
                                                       MLE     ∗ 2
                                 ≤         2        ∥θ t   − θ  ∥At −                t


                                     t=1
                                         2pmin α(t)                   t=1
                                                                                   α(t)
                                         T
                                         X   1
                                     −            ∥θ V
                                                     t − θt
                                                            MLE 2
                                                               ∥At                                                      (90)
                                      t=1
                                           2α(t)
                                                     X   T          T
                                       βT        ′           1     X     1
                                 ≤          +  β T    ·          −           ∥θ V    MLE 2
                                                                                t − θt  ∥At (θ′ ) ,                     (91)
                                     2p2min             t=1
                                                            α(t)   t=1
                                                                       2α(t)



where (89) holds by applying Taylor’s theorem with θ ′ ∈ (θ V      MLE
                                                              t , θt    ), θ ′′ ∈ (θ MLE
                                                                                     t   , θ ∗ ), and the fact
that ∇θ ℓt (θ)|⊤
               θ=θ MLE
                       (θ V    MLE
                          t − θt   ) ≤ 0, (90) holds due to −p2min ∇2θ ℓt (θ) ⪯ At ⪯ −∇2θ ℓt (θ), ∀ θ ∈
                   t
                                                  PT
P, and (91) holds with probability at least 1 − t=1 T12 by (75), (77), and replacing δ with T12 in
βT and βT′ , Lemma 3, and Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. Then, we have



            T h
            X                                                i
R′ (T ) =           V ∗ (st , θ V
                                t)−V
                                     πt
                                        (st ; θ ∗ )                                                                     (92)
            t=1
             T
             X +1 h                                                                                    i
                                                                                                   ∗
        =γ            Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θVt ) [V ∗ (s′ , θ V
                                                           t )] − E ′               ∗
                                                                   s ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ ) [V πt ′
                                                                                            (s , θ   )]                 (93)
              t=2
             T
             X +1
        =γ            Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) [V ∗ (s′ , θ V
                                                          t)−V   (s , θ ∗ )] − V ∗ (st+1 , θ V
                                                               πt ′
                                                                                             t)−V
                                                                                                  πt
                                                                                                     (st+1 , θ ∗ )
              t=2     |                                               {z                                           }
                                                                                :=B1

            + Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θVt ) [V   ∗     ′
                                               (s , θ V
                                                      t )]−V
                                                             πt
                                                                (st+1 , θ ∗ )
              |                                 {z                               }
                                               :=B2

            −Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ ) [V ∗ (s′ , θ V     ∗          V
                                                 t )]+V (st+1 , θ t )                                                   (94)
            |                           {z                          }
                                         :=B3
                    r
             4γ                 1
        ≤               T log     + B2                                                                                  (95)
            1−γ                 δ


                                                                                              PT 2
where (93) holds by πt = argmaxπ V π (st , θ V
                                             t ), and (95) holds with probability at least 1−  t=1 t2
by applying Azuma Hoeffding inequality in Lemma 5 on B1 and B3 , which are martingale difference


                                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sequences. For B2 , we have


      T
      X +1 h                                                               i
  γ          Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θVt ) [V ∗ (s′ , θ V
                                                  t )] − V
                                                           πt
                                                              (st+1 , θ ∗ )
      t=2
      T +1
             "                       "                                #                    #
      X                           Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ V
                                                     t) ∗ ′        V       πt          ∗
=γ       Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ )                           V (s , θ t ) − V (st+1 , θ )                              (96)
   t=2
                                   Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ ∗ )
   T +1
        "                        "                                    #                                           #
   X                               Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ V
                                                      t) ∗ ′        V    Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V
                                                                                              t) ∗            V
=γ        Es′ ∼Pr(·|st ,at ;θ∗ )                          V (s , θ t ) −                          V (st+1 , θ t )
    t=2
                                   Pr(s′ |st , at ; θ ∗ )                Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ∗ )
 |                                                          {z                                                    }
                                                             :=B4
         T +1
                 "                                                        #
         X    Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V
                                   t) ∗            V        πt          ∗
  +γ                                   V (st+1 , θ t ) − V (st+1 , θ )                              (97)
        t=2
              Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ∗ )
                                    T  +1
                                          "                              !                #
            ′         2γ            X        Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V
                                                                  t)         ∗        V
=B4 + γR (T ) +              +γ                                       − 1 V (st+1 , θ t )           (98)
                    1−γ              t=2
                                             Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ∗ )
               r                   T +1
                                         "                              !               #
       2γ               1          X        Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V
                                                                 t)         ∗       V       ′      2γ
≤                 T log + γ                                      ∗ − 1 V (st+1 , θ t ) +γR (T ) +
  pmin (1 − γ)          δ          t=2
                                            Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ )                                1−γ
                                |                             {z                        }
                                                                     :=B5
                                                                                                                  (99)


where (96) holds by importance sampling, (97) holds by adding and subtracting
                                             ∗
Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V                             ∗          V
                     t )/Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ) · V (st+1 , θ t ), (98) holds by Lemma 4, and (99) holds with
probability at least 1 − δ by applying Azuma-Hoeffding inequality in Lemma 5 on B4 . Then, for
the term B5 , we have


                      T +1
                             "                               !                #
                      X          Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ V
                                                      t)       ∗          V
         B5 =γ                                            − 1 V (st+1 , θ t )                                    (100)
                      t=2
                                 Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ∗ )
                                 T
                         γ      X
                                                                ∗           γ
                 ≤                  |⟨ϕ(st+1 |st , at ), θ V
                                                           t − θ ⟩| +                                            (101)
                   pmin (1 − γ) t=1                                   pmin (1 − γ)
                                   T
                           γ      X
                 ≤                    ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥A−1 · ∥θ V    MLE
                                                                  t − θt   ∥At
                     pmin (1 − γ) t=1                     t


                                       T
                               γ      X                                                     γ
                     +                    ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥A−1 · ∥θ MLE
                                                                      t   − θ ∗ ∥At +                            (102)
                         pmin (1 − γ) t=1                     t                       pmin (1 − γ)
                                   T
                           γ       X
                 ≤                    ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥A−1 · ∥θ V    MLE
                                                                  t − θt   ∥At
                     pmin (1 − γ) t=1                     t


                           √               s                             !
                                                            dλ + T L2

                              βT γ
                     +                 1 + T · 2d log                                                            (103)
                        pmin (1 − γ)                             d



where (101) holds by pmin ≤ mint≤T Pr(st+1 |st , at ; θ ∗ ), which is defined in Assumption 1, (102)
holds by Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and triangle inequality, and (103) holds by Theorem 1 with
probability at least 1 − T1 by replacing δ with T12 in βT and Lemma 3. Combining the final term in


                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(91) and (103), we have
          T
        X           1                             γ
              −        ∥θ V − θ MLE 2
                                    ∥    +                ∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥  −1 ∥θ
                                                                                     V
                                                                                       − θ MLE
                                                                                               ∥A
         t=1
                  2α(t) t       t     At
                                           pmin (1 − γ)                       At     t     t      t


                          2 XT
                 γ
      ≤                          α(t)∥ϕ(st+1 |st , at )∥2A−1                                          (104)
           4pmin (1 − γ)    t=1
                                                          t


                         dλ + T L2

      =α(T ) · 2d log                  ,                                                              (105)
                             d
                                                                                                    √
where (104) holds by completing the square, and (105) holds by Lemma 3. Letting α(t) = t and
combining (85), (91), (95), (99), (103), and (105), we complete the proof.

C    D IFFERENCES B ETWEEN VBMLE FOR RL AND VBMLE FOR BANDITS
Compared to the existing works on VBMLE for bandits (Hung et al., 2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023),
VBMLE for RL presents its own salient challenges:

• Non-Concave Objective Function of VBMLE for Linear Mixture MDPs: In the context of
  bandits, VBMLE learns by maximizing the log-likelihood of observed rewards with a bias term
  that depends on the maximum achievable reward. As the parametric form of the reward distribu-
  tions is typically unknown in the bandit setting, (Hung et al., 2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023) rely on a
  surrogate likelihood function (typically belongs to an exponential family) to estimate the unknown
  reward distributions and incorporates a reward bias by adding the immediate maximum reward.
  As a result, the resulting objective function still remains a concave function such that its maxi-
  mizer either enjoys a closed-form expression or could be solved efficiently by a gradient-based
  method. By contrast, VBMLE for RL manages to optimize the log-likelihood with the value bias,
  which ends up as a non-concave function. To address this issue, we take the following approach:
  (i) For the theoretical regret analysis, we consider an oracle that returns the maximizer of the
  constrained optimization problem induced by VBMLE. (ii) For the practical implementation, we
  could incorporate the value iteration into the optimization subroutine and use a gradient-based
  method to numerically find an approximate maximizer of VBMLE.
• Non-Index-Type Policies: Prior works on VBMLE for bandits (Liu et al., 2020; Hung et al.,
  2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023) could convert the original VBMLE into an index-type policy by using
  arm-specific estimators. This conversion also facilitates the regret analysis in (Liu et al., 2020;
  Hung et al., 2021; Hung & Hsieh, 2023). However, this approach is not applicable in RL for
  linear mixture MDPs since the action and state spaces could typically be very large in practice.
  As a result, we are not allowed to reuse a similar analytical framework to characterize the regret
  of VBMLE in linear mixture MDPs. To address this, we leverage a supermartingale approach and
  use an induction argument to establish the regret bound, as will be shown in Section 5.



D    R EGRET A NALYSIS FOR A DAPTIVE VBMLE
Theorem 3. For all linear mixture
                            √      MDP M = ⟨S, A, P, R, T, µ0 ⟩, with probability at least 1 −
1
T − 3δ and choosing α(t) =    t, VBMLE   with
                         ( t−1                                                      )
            V
                           X                               λ   2           ∗
          θ t := argmax         log⟨ϕ(si+1 |si , ai ), θ⟩ + ∥θ∥2 + α(t) · V (st ; θ) ,   (106)
                   θ∈Pt    i=1
                                                           2
and Pt is defined in (15), has a regret upper bound that satisfies
                                              √                     !
                                             d T (log T )5       T0
                               R(T ) = O                   +          ,                              (107)
                                               (1 − γ)2        1−γ

where T0 := exp( p1min ).


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The proof closely resembles that of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 by replacing pmin with log1 t .
We highlight the distinctions in Theorem 1 as follows:

                                                                                 dλ+(t−1)L2
       • In Lemma 2, the upper bound of ∆t is 8d2 (log t)2 log                        d           due to
                  ⊤
         ϕt (st+1 )   θ MLE
                        t   ≥ log1 t , ∀t ∈ [T0 , T ] in (53).
                         1
       • The final term pmin in (60) becomes log t, ∀t ∈ [T0 , T ].

                                                                                           dλ+tL2
       • For Mt , the RHS in (69) becomes maxi≤t ∥θ MLE
                                                    i   − θ ∗ ∥2Ai · 2d(log t)2 log          d          due
                      ⊤    ∗
         to ϕi (si+1 ) θ       ≥ log1 t .

Then, we have
                                                    dλ + tL2

                                                                     1
                       βt = 37d2 · (log t)2 · log              · log                                (108)
                                                       d             δ
                                                           2

                                                    dλ + tL                1
                      βt′ = 22d2 · (log t)2 · log              · max{1, log }                       (109)
                                                       d                   δ
We also highlight the distinctions in Theorem 2 as follows:

       • The initial steps T0 are chosen such that log1T0 ≤ pmin . The cumulative regret before T0 is
                         T0
         equivalent to 1−γ  according to Lemma 4.

       • For the remain cumulative regret, we have − (log1 t)2 ∇2θ ℓt (θ) ⪯ At ⪯ −∇2θ ℓt (θ), ∀ θ ∈ Pt
         applied in (90). Therefore, we have
                                               √                          1
                                                                              !
                                             d T (log T )5        exp( pmin )
                                R(T ) = O                      +                .                (110)
                                                (1 − γ)2             1−γ


E     BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION FOR VBMLE
In this section, we present another approach for addressing the non-concave optimization problem
outlined in (10). While we can employ a gradient-based method to identify a θ that achieves a
local maximum in (10), the complexity of such approaches, such as the Trust-Region Constrained
Algorithm Byrd et al. (1987) and Coordinate Descent Algorithm Wright (2015), are typically high
due to the growth in the number of constraints, which scales in the order of |S|2 . This complexity
makes it challenging to tackle large-scale (|S| ≥ 100) linear mixture MDPs using VBMLE and
other baseline algorithms like Zhou et al. (2021a;b). To find the maximizer of a black-box function
f with sample efficiency, Bayesian optimization (BO) leverages the Gaussian process (GP) prior to
parameterize each point in the domain D ⊂ Rd into a mean function and a covariance function. For
choosing a next sample, such BO approaches like EI Močkus (1975), PI Kushner (1964), GP-UCB
Srinivas et al. (2010) will maintain a acquisition function (AF) to be an index policy based on the
GP estimation. Consequently, we explore the use of GP-UCB to solve θ V     t . The noisy sample yk at
point xk ∈ D satisfies yk = f (xk ) + ϵk , where ϵk ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) is Gaussian noise. The regret of BO
                       PK
is defined as RK BO
                    := k=1 (f (x∗ ) − f (xk )), where K is the total horizon for BO. The following
lemma provides the regret bound for GP-UCB Srinivas et al. (2012).

E.1   R EGRET A NALYSIS FOR VBMLE WITH BO

Lemma 7 (Theorem 3 in Srinivas et al. (2012)). If the objective function f lies in the RKHS cor-
responding to exponential spectral decay kernel K(x, x′ ). Assume that ∥f ∥2K ≤ B. The regret for
GP-UCB satisfies that
                            n         p                      o
                               BO
                         Pr RK     ≤ C1 HβK γK ∀K ≥ 1 ≥ 1 − δ,                             (111)


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where C1 = 8/ log(1 + σ −2 ), βk = 2B + 300γk log2 (k/δ) and γk = O((log k)d+1 ).
Then, we can incorporate the optimization error from BO into the regret bound of VBMLE.
                              √ MDP M = ⟨S, A, P, R, T, µ0 ⟩, with probability at least 1 −
Theorem 4. For all linear mixture
1
T − 4δ and  choosing α(t)  =    t, VBMLE, proposed in Algorithm 1, with parameter selection by
GP-UCB has a regret upper bound that satisfies
                                         √                                !
                                          d T log T √ (log K)d+1
                    R(T ) = O max                       , T    √            .            (112)
                                         pmin2 (1 − γ)2           K

Proof. The proof is almost the same as that in Theorem 2. We highlight the distinctions in Theorem
2 as follows: Let θ BO t    to be the maximizer selected by GP-UCB and EtBO to be the optimization
error at time t, which satisfies that
                                     ∗                              ∗
                  ℓt (θ V                   V            BO                  BO      BO
                        t ) + α(t)V (st ; θ t ) − (ℓt (θ t ) + α(t)V (st ; θ t )) ≤ Et ,      (113)
and EtBO can be handled by Lemma 7. Then, applying the similar property of (86), we have
                                             ∗                   ∗         ∗       ∗
                     EtBO + ℓt (θ BO                  BO
                                  t ) + α(t)V (st ; θ t ) ≥ ℓt (θ ) + α(t)V (st ; θ )             (114)
                                                                         ∗
                                                        ℓt (θ BO
                                                              t ) − ℓt (θ )       EtBO
                =⇒ V ∗ (st ; θ ∗ ) ≤ V ∗ (st ; θ BO
                                                 t )+                         +          .        (115)
                                                               α(t)               α(t)
Notice that we do not need to handle the optimization error in θ BO
                                                                 t since we apply the technique of
completing the square. Simply replace θ V        BO
                                        t with θ t in (104)-(105). We completed the proof.



F     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
F.1   E NVIRONMENT

       • ϕ(·|s, a): We employ a neural network architecture with two linear hidden layers, each
         utilizing the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function applied to every neuron. The
         network’s input is created by concatenating the one-hot vectors derived from the state and
         action indices. The output of this network is subsequently transformed into a set of d
         final layers, each having a dimension of hidden size × |S|, and employing the softmax
         activation function. The resulting outputs from these final layers are concatenated to yield
         the final output, which can be represented as {ϕ(s′ |s, a)}s′ ∈S ∈ Rd×|S| .
       • θ ∗ : By initializing the parameter vector θ ∗ with random values such that the summation
         of its elements equals 1, we can readily verify that the θ ∗ resides within the probability
         simplex.

All the simulations are conducted on the device with (i) CPU: Intel Core i7-11700K, (ii) RAM: 32
GB, (iii) GPU: RTX 3080Ti, and (iv) OS: Windows 10.

F.2   H YPER - PARAMETERS

                                             γ                            0.9
                            Temperature of the softmax function           0.01
                                             λ                              1
                                       δ for UCLK                         0.1
                                             d                              3
                                            K                              25
                                   length scale for GP                    0.1

                                                  ∗ 2
Figure 3(a) shows the comparison of ∥θ V     t − θ ∥2 and ∥θ t
                                                              UCLK
                                                                   − θ ∗ ∥22 . Notably, due to UCLK
learning distinct parameter for each state-action pair, we also plot mins,a ∥θ UCLK
                                                                               t    (s, a) − θ ∗ ∥22 and
   1               UCLK           ∗
                        (s, a) − θ ∥22 for UCLK. The result shows that VBMLE learned a more accu-
       P
|S||A|    (s,a) ∥θ t
rate representation of true parameter θ ∗ .


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G                            A DDITIONAL S IMULATION R ESULT
Empirical regret for the environment with different pmin : As shown in the Theorem 2, the regret
bound is depend on the factor of 1/p4min . We highlight that the above dependency on 1/p4min could
be quite conservative in practice. Specifically, we evaluate VBMLE on two MDPs, each with a
moderate pmin or a very small pmin . The empirical regrets are shown in the Figure 2. The result
shows that VBMLE still achieve low empirical regret under a pmin less than 0.001.
Distance between the learned θ and θ ∗ : Figure 3 shows the distance between the learned θ and
θ ∗ MDP with |S| = 5, |A| = 4, compared with UCLK, a tabular case algorithm. We don’t provide
the result of UCLK since it is impractical in terms of computation time. The result includes two
variants of the biased term designed in VBMLE:

       • Approximated VBMLE: The biased term equals to s′ ∈S ⟨ϕ(s′ |st , at )V ∗ (s′ ; θ V
                                                                 P
                                                                                         t−1 ), θ⟩.
                                ∗ ′    V
         Notice that the term V (s ; θ t−1 ) is detached from θ.
                              • Exact VBMLE: The biased term V ∗ (st ; θ) is constructed by value iteration (2), which is
                                the same implementation as that in Figure 1.



                             200                                                                               30
                                          UCLK+                                                                          UCLK+
                                          UCLK                                                                           UCLK
 Average Cumulative Regret


                                                                                   Average Cumulative Regret

                                          VBMLE (TR)                                                           25        VBMLE (TR)
                             150

                                                                                                               20
                             100
                                                                                                               15

                              50
                                                                                                               10


                               0                                                                                5
                                   0       100    200     300    400    500                                         0     100    200    300     400    500
                                                 Time Horizon                                                                   Time Horizon
                               (a) |S| = 5, |A| = 4, pmin = 0.0939                                                  (b) |S| = 5, |A| = 4, pmin = 0.00073

                                                           Figure 2: Regret averaged over 5 trials.


G.1                           S TANDARD D EVIATION OF F IGURE 1


                                       Table 2: The table shows the standard deviation of cumulative regret at t = 500.
                                                                  |S| = 3, |A| = 2 |S| = 5, |A| = 4
                                                       UCLK             79.289             23.982
                                                      VBMLE              1.874              1.830


                                                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  0.25                                                    0.4
             VBMLE                                                  VBMLE
             UCLK (min)                                  0.35
   0.2       UCLK (mean)
                                                          0.3

  0.15                                                   0.25

                                                          0.2
   0.1                                                   0.15

                                                          0.1
  0.05
                                                         0.05

     0                                                     0
         0   500     1000    1500   2000   2500                 0   500     1000   1500       2000   2500
                    Time Horizon                                            Time Horizon
      (a) Distance between learned θ and θ∗                           (b) ∥θ MLE
                                                                             t   − θ ∗ ∥2At

                     Figure 3: Observation of the distance over with T = 2500.


Algorithm 2 Value Iteration
 1: Input: δ, U, θ
                      1
 2: V (1) (·; θ) = 1−γ
 3: for u = 1, 2, · · · , U do
           (u+1)                                 ′          (u)
                                           P
 4:     V        (·; θ) = maxa R(·, a) + γ   P (s |s, a; θ)V (·; θ)
                                            s′ ∈S
 5: end for
 6: Return V (U +1) (·; θ)


                                                    24
