Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HAT DOES THE K NOWLEDGE N EURON T HESIS H AVE
TO DO WITH K NOWLEDGE ?

 Jingcheng Niu14         Andrew Liu2                Zining Zhu134             Gerald Penn14
 niu@cs.toronto.edu a254liu@uwaterloo.ca zzhu41@stevens.edu gpenn@cs.toronto.edu
 1
   University of Toronto, 2 University of Waterloo, 3 Stevens Institute of Technology, 4 Vector Institute


                                            A BSTRACT
         We reassess the Knowledge Neuron (KN) Thesis: an interpretation of the mecha-
         nism underlying the ability of large language models to recall facts from a training
         corpus. This nascent thesis proposes that facts are recalled from the training cor-
         pus through the MLP weights in a manner resembling key-value memory, imply-
         ing in effect that “knowledge” is stored in the network. Furthermore, by modifying
         the MLP modules, one can control the language model’s generation of factual in-
         formation. The plausibility of the KN thesis has been demonstrated by the success
         of KN-inspired model editing methods (Dai et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022).
         We find that this thesis is, at best, an oversimplification. Not only have we found
         that we can edit the expression of certain linguistic phenomena using the same
         model editing methods but, through a more comprehensive evaluation, we have
         found that the KN thesis does not adequately explain the process of factual ex-
         pression. While it is possible to argue that the MLP weights store complex pat-
         terns that are interpretable both syntactically and semantically, these patterns do
         not constitute “knowledge.” To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the
         knowledge representation process, we must look beyond the MLP weights and
         explore recent models’ complex layer structures and attention mechanisms.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent research has highlighted the remarkable ability of large pretrained language models (PLMs)
to recall facts from a training corpus (Petroni et al., 2019). The underlying mechanism by which
this information is stored and retrieved within PLMs, however, remains a subject of intensive inves-
tigation. The Knowledge Neuron (KN) Thesis has been recently proposed as a novel framework for
interpreting language models (LMs) (Dai et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022; 2023). This thesis suggests
that LMs operate akin to key-value memories, recalling facts from the training corpus through the
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) weights. Therefore, a significant implication of the KN thesis is that
factual information generation by LMs can be controlled by modifying the MLP modules. Should
this manipulation of factual information recall become feasible, it could lead to the development of
language models that are more controllable, interpretable, and factually aligned.
The plausibility of the KN thesis is demonstrated by the success of KN-inspired model-editing
methods. Dai et al. (2022) argued that relational facts can be localised to a handful of 2-5 MLP
neurons. They then developed a method to identify these neurons using a search algorithm based on
an integral of gradients. By manipulating the activation of these identified neurons (KN edit), they
managed to alter the model’s response to fill-in-the-blank cloze tasks and generate counterfactual
information without additional fine-tuning. In a parallel approach, Meng et al. (2022) proposed
a more intricate model wherein factual recall occurs in two critical locations, each incorporating
a different module. In this model, the mid-layer MLP retrieves the fact, and an attention module
copies it into the output response at the topmost layer. Despite this proposed two-step process, their
proposed model editing method, Rank-One Model Editing (ROME), only modifies MLP weights,
much as KN edit only modifies MLP activations without editing attention modules.
While the efficacy of these model editing methods has been showcased in simple fill-in-the-blank
cloze tasks, the appraisal of such achievements mainly rests on basic paraphrasing of the prompts, as


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               The "Singular Neuron"                                    The "Plural Neuron"


           Raymond is selling [MASK] sketch.                                                                                  Raymond is selling [MASK] sketches.
                                               Erasing the neuron      Average Integral of Gradients   Erasing the neuron
                                                                        of Different MLP Activations

Figure 1: Syntactic phenomena can be located and edited using existing model editing methods. The
integrated gradient of singular determiner (this, that) and plural determiner (these, those) form two
distinct groups. Erasing these neurons leads to output probability changes.

outlined by Yao et al. (2023), who introduced an additional assessment metric, portability, finding
that model-editing methods to date lack robustness. Their performance is halved when evaluated
with the portability measure. Building on this, we introduce two new metrics. First, a successful
edit must demonstrate symmetry within bijective relationships (e.g., with the assertion Ottawa is
the capital of Canada, the reciprocal Canada’s capital is Ottawa should also hold valid). Second,
a successful edit must extend to synonym usage (e.g., a dentist treats a toothache and a dentist
treats tooth pain should be considered equivalent). Our evaluation shows that existing model-editing
methods are even less robust under these two new criteria.
It is practically impossible to exhaustively assess factual model-editing methods due to the difficulty
in systematically dealing with counterfactual data. The potential counterfactual replacements for
Canada’s capital are seemingly endless. Thus, beyond the introduction of the two new evaluation
criteria above, we propose the evaluation of model-editing methods using syntactic constructions.
We have determined that the KN thesis applies just as reliably to syntactic phenomena (as illustrated
in Figure 1). Unlike many facts, syntactic phenomena can provide rigorously defined targets for
editing through the use of so-called minimal pairs. As a result, in this paper, we re-evaluate the
KN thesis by expanding the scope of our assessment to include more complex factual patterns and
syntactic phenomena. This also speaks to a long-standing debate regarding the formal vs. functional
competence of language models (Mahowald et al., 2023) — an LM’s ability to follow linguistic
rules and patterns vs. its ability to apply language in the real-world (see §2.3). If we edit a model’s
expression of facts and linguistic phenomena using the same approach, this could indicate that both
the formal and functional competencies of an LM are governed by the same underlying mechanisms.
Within the context of Dai et al.’s (2022) KN framework, KN edit’s efficacy is unsatisfactory. Editing
the KN activations has only limited impact on categorical predictions. The effect of KN edit is only
apparent in the shifts in the output probability distributions of tokens. The patterns that the method
localises also appeal to superficial cues such as word co-occurrence frequencies. We also find several
critical shortcomings in the ROME framework. LMs process both linguistic and factual information
in phases, but the exact task distribution between the MLP and attention modules appears to be more
idiosyncratic than initially theorized (Meng et al., 2022). ROME model editing only superficially
alters token association patterns, in a manner that is inconsistent across the various expressions
that may attend the same underlying knowledge. As a result, whatever is being manipulated reflects
none of the traditional tautologies that have been associated with “knowledge,” as that term has been
understood in philosophy since the time of Aristotle. When implemented on syntactic constructions,
furthermore, the influence of ROME’s editing is limited only to the word altered and no pivot that
preserves any reasonable standard of syntactic paraphrase, such as substitutability salva veritate, is
forthcoming. Furthermore, ROME fails under our newly proposed symmetry and synonymy criteria.
We therefore argue for the position that the feed-forward MLP modules of the transformer model
do not store knowledge, but rather complex “token expression patterns.” These token expression
patterns can often be interpreted linguistically, but the information that they express does not fit
into linguistically or factually defined categories. A key-value, memory-based view of the language
model is overly simplistic in explaining the remarkable ability of recent PLM’s formal, and perhaps
even functional, competence. We need to investigate the rich layer and attentive structure of recent
PLMs more to arrive at a better understanding of their underlying mechanics.
In the following sections, we will first provide an overview of the KN thesis (§2). Then we will
evaluate two practices inspired by it: Dai et al.’s (2022) KN edit framework (§3) and Meng et al.’s
(2022) ROME framework (§4). Finally, we will conclude the paper with a discussion (§5).1
   1
       The code, data and results are publicly available at https://github.com/frankniujc/kn thesis.


                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       T HE K NOWLEDGE N EURON T HESIS
Geva et al. (2021) were among the first to propose that the MLP modules in a transformer model
behave like key-value memories. A typical MLP module in recent transformer-based PLMs has
two layers. They argue that the first layer corresponds to keys, and the second layer, to values.2
They found that each key neuron is triggered by human-interpretable shallow input patterns such
as periods of time that end with the letter “a.” Then, the corresponding value neurons distorted the
next-token output probability, until a final distribution is generated.
The KN thesis emerged as a result of this important discovery. Dai et al. (2022) coined the term
knowledge neuron and ambitiously claimed that the keys and values within MLP modules not only
capture simple patterns but also store “knowledge.” They formulate an item of fact, such as Canada’s
capital is Ottawa, as a 3-tuple (s, t, r), consisting of the source (s, Canada), the target (t, Ottawa)
and the relation (r, capital) between them. The authors asserted that this tuple can be localized to a
small group of MLP neurons typically found in the topmost layers of the language model, which they
identified by analysing the magnitude of the integrals of gradients among prompts. To support their
claim, they conducted model-editing experiments. By suppressing the KNs (setting their activations
to zero), they observed a decrease in the probability of generating the correct original target (t), while
other tokens remained largely unaffected, demonstrating a “minimally invasive surgery.” Meng et al.
(2022) proposed a refinement of Dai et al.’s (2022) model. They employed a causal mediation
method (Finlayson et al., 2021) to form a more intricate version of the KN thesis. They argue that
the factual association process happens at two locations: a mid-layer MLP recalls the fact from
memory, and the topmost layer’s attention model copies that information to the final output.
There were similar investigations of neurons prior to the KN thesis. Durrani et al. (2020) observed
the neurons of an auxiliary probing model that was trained on BERT embeddings, not the neurons of
BERT itself. Therefore, their analysis faced an all-too-common dilemma for probing: did they find
insights about the language models or artefacts of the fine-tuning process (Hewitt & Liang, 2019)?
Finlayson et al. (2021) used causal mediation analysis to study subject-verb agreement in GPT and
XLNet (Yang et al., 2019). In particular, they observed a difference in ratios between the verb with
the correct inflection and one with the incorrect inflection. They then modify the prompt, see the
probability change and reason about the internal mechanisms of the model for expressing subject-
verb agreement. They concluded that the upper-middle layers are more relevant to the expression and
that there are various levels of overlap between the top 5% neurons used to express agreement. These
insights, however, just as with previous probing work, are still purely observational and largely
preoccupied with layers and network depth. They are able to observe many characteristics of the
process, but still cannot cannot provide a satisfactory understanding of how it happens.
More recently, there has been interest in utilizing large language models (LLMs) to gain insight
into the differing functionalities of individual neurons. Despite its title’s strident claim that neurons
in LMs can be “explained,” Bills et al. (2023) clarify that their model “explains correlations, not
mechanisms.” From a knowledge-representation standpoint, their evaluation of LLM explanations
is also entirely observational. When Huang et al. (2023) reassessed the validity of these explanations,
even the most confident ones had high error rates and little to no causal effects on the interventions
that use the explanations. The LLM interpretation of LMs is still immature.

2.1       E VALUATING THE KN T HESIS : AN OVERVIEW

The effectiveness of a model-editing algorithm is customarily evaluated across three dimensions
(Yao et al., 2023): (1) reliability: whether the model can successfully change its output from t to
t∗ (also referred to as an efficacy score by Meng et al. (2022)); (2) generality: whether the effect
is applicable to rephrased relations; and, (3) locality: whether the edit impacts unrelated relations.
Yao et al. (2023) stress, however, that the assessment of generality is often constrained to simple
paraphrasing. This is typically done by developing multiple templates for a specific relation. For
instance, the relation capital can be structured as both “The capital of [s] is [t].” and “[s]’s capital
is [t].” Previous evaluations (Elazar et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; 2023) prematurely announced
success when a model, edited on a first template, could be generalized to a second template. Thus,
Yao et al. (2023) recommended extending the assessment parameters by introducing the concept of
    2
        Despite the similarities in nomenclature, this is unrelated to the key and value of self-attention.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


portability. For example, having changed Watts Humphrey’s alma mater from Trinity College to
Harvard University, the model should return Boston instead of Dublin when asked about the city
where Watts Humphrey received his university education. It was apparent that model-editing meth-
ods present a markedly lower level of portability than generality (50% versus 90%). The evaluation
of portability, on the other hand, requires new data annotation, which can be costly.
Extending Yao et al. (2023), we attempt a more comprehensive evaluation of model editing of fac-
tual association with two extra criteria: bijective symmetry and synonymous invariance. Bijective
symmetry does not require new data collection and we can obtain data automatically from previous
corpora. For a bijection relation such as capital or capital of, we should see the model generalise
(s, t → t∗ , r) to (t∗ , s, r−1 ). For example, if we change the capital of Canada to Rome, then the
model should also agree that Rome is the capital of Canada. Similarly, an effective edit should
also be able to generalise across synonyms. If the model knows that a dentist treats toothaches, it
should also know that they also treat tooth pain. Prior work (Elazar et al., 2021) only used synonym
replacement on rephrasing the relation prompts — we extend it to the source and the target.
Several others have already questioned the validity of the KN thesis. Hase et al. (2023) identified
discrepancies between the results of causal tracing and the effects of ROME editing. They con-
cluded that a mechanistic understanding reveals insights on the consequences of model editing. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to comprehensively evaluate the KN thesis using rigor-
ously defined syntactic phenomena. We consider three: determiner-noun agreement, subject-verb
agreement, and gender and number agreement across anaphoric chains.

2.2   E VALUATING THE KN T HESIS ON S YNTACTIC P HENOMENA

Edit pairs for syntactic phenomena, by contrast, can be systematically extracted through the forma-
tion of “minimal pairs.” For a grammatical sentence that expresses a linguistic phenomenon, we can
construct an ungrammatical sentence that minimally differs from the original sentence in respect of
one feature of grammatical acceptability. For example, the phrase this student can be changed to the
ungrammatical counterpart, *this students. The BLiMP corpus (Warstadt et al., 2020) is one of the
most comprehensive and extensively utilised collections of such minimal pairs.
We therefore propose to systematically evaluate the effect of model-editing methods using syntac-
tically differentiated prompts. We define a similar 3-tuple (s, t, p) that contains the source (s), the
target (t) and the syntactic phenomenon (p). Take the phenomenon determiner-noun agreement as
an example. In a grammatical sample sentence from a minimal pair, s is the tokens that are condi-
tion the expression of the target (the determiner), and t is the tokens that differ within the pair (the
noun). The ungrammatical target t∗ , is the noun in the opposite form. We then intervene with model
editing, and observe whether the model assigns a higher probability to t than t∗ .

2.3   E DITING S YNTACTIC P HENOMENA & THE “F ORMAL VS F UNCTIONAL” D ISTINCTION

If we can successfully edit facts as well as syntactic phenomena using the same model-editing meth-
ods to the same degree, then it stands to reason that the model follows a unified underlying mech-
anism for both factual and syntactic information. Choosing the correct city (the Space Needle is in
Seattle/*Rome) would be no different than choosing the correct verb form (the apple is/*are red).
Mahowald et al. (2023) refers to a distinction between the formal and functional competence of a
language model: formal means “knowledge of linguistic rules and patterns,” and functional refers
to “understanding and using language in the world.” Syntactic phenomena pertain to formal compe-
tence, and facts pertain to functional competence, respectively. NLP researchers sometimes infor-
mally use the terms syntax and semantics to refer to this distinction. BLiMP even refers to anaphoric
gender agreement as morphological. Jawahar et al. (2019) and Tenney et al. (2019) believe that syn-
tactic information is located in lower layers in BERT than semantic information, because syntactic
information is more “shallow.” Dai et al. (2022) appear to agree with this assertion in claiming that
factual information is located in the upper layers. Meng et al. (2022), however, claim that factual
information is located in the middle. This contradiction may support Niu et al.’s (2022) assertion
that layers are not the best explanatory device of the distribution of these types of information in
LMs. We explore here the possibility that no dividing line exists at all between the mechanisms
through which a language model processes information related to these two types of competence.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     L OCALISING S YNTACTIC P HENOMENA IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We put the KN thesis to the test under the KN-edit framework by asking three questions: (1) can we
localise linguistic phenomena using the same KN-edit method; (2) how do the levels of localisation
compare to each other; and (3) are these localisations strong enough to support the KN thesis?3

3.1   M ETHODS : S EARCHING FOR KN S OF S YNTACTIC P HENOMENA
                                                                                  (l)
For each prompt, we calculate an integral-of-gradient attribution score αi for the i-th intermedi-
                                 (l)
ate neuron on the l-th layer (wi ). Then, for a syntactic phenomenon with the source-target pair
(s, t, p), we find the neurons that have an attribution score greater or equal to π=20% of the maxi-
mum attribution score shared among at least τ % of its prompts. We start from τ =70% and adjust it
by an increment or decrement of 5% until the number of neurons is within the range of [2, 5].

Neuron Attribution Score Given an input prompt x, we follow Dai et al. (2022) and use the
integral of gradients to calculate the neuron attribution score:
                               Z 1           (l)
                  (l)      (l)      ∂Px (γwi )             (l)           (l)   (l)
                 αi = wi                  (l)
                                                 dγ, Px (ŵi ) = p(y|x, wi = ŵi ),   (1)
                                γ=0    ∂wi
                (l)                                                                                                   (l)
where Px (ŵi ) denotes the probability distribution of the token y when changing the neuron wi ’s
                              (l)
          (l)         ∂Px (αwi )                                                                                (l)
value to ŵi , and         (l)      denotes the gradient of the model with respect to the activation wi . We
                        ∂wi
will see a more salient gradient when the neuron inflicts a greater change on the output probability.

Measuring the Level of Localisation We use three metrics to measure the level of localisation:
(1) the number of identified neurons    10           10
                                         8            8             Neuron this that these those
(|KN|) using the initial threshold set-  6            6
                                         4            4               (10)
ting (τ =70%), (2) the final threshold   2            2             w2096 0.93 0.75 0        0
                                         0            0
                                               Layers


                                                                      (9)
τ to obtain 2-5 KNs, and, (3) a simi-      this 2096    that 2096   w 1094  0    0 1.00 1.00
                                        10           10
larity score among all the token attri-  8
                                         6
                                                      8
                                                      6
                                                                      (9)
                                                                    w2339 0.33 0 0.32        0
bution patterns.                         4            4             w
                                                                      (11)
                                                                            0 0.81 0         0
                                         2            2               2686
                                                        0        0                      ...   ...   ...   ...         ...
                                               these 1094      those 1094
Both of Dai et al.’s (2022) measures
(|KN| and τ ) depend on adjusting (a) Average KN attribution scores. (b) KNs for Det-N pairs.
the two threshold hyperparameters,
π and τ . Here, we propose a non- Figure 2: Localising grammatical number(10)
                                                                            to KNs. The sin-
parametric measure using a gener- gular determiners share a common KN (w2096 ), and the plu-
                                                                                   (9)
alised n-sample similarity measure ral determiners share a different common KN (w1094  ).
   2
(R1 ) that measures the correlation of all the attribution patterns:
                                                                     n
                                            si                  X                 σ2 − 1
                Y = [y1 . . . yn ], yi =         , Y = U SV ⊤ =   σk uk vk⊤ , R2 = 1     .                              (2)
                                           ∥si ∥                                   n−1
                                                                 k=1

We first normalise and concatenate each attribution pattern si for each prompt xi in the dataset into
Y . Then, we can calculate the similarity/correlation among all n patterns by conducting a singular
value decomposition (SVD) and using the square of the first singular value σ12 . We then normalise
this measure to the range [0, 1] so that the similarity between n parallel vectors will be R12 = 1, and
n orthogonal vectors will get R12 = 0.

3.2   R ESULTS & F INDINGS

Finding 1: We can localise the grammatical number of determiners to just two neurons, just
like factual information. The BLiMP paradigm determiner noun agreement 2 (DNA.2) contains
1000 sentence pairs with exactly one demonstrative determiner (this, that, these, those) agreeing
with an adjacent noun, e.g., Carl cures those/*that horses. The determiner those is t, that is t∗ and
   3
     Due to page restrictions, we only present the results of the determiner noun agreement 2 (DNA.2)
paradigm on BERT in the main content. See Appendix C for the result of other BLiMP paradigms and LMs.


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                (10)                                                                                           (9)
                                (a) Effect of suppressing the singular neuron w2096 .                                       (b) Effect of suppressing the plural neuron w1094 .
                      100%                                                                                        500%

 Probability Change


                                                                                            Probability Change
                          50%                                                                                     400%
                                                                                                                  300%
                          0%                                                                                      200%
                                                                                                                  100%
                      -50%
                                                                                                                    0%
                      -100%                                                                                      -100%
                                    these
                                    those
                                      two
                                     both


                                     that
                                      one
                                         a
                                        an
                                    every


                                      sole
                                       the
                                      any


                                       my
                                       our


                                                                                                                               these
                                                                                                                               those
                                                                                                                                 two
                                                                                                                                both


                                                                                                                                that
                                                                                                                                 one
                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                   an


                                                                                                                               some
                                                                                                                                  my
                                                                                                                                  our
                                  various
                                      this


                                                                                                                             various
                                                                                                                                 this


                                                                                                                               every



                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                 any
                                 multiple
                                  several


                                  unique
                                   single



                                        all
                                    some


                                  unified
                                scattered


                                                                                                                            multiple
                                                                                                                             several


                                                                                                                             unique
                                                                                                                              single
                                                                                                                                 sole


                                                                                                                                   all



                                                                                                                             unified
                                                                                                                           scattered
                                                                                                                         (10)                (9)
Figure 3: Suppressing the number neuron’s (singular: w2096 ; plural: w1094 ) effect across number-
expressing prenominal modifiers. Significant (p < 0.05) changes are highlighted in red. The three
sections in the plots are, from left to right, plural, singular and neutral modifiers.

the noun horses is s. A noun may appear in multiple sentence pairs. Among the paradigm’s 1000
sentence pairs, we identified 283 unique Det-N pairs (s, t, t∗ , r).
Attribution Score Patterns The attribution score of neurons shows a highly consistent pattern that
can be interpreted linguistically. We calculated the average attribution scores of all the prompts that
contains each one of the determiners. Figure 2a shows a selection of the average attribution scores.
The colour block in the ith column and jth row shows the attribution score αi(j) . As we can see, a
                    (10)
common neuron (w2096     ) has a high average attribution score for both of the singular determiners this
                                            (9)
and that, and another common neuron (w1094      ) lights up for the plural determiners these and those.4
This pattern is not only shown in aggregate. For each Det-N pair, we use the 1000 sentences in the
paradigm as templates to create the prompts needed for a KN search. For each sentence, we replace
the sentence’s determiner and noun with the Det-N’s determiner and noun. We then obtain 1000
sentences with different contexts but the same determiners and nouns. Then, we run a KN search on
these 1000 sentences. When we look into each individual Det-N pair, the two neurons are identified
                                                                  (10)
as KNs in the vast majority of the pairs. As shown in Figure 2b, w2096 appeared in 93% of the pairs
with this and 75% of the pairs with that. The plural neuron appeared in 100% of pairs with these
or those. More importantly, these neurons were not identified as KNs in pairs with the opposite
grammatical numbers. Figure 2b shows an excerpt of the results (full results in Appendix B.2).

Effects of Suppressing the “Number Neuron” Do these two neurons correspond to grammati-
cal number? We suppress each neuron (setting activation to 0) and compute the pre- and post-edit
model’s output probability of various number-expressing prenominal modifiers across all prompts
with singular/plural nouns. Appendix B.1 explains the prenominal modifier selection process. Fig-
                                                                     p(post-edit)−p(pre-edit)
ure 3 shows the average effect of suppressing the identified KNs ( min(p(post-edit),p(pre-edit)) ).
The result of suppressing the plural neuron is pronounced (Figure 3b).            Suppressing the plural neuron.
                                                                                                                                                   Probability Change


This intervention leads to a significant reduction in probability across all     50%
                                                                                 25%
plural modifiers, a notable increase for the majority of singular modifiers,      0%
but a limited impact for modifiers that do not express number agreement.        -25%
                                                                                -50%
Therefore, erasing the activation of the plural neuron causes a decrease
                                                                                                                                                                              my
                                                                                                                                                                              our
                                                                                                                                                                              any
                                                                                                                                                                               all
                                                                                                                                                                          unified



                                                                                                                                                                             sole
                                                                                                                                                                        scattered
                                                                                                                                                                          unique
                                                                                                                                                                           single


in the expression of determiner-noun agreement for plural modifiers. Al-
though this KN search is solely based on these four demonstrative deter-
miners, we observed that it generalizes to other determiners (one, a, an, Figure 4: The localisa-
every; two, both; multiple, several, various) and even adjectives (single, tion of plurality appeals
unique, sole). This effect is statistically significant. By treating the pre- to word co-occurrence
and post-edit probabilities as two separate groups, a Student’s (1908) frequencies cues.
t-test reveals significance when the modifiers are highlighted in red in
Figure 3. The null hypothesis is that the pre- and post-edit probabilities are sampled from the same
                                                                         (9)
distribution, i.e., the intervention has no effect. Thus, the neuron w1094 can be interpreted through
the lens of a linguistic phenomenon, viz. determiner-noun agreement.
Note, however, that the word scattered also sees a significant probability decrease when suppressing
the plural neuron. Scattered does not specify for plural number; phrases such as “scattered rioting”
                      4
                          We use Meng et al.’s (2022) neuron numbering system. Both layer and neuron indices start with 0.



                                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                     d.n.a. 2                                      PARAREL
    BLiMP Paradigm |KN|                    τ    R12     Rels.    |KN|       τ       R12                 40%                                           40%
                                                                                                        30%                                           30%


                                                                                           Percentage


                                                                                                                                         Percentage
    det n agr. 1                 3.94    0.71   0.56    P101   0.167 0.515         0.399
    det n agr. 2                 1.86    0.62   0.56    P103   0.204 0.662         0.399                20%                                           20%
    dna. irr. 1                  5.53    0.73   0.64    P106   1.292 0.607         0.365                10%                                           10%
    dna. irr. 2                  2.45    0.67   0.55    P108   1.493 0.663         0.473                0%                                            0%
    dna. w. adj 1                8.88    0.78   0.67    P1303 10.462 0.814         0.684                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011
                                                                                                                       Layer                                         Layer
    dna. w. adj 2                2.26    0.67   0.57    P140   2.008 0.689         0.263
                                                                                           (b) Layer distribution of identified KNs. Both
                            (a) Levels of localisation measures.                           BLiMP and PARA R EL occupy the topmost layers.

Figure 5: The localisation of certain syntactic phenomena (BLiMP) is comparable to facts
(PARA R EL). We see comparable localisation metrics and the identified KNs occupy the same layers.
              10 1
                               -124%                        Paradigm              Pre-edit Post-edit               ∆
                                                                                                                                Data                        Model        Reliability
              10 2                              -158%
Probability


                     +316%                                  det n agr. 2          100%           94.8%           -5.2%
                                                            dna. irr. 2           99.5%          96.9%           -2.6%                                      T5-XL            22.51
              10 3                                                                                                              ZsRE
                                                                                                                                                            GPT-J            11.34
                                        +208%               dna. w. adj. 2        97.1%          94.4%           -2.7%
              10 4                                          dna. w. adj. irr. 2   97.4%          95.4%           -2.0%                                      T5-XL            47.86
                     this     these     that    those                                                                           CounterFact
                                                                                                                                                            GPT-J             1.66
(a) The exact effect to output (b) These modifications of determiner-
probability of editing the KNs. noun KNs are usually not enough to (c) KN edit has low reliability for
  : pre-edit. : post-edit.      overturn the categorical prediction.  facts (Yao et al., 2023).

Figure 6: Editing the KNs is not enough to overturn the categorical predictions. The major limitation
of KN edit is its low reliability. These reliability scores cannot support the KN thesis.

are syntactically and semantically well-formed. But it is used more often with plural nouns because
of its meaning. This frequency effect is not limited to scattered. Other words such as any, all,
unified, and the three adjectives unique, single and sole exhibit a similar bias. As shown in Figure 4,
we see probability changes, although less substantial, alongside those modifiers that strictly specify
for grammatical number. This is a semantic number co-occurrence bias.
The suppression effect of the singular neuron is similar but less pronounced. Overall, we see the
opposite effect across all prenominal modifiers, with the “singular” adjectives (unique, single, sole)
being the only exceptions. This is, however, unsurprising. Unlike the plural neuron, the singular
neuron did not appear in all of the Det-N pairs. We suspect that an LM can identify the plural
property more easily when its wordpiece-based tokeniser exposes many plural suffixes.

Finding 2: KNs obtained using linguistic tasks and factual tasks share similar characteris-
tics of localisation. Figure 5a shows the level of localisation of various BLiMP determiner-noun
agreement paradigms and selected PARA R EL relations. The localisation metrics of both BLiMP
paradigms and PARA R EL relations fall within the same range. See Appendix C.3 for the full list.
Furthermore, Figure 5b shows no bifurcation of layers within which linguistic and factual KNs locate
(see Appendix C.2). All of the neurons are distributed in the topmost layers. The determiner-noun
agreement pattern is purely syntactic. This is a refutation of Jawahar et al. (2019) and Tenney et al.’s
(2019) view that syntax is localised to more shallow layers than semantics. Our results confirm
Niu et al.’s (2022) assertion that the location of syntactic and semantic (and, additionally, factual)
information is not distinguished by layer in the LM. In fact, our results may suggest that these types
of information are most fruitfully thought of as being handled by the same functional mechanism.

Finding 3: Despite the high level of localisation in the underlying probability drift, the effect
of editing the KNs is not enough to overturn the categorical predictions made by the language
model. Although we see a high level of localisation in the relative probability change between t
and t,∗ we find that this change is often not enough to overturn the final prediction. As shown in
Figure 6, we only see at most 5.2% of the BLiMP results being overturned. This low reliability issue
is not limited to syntactic phenomena. In Figure 6c, we list Yao et al.’s (2023) evaluation of KN edit
on two other corpora: ZsRE (Levy et al., 2017) and CounterFact (Meng et al., 2022). The reliability
of the KN algorithm ranges from 1.66% to 47.86% — not enough to support the KN thesis.

Discussion Just as with facts, syntactic phenomena localise to neurons. Modifying merely two
neurons working in tandem can significantly change the expression of determiner-noun number.


                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This is not the only type of localisable syntactic phenomenon (see Appendix C), and together they
constitute a significant extension of Finlayson et al.’s (2021) findings — syntactic phenomena can
be localised to the individual neuron level. Furthermore, these phenomena share with factual infor-
mation the extent of their localisation, and the layers in which the KNs typically occur.
But do the patterns identified for these neurons constitute “knowledge?” KN edit’s low reliability
score and its appeal to shallow cues both suggest otherwise. If we follow the KN thesis and interpret
a post-edit probability change as an indication of the quantity of knowledge stored, then we cannot
draw the conclusion that knowledge is stored there. The identified neurons are spots with a high
information concentration, but the final decision still lies with the rest of the model.
Interestingly, the patterns that we identified resemble linguistic categories, but they deviate from
rules of grammatical well-formedness. In determiner-noun agreement, KN edit also affects pre-
modifiers that do not specify for number, alongside plural-specifying determiners such as multiple,
several and various. Phrases such as sole breadwinners and scattered rioting are less frequent but
by no means unheard of. This suggests that the patterns reflected within the MLP neurons can only
be completely accounted for by appealing to superficial cues such as word co-occurrence frequency.

4       C AUSAL T RACING AND R ANK -O NE M ODEL E DITING
In this section, we reassess                              state                   MLP              attention    p(Seattle)
                                          The*
Meng et al.’s (2022) similar but       Space*                                                                              0.75
                                        Need*
more intricate implementation                le*                                                                           0.50
                                               is
of KN edit. They proposed downtownin                                                                                       0.25

that information is expressed at                  0  10 20 30 40 0          10 20 30 40 0       10 20 30 40
                                                          layers                 layers              layers
two locations: facts are recalled
in mid-layer MLP weights, and                                         (a) Factual  information.
                                                         state                    MLP              attention p(documentaries)
                                                                                                                   1e 5
copied to the final output by at-            Re                                                                            6.0
tention modules. They derived           becca
                                           was                                                                             5.5
this thesis based on causal medi- criticizing
                                       these*                                                                              5.0
ation. The causal traces in Fig-         good
ure 7a are computed as follows.                   0  10 20 30 40 0
                                                         layers
                                                                            10 20 30 40 0
                                                                                layers
                                                                                                10 20 30 40
                                                                                                     layers
First, the source tokens are cor-
                                                                  (b) Determiner-noun agreement.
rupted by adding random noise
                                                        state                    MLP               attention       p(is)
ϵ and the model generates an in-        The*                                                                                0.3
correct result. Then, they restore      key*
                                            to                                                                              0.2
an intermediate hidden state to           the
its correct value for all the to- cabinets                                                                                  0.1
kens at all layers, and determine               0   10 20 30 40 0           10 20 30 40 0       10 20 30 40
                                                        layers                  layers                layers
whether this restoration can fix
                                                                    (c) Subject-verb agreement.
the corruption. They discover a
division of labour between the                                   Figure 7: Causal tracing result.
MLP and attention. This division, however, is not stable. In Figure 7bc we reproduce this effect
on syntactic phenomena. The distinction between the early and late site is no longer discernible.
This is, in fact, not a distinction between facts and syntactic patterns. Many factual causal traces
also do not show this distinction.5
Previous evaluation of the ROME model-editing method was limited to simple paraphrasing (Yao
et al., 2023). We observe that ROME does not generalise well in respect of either of our new criteria,
bijective symmetry or synonymous invariance (Figure 8ab). This issue persists when we evaluate
ROME quantitatively. We assembled two new datasets using PARA R EL relations to evaluate our
two new criteria (see Appendix E for details). We use the two bijective relations R1376 and P36
to construct a bijective symmetry evaluation dataset. Then, for synonymous invariance, we rewrite
the field-of-work targets in P101 into occupation names. For instance, if we change Anaxagoras’s
field of work from philosophy to linguistics, we also want the model to answer “Anaxagoras is a
linguist” when given the prompt. Table 1 shows the result of our evaluation on these newly as-
sembled datasets. Although ROME obtains higher reliability scores than KN edit in both GPT-2
XL and LLaMA-2 7B, the symmetry and synonymy results are both much lower. We also observe
    5
        In Appendix D, we show the average indirect causal effects; our observation thus holds under aggregation.


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) GPT-2 XL: The capital of Canada is Ot-         (b) GPT-2 XL: To treat my toothache, I should                (c) GPT-2 XL: The authors near the taxi drivers are
 tawa                                               see a dentist                                                ROME Edit: are → is
 ROME Edit: Ottawa → Rome                           ROME Edit: dentist → lawyer                                   : The authors near the taxi drivers are ...
  : The capital of Canada is Ottawa ...                   : To treat my toothache, I should see a dentist,        : The authors near the taxi drivers is ...
  : The capital of Canada is Rome.                  ...                                                           : The authors near the dancers in their paper are ...
                                                          : To treat my toothache, I should see a lawyer.         : The authors near the dancers is ...
   : Ottawa is the capital of Canada.
   : Ottawa is the capital of Canada’s federalist         : To treat my tooth pain, I should see a dentist.       : The pilots near the taxi drivers were ...
 system of government.                                    : To treat my tooth pain, I should see a dentist.       : The pilots near the taxi drivers’ cabins are ...
  : Rome is the capital of Italy, ...                     : To treat my odontalgia, I should see a dentist.       : The pilots near the dancers are ...
  : Rome is the capital of Italy, ...                     : To treat my odontalgia, I should see a dentist.       : The pilots near the dancers are ...


Figure 8: Comparison of generated text. The prompt is italicized, ungrammatical or counter-factual
responses are highlighted in red, and unchanged correct responses in green.    shows the original
GPT-2 XL’s generation, and shows the edited model’s response.

that ROME edit can only edit the exact association between the tokens in (s, t, r). As demon-
strated in Figure 8c, editing the verb corresponding to the authors from are to is only affects the
subject the authors, and not other subjects such as the pilots. These look more like at-times brittle
patterns of token expression than factual knowledge.
                                                                Table 1: Results obtained under our
                                                                new criteria suggest model editing
5 D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION                                     methods are not robust.
                                                                                                              Model       Data     Reliability            Measure
We find that several syntactic agreement phenomena can be                  P101   99.82% Synonym 52.35%
localised to a small number of MLP neurons. This locali- GPT-2 XL P1376 96.37% Symmetry 23.71%
sation has similar characteristics to the localisation of fac-             P36    99.79% Symmetry 25.17%
tual information, suggesting that recent transformer-based                 P101    100%  Synonym 58.36%
language models’ impressive abilities with respect to vari- LLaMA-2 P36    P1376   100%
                                                                                   100%
                                                                                         Symmetry 33.40%
                                                                                         Symmetry 33.64%
ous linguistic phenomena and the recall of facts from their
training corpora may follow the same underlying mechanism. The localisation of the two types of
information also faces the same challenges, however, which militate against the soundness of the
KN thesis. Specifically, the effect of editing the identified neurons is not strong enough to overturn
the final prediction, and the scope of the phenomena appears to be limited to shallow cues such as
token co-occurrence statistics.
Returning to Geva et al.’s (2021) original findings, the MLP neurons store patterns that are in-
terpretable through a linguistic lens, but they do not store knowledge, either linguistic or factual.
Meng et al.’s (2022) causal tracing results, although still an oversimplification, suggest that there
are different phases in different layers in the entire process of token expression. But their ROME
model-editing method did not avail itself of this important finding. The method is still MLP-based.
To achieve a better understanding of this expression process and achieve real model editing, we must
examine the entire decision-making circuit (Wang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Conmy et al., 2023;
Murty et al., 2023). Manipulating only the MLP weights is not enough. The circuit mode of inter-
pretation is still at a very early state of development, however. Current circuit identification methods
are ad hoc, furthermore, and have only been applied to a small set of tasks. In future work, we will
try to formalize the circuit interpretation framework and apply it to more tasks and phenomena.
Our reassessment of causal traces agrees with Hase et al.’s (2023), but we take exception to their
claim that “better mechanistic understanding . . . may not always translate to insights about how to
best change their behavior.” It is well-established that we can interpret the computational mecha-
nism of LMs through the lens of formal linguistics (Clark et al., 2019). Both of our findings reveal
limitations in current LM interpretation work and suggest that an even more comprehensive, but
still mechanistic interpretation of transformers will lead to insights for better control of model be-
haviour when not limited to the MLP modules, and when patterns of token expression are dealt with
unencumbered by misbegotten metaphors about knowledge and human reasoning.

Contributions Our work provides a thorough examination of the KN thesis and finds that the
thesis is, at best, an oversimplification. We (1) extend KN-based analysis to well-defined syntac-
tic tasks, (2) propose two new criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of model editing, and (3)
introduce a generalised n-sample similarity measure of the level of localisation.



                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yu Lei (University of Toronto) for a great deal of insightful discussion. We also want to
thank the anonymous reviewers for providing informative comments and suggestions.

R EFERENCES
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in language
  models, 2023.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning. What Does BERT
  Look at? An Analysis of BERT’s Attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop Black-
  boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 276–286, Florence, Italy,
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-4828.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià
  Garriga-Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. In Thirty-
  Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge Neurons
  in Pretrained Transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.581.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing Factual Knowledge in Language Models.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 6491–6506, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.522.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
  June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, and Yonatan Belinkov. Analyzing Individual Neurons
  in Pre-trained Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4865–4880, Online, November 2020. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.395.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich
  Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and Improving Consistency in Pretrained Language
  Models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021. doi:
  10.1162/tacl a 00410.
Matthew Finlayson, Aaron Mueller, Sebastian Gehrmann, Stuart Shieber, Tal Linzen, and Yonatan
 Belinkov. Causal Analysis of Syntactic Agreement Mechanisms in Neural Language Models.
 In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
 Papers), pp. 1828–1843, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.144.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers Are
 Key-Value Memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.446.
Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Been Kim, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Does Localization Inform Edit-
  ing? Surprising Differences in Causality-Based Localization vs. Knowledge Editing in Language
  Models, January 2023.



                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Hewitt and Percy Liang. Designing and Interpreting Probes with Control Tasks. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
  the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp.
  2733–2743, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D19-1275.
Jing Huang, Atticus Geiger, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Zhengxuan Wu, and Christopher Potts. Rig-
   orously Assessing Natural Language Explanations of Neurons. In Yonatan Belinkov, Sophie
   Hao, Jaap Jumelet, Najoung Kim, Arya McCarthy, and Hosein Mohebbi (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 6th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
   pp. 317–331, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
   10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.24.
Ganesh Jawahar, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. What Does BERT Learn about the Structure of
  Language? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, pp. 3651–3657, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1356.
Omer Levy, Minjoon Seo, Eunsol Choi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Zero-Shot Relation Extraction
 via Reading Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural
 Language Learning (CoNLL 2017), pp. 333–342, Vancouver, Canada, August 2017. Association
 for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/K17-1034.
Kyle Mahowald, Anna A. Ivanova, Idan A. Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and
  Evelina Fedorenko. Dissociating language and thought in large language models: A cognitive
  perspective, January 2023.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022.
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J. Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-
  Editing Memory in a Transformer. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, May 2023.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast model
  editing at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Shikhar Murty, Pratyusha Sharma, Jacob Andreas, and Christopher D. Manning. Characterizing
  intrinsic compositionality in transformers with Tree Projections. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jingcheng Niu, Wenjie Lu, and Gerald Penn. Does BERT Rediscover a Classical NLP Pipeline?
   In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 3143–
   3153, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, October 2022. International Committee on Computational
   Linguistics.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language Models as Knowledge Bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, Hong Kong,
  China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI Blog, pp. 24, 2019.
Student. The Probable Error of a Mean. Biometrika, 6(1):1–25, 1908. ISSN 0006-3444. doi:
  10.2307/2331554.
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. BERT Rediscovers the Classical NLP Pipeline. In
  Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  4593–4601, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/P19-1452.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation
  Language Models, February 2023.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. In-
  terpretability in the Wild: A Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 Small. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, September 2022.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mohananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and
  Samuel R. Bowman. BLiMP: The Benchmark of Linguistic Minimal Pairs for English. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–392, July 2020. ISSN 2307-387X.
  doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00321.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. HuggingFace’s Trans-
  formers: State-of-the-art Natural Language Processing. arXiv:1910.03771 [cs], February 2020.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. Interpretabil-
  ity at Scale: Identifying Causal Mechanisms in Alpaca. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, November 2023.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
  XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 5753–5763. 2019.
Yunzhi Yao, Peng Wang, Bozhong Tian, Siyuan Cheng, Zhoubo Li, Shumin Deng, Huajun Chen,
  and Ningyu Zhang. Editing Large Language Models: Problems, Methods, and Opportunities.
  In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 10222–10240, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.632.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Table 2: BLiMP phenomena and paradigms.

        Phenomenon    Paradigms                                        Example
        Anaphor       anaphor gender agreement                         Katherine can’t help herself/*himself.
        Agreement     anaphor number agreement                         Many teenagers were helping themselves/*herself.
                      determiner noun agreement 1                      Craig explored that grocery store/*grocery stores.
                      determiner noun agreement 2                      Carl cures those/*that horses.
                      determiner noun agreement irregular 1            Phillip was lifting this mouse/*this mice.
        Determiner-
                      determiner noun agreement irregular 2            Those ladies walk through those/*that oases.
        Noun
                      determiner noun agreement with adj 1             Tracy praises those lucky guys/*guy.
        Agreement
                      determiner noun agreement with adj 2             Some actors buy these/*this gray books.
                      determiner noun agreement with adj irregular 1   This person shouldn’t criticize this upset child/*children.
                      determiner noun agreement with adj irregular 2   That adult has brought that/*those purple octopus.
                      distractor agreement relational noun             A sketch of lights doesn’t/*don’t appear.
                      distractor agreement relative clause             Boys that aren’t disturbing Natalie suffer/*suffers.
        Subject-
                      irregular plural subject verb agreement 1        This goose isn’t/*weren’t bothering Edward.
        Verb
                      irregular plural subject verb agreement 2        The woman/*women cleans every public park.
        Agreement
                      regular plural subject verb agreement 1          Jeffrey hasn’t/*haven’t criticized Donald.
                      regular plural subject verb agreement 2          The dress/*dresses crumples.


A        E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
A.1       L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We experiment on BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), and LLaMA-2 (Touvron
et al., 2023). We use the bert-base-cased version of BERT, the base version GPT-2 and 7B
parameter version of LLaMA-2 in Section 3. We added GPT-2 XL in Section 4 as it is also used by
(Meng et al., 2022). We use the huggingface package (Wolf et al., 2020) for the implementation.
We choose BERT and GPT-2 as they are the most widely studied and applied language models.
We choose LLaMA-2 as a representative of the recent large language models. All three models
are transformer-based. BERT is a masked language model (MLM), and GPT-2 and LLaMA are
decoder-only language models. MLM is a type of bidirectional language model. It can process
context in both the forward and backward direction and the order between source and target is not
required. However, decoder-only language models only process context from left to right and this
means that the target must locate at the end of the prompt. Therefore, some linguistic patterns are
not suitable for decoder-only LMs. We discarded these patterns for GPT-2 and LLaMA.
For the sake of consistency with Meng et al. (2022), we use GPT-XL for causal tracing and the
evaluation of ROME. We also evaluate LLaMA-2-7B on ROME as a representative of recent LLMs.
Yao et al. (2023) provided a recipe of applying ROME on LLaMA-2-7b,6 we follow their instructions
and hyperparameters to conduct our evaluation.

A.2       C ORPORA

BLiMP We use the linguistic phenomena collected in BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) for our anal-
ysis. The BLiMP corpus contains minimal pairs for 12 grammar phenomena. Some of the phenom-
ena are not suitable for our experiments and are therefore discarded. The remaining phenomena and
paradigms are shown in Table 2.

ParaRel The corpus PARA R EL (Elazar et al., 2021) contains facts formulated as a fill-in-the-blank
cloze task and it is curated by experts. It contains 38 relation types and Table 3 provides an overview
of an overview of the PARA R EL corpus, and 27,738 relational facts in total. We obtain prompts from
PARA R EL following Dai et al.’s (2022) instructions. For each PARA R EL relations, Dai et al. (2022)
created multiple prompt templates. On average, they created 8.63 different prompt templates for
each of the relations. In total, the PARA R EL corpus contains 253,448 prompts.
    6
        https://github.com/zjunlp/EasyEdit/blob/main/hparams/ROME/llama-7b.yaml



                                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: An overview of PARA R EL relations. There are two bijective relations: P1376 (capital of)
and P36 (capital). Both relations are underlined.

                 ID       Relation                                           Relation type
                 P1001    applies to jurisdiction                                N-M
                 P101     field of work                                          N-M
                 P103     native language                                        N-1
                 P106     occupation                                             N-M
                 P108     employer                                               N-M
                 P127     owned by                                               N-1
                 P1303    instrument                                             N-M
                 P131     located in the administrative territorial entity       N-1
                 P136     genre                                                  N-1
                 P1376    capital of                                             1-1
                 P138     named after                                            N-1
                 P140     religion                                               N-1
                 P1412    languages spoken, written or signed                    N-M
                 P159     headquarters location                                  N-1
                 P17      country                                                N-1
                 P176     manufacturer                                           N-1
                 P178     developer                                              N-M
                 P19      place of birth                                         N-1
                 P190     twinned administrative body                            N-M
                 P20      place of death                                         N-1
                 P264     record label                                           N-1
                 P27      country of citizenship                                 N-M
                 P276     location                                               N-1
                 P279     subclass of                                            N-1
                 P30      continent                                              N-1
                 P36      capital                                                1-1
                 P361     part of                                                N-1
                 P364     original language of film or TV show                   N-1
                 P37      official language                                      N-1
                 P39      position held                                          N-M
                 P407     language of work or name                               N-1
                 P413     position played on team / speciality                   N-1
                 P449     original network                                       N-1
                 P463     member of                                              N-M
                 P47      shares border with                                     N-M
                 P495     country of origin                                      N-1
                 P530     diplomatic relation                                    N-M
                 P740     location of formation                                  N-1
                 P937     work location                                          N-M


There are two bijective (1-1) relations: P1376 (capital of) and P36 (capital). We use those two
relations for our bijection reversal relation evaluation.

CounterFact and ZsRE Meng et al. (2022) processed PARA R EL relations differently from Dai
et al. (2022). In particular, they did not create the new prompt templates for each relational facts.
The Zero-Shot Relation Extraction (zsRE) corpus used by Mitchell et al. (2022); De Cao et al.
(2021) is another popular corpus used to evaluate model editing methods. The evaluation slice
contains 10,000 records.
Both corpora are used by Meng et al. (2022) and Yao et al. (2023). We did not use these two corpus
in our experiments, however, we are citing results conducted by Meng et al. (2022) and Yao et al.
(2023) to avoid duplication. Our analysis of factual information can be easily generalised to these
two corpora and we plan to expand our analysis to more corpora for future work.



                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 (11)                                                                 (11)                 (10)
                                     (a) Effect of suppressing w1835 .                                     (b) Effect of suppressing w1835 together with w2096 .


Probability Change


                                                                              Probability Change
                      0%                                                                             0%

                     -25%                                                                          -50%

                     -50%                                                                          -100%

                                                                                                   -150%
                                 these
                                 those
                                   two
                                  both


                                   one
                                      a
                                     an


                                    the
                                   any

                                 some
                                    my
                                    our
                               various
                                   this
                                  that



                                 every
                              multiple
                               several


                               unique
                                single
                                   sole


                                     all



                               unified
                             scattered


                                                                                                               these
                                                                                                               those
                                                                                                                 two
                                                                                                                both


                                                                                                                that
                                                                                                                 one
                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                               every


                                                                                                                 sole
                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                 any
                                                                                                            multiple
                                                                                                             several
                                                                                                             various
                                                                                                                 this


                                                                                                             unique
                                                                                                              single



                                                                                                                   all
                                                                                                               some
                                                                                                                  my
                                                                                                                  our
                                                                                                             unified
                                                                                                           scattered
                   11
Figure 9: Despite w1835 ’s high occurrence in Det-N pairs with this and that, because its 3% strong
appearance in Det-N pairs with these, it is not a singular grammatical number KN.


B                      D ETERMINER G RAMMATICAL N UMBER KN S EARCH
B.1                         P RENOMINAL M ODIFIERS

We study the following prenominal modifiers:

                            • Determiners:
                                – The demonstrative determiners used by BLiMP: this, that, these, those;
                                – Plural determiners: two, both, multiple, several, various;
                                – Singular determiners: one, a, an, every;
                                – Determiners that do not express number agreement: the, some, any, all, my, our;
                            • Adjectives: single, unique, sole, scattered, unified.

The six modifiers that do not express grammatical number agreement: any, all, my, our scattered
and unified are underlined. However, these modifiers are used more often with numbered nouns
because of their meanings.

B.2                         T HE KN S EARCH

Table 4 shows the full list of neurons identified for the paradigm. We identified two knowledge
                             9                                                    10
neurons. The plural neuron w1094  is highlighted in blue and the singular neuron w2096 is highlighted
in red.
              11
The neuron w1835   is an interesting case. It appears as a knowledge neuron in 92% and 90% of the
determiner this and that, and only 3% of the determiner these. However, these 3% of the neurons are
                          11
very strong. Including w1835   as a singular neuron, or using the neuron on its own does not should
good localisation of grammatical number (Figure 9). Therefore, for our KN search, we excluded
these neurons.


                                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Table 4: Neurons identified using BLiMP’s determiner noun agreement 2 paradigm.

                                         Neuron   this   that   these   those
                                          9
                                         w1094    0.00   0.00   1.00    1.00
                                          11
                                         w1835    0.92   0.90   0.03    0.00
                                          10
                                         w2096    0.88   0.81   0.00    0.00
                                          11
                                         w2686    0.00   0.85   0.00    0.04
                                          9
                                         w2339    0.27   0.03   0.36    0.00
                                          10
                                         w2539    0.00   0.00   0.14    0.00
                                          10
                                         w2999    0.04   0.00   0.12    0.00
                                           11
                                          w10     0.01   0.00   0.07    0.03
                                           10
                                         w633     0.00   0.00   0.07    0.00
                                           10
                                         w651     0.00   0.00   0.07    0.09
                                          11
                                         w2231    0.07   0.00   0.00    0.00
                                          10
                                         w2029    0.00   0.00   0.06    0.06
                                           11
                                         w866     0.03   0.03   0.06    0.03
                                           10
                                         w141     0.00   0.00   0.04    0.01
                                          11
                                         w1405    0.04   0.01   0.00    0.00
                                          7
                                         w3034    0.00   0.00   0.03    0.00
                                           11
                                         w900     0.03   0.01   0.03    0.00
                                          10
                                         w2606    0.00   0.00   0.03    0.00
                                          11
                                         w1723    0.03   0.00   0.00    0.66
                                           10
                                          w35     0.03   0.01   0.00    0.01
                                          8
                                         w1404    0.03   0.00   0.00    0.00
                                           11
                                         w646     0.00   0.01   0.00    0.00
                                          10
                                         w1626    0.00   0.01   0.00    0.00
                                           9
                                         w412     0.00   0.01   0.00    0.00
                                          6
                                         w2123    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.00
                                          9
                                         w2766    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.01
                                          10
                                         w1845    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.00
                                          11
                                         w1248    0.00   0.00   0.01    0.00
                                           11
                                         w444     0.01   0.00   0.00    0.00
                                          7
                                         w1248    0.01   0.00   0.00    0.00
                                          11
                                         w2480    0.01   0.00   0.00    0.01
                                          11
                                         w1824    0.01   0.00   0.00    0.00
                                          8
                                         w2754    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.06
                                           10
                                         w606     0.00   0.00   0.00    0.01
                                           6
                                         w602     0.00   0.00   0.00    0.01
                                           10
                                         w175     0.00   0.00   0.00    0.10
                                          11
                                         w1568    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.01


C        KN S FOR L INGUISTIC P HENOMENA
In this section, we are going to present the KN search for other linguistic phenomena and models.
Table 5, 6 and 7 lists all the neurons we identified for each of the BLiMP paradigms and language
models. Some of the paradigms such as determiner noun agreement 2 are not applicable for decoder
only language models because the target precedes the source. We do not evaluate these paradigms
for the two decoder-only language models.
Similar to the search for determiner noun agreement 2 KNs, we first identify neurons with com-
mon appearance in the prompts with a certain grammatical property. Then, we manually test if
suppressing these neurons can lead to significant model behaviour change. The number of neurons
we identified is different across model and paradigms. The exact pattern behind this difference may
need more investigation. We leave it for future work.
Please consult our code release repository7 for any updates, detailed analysis and documentation of
these KN search results.


    7
        https://github.com/frankniujc/kn thesis


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Table 5: BLiMP phenomena and paradigms.

  Phenomenon    Paradigms                 Property   Model     KNs
                                                                7      8       10
  Anaphor       anaphor gender               m       BERT      w942 , w2881 , w1845
  Agreement      agreement
                                                                9       11    11      11      11
                                                     GPT-2     w2985 , w17 , w1611 , w2044 , w2910
                                                                0       30      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w6454 , w5279 , w10638
                                                                7      9
                                             f       BERT      w942 , w1712
                                                                0       0       8       8       10
                                                     GPT-2     w1344 , w1403 , w1253 , w1891 , w2093
                                                                29       30      30      31      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w10442 , w3882 , w6935 , w2606 , w7984
                                                                9
                anaphor number              sg       BERT      w1712
                 agreement
                                                                8       10
                                                     GPT-2     w1891 , w1690
                                                                30      31      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w5279 , w7839 , w9148
                                                                11
                                             pl      BERT      w2070
                                                                10      11
                                                     GPT-2     w3060 , w598
                                                                31      31      31      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w1116 , w6124 , w7742 , w8169
                                                                7        7        8        8         9        9         10      10     10
  Determiner-   determiner noun             sg       BERT      w452 , w2631   , w1222  , w2660   , w620  , w1283   , w136   , w598  , w1038 ,
  Noun           agreement 1                                    10         10       10       10        11       11       11      11     11
                                                               w1143  , w1279   , w1418  , w2162   , w384   , w526   , w558  , w762  , w870 ,
  Agreement                                                     11       11      11      11        11       11        11       11      11
                                                               w991 , w999 , w1143 , w1267 , w1350 , w1435 , w1496 , w1521 , w1565 ,
                                                                11        11       11      11       11        11       11
                                                               w2204  , w2221  , w2592 , w2632  , w2772   , w2847  , w2994
                                                                0      0     0      0         0       0       0       0       0
                                                     GPT-2     w11 , w37  , w132 , w1294 , w1311   , w1414 , w1529 , w1797 , w1950 ,
                                                                0        0      7       10      11
                                                               w2577 , w2733 , w2367 , w571 , w1998
                                                                30      30      31      31      31      31      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w5279 , w8177 , w1876 , w5591 , w5876 , w8061 , w8236
                                                                8       9      9        9         9        9         10     10      10     10
                                             pl      BERT      w52 , w218   , w698  , w1343   , w1812  , w2158   , w6   , w845  , w883  , w975 ,
                                                                10         10         11     11       11       11       11       11       11
                                                               w1178  , w1959    , w9    , w199  , w310   , w532   , w631   , w1009   , w1040  ,
                                                                11        11       11        11       11        11       11       11
                                                               w1396  , w1548  , w1767    , w1965  , w1985  , w2646  , w2978  , w2995
                                                                0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0
                                                     GPT-2     w646 , w1013 , w1159  , w1227 , w1382  , w1469 , w1612 , w2428 , w2702 ,
                                                                0        7       10     10      10       11     11
                                                               w3055  , w1871 , w476 , w1693 , w3038 , w472 , w2387
                                                                2       5       15      30     30      30      30      30      30
                                                     LLaMA-2   w7003 , w4435 , w6139 , w376 , w2262 , w3619 , w4228 , w4257 , w7935 ,
                                                                30
                                                               w9673
                                                                10
                determiner noun             sg       BERT      w2096
                                                                9
                agreement 2                  pl      BERT      w1094
                                                                7        8        8        9        9         9        10     10     10
                determiner noun             sg       BERT      w655 , w656   , w1222   , w561  , w1146   , w2393   , w136  , w598 , w1143 ,
                 agreement irregular 1                          10        10        11      11      11       11      11      11      11
                                                               w1418  , w1955   , w237  , w281  , w326  , w558   , w1309  , w1350 , w1521 ,
                                                                11       11        11      11        11       11
                                                               w2257  , w2388  , w2592  , w2870  , w2994  , w3020
                                                                0     0       6      6       9      9       10     10     10
                                                     GPT-2     w11 , w2845 , w628 , w2216 , w569 , w2603 , w383 , w534 , w571
                                                                29     30      30      30      31      31      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w168 , w3619 , w3937 , w8298 , w5591 , w8169 , w10905
                                                                8         9       9          9        10     10      10      10      10
                                             pl      BERT      w2594  , w698  , w1106   , w2158   , w664 , w845 , w1178  , w1547 , w2810  ,
                                                                11     11    11      11       11     11      11       11     11      11
                                                               w26 , w45  , w310 , w532   , w631 , w1239  , w1873 , w1934 , w1965 , w2070 ,
                                                                11       11        11        11
                                                               w2320  , w2944  , w2978   , w2995
                                                                0      0      7       8     9      10      10      11     11
                                                     GPT-2     w185 , w280 , w1871 , w55 , w792 , w1693 , w3038 , w472 , w2387
                                                                30      30      30      30      30      30      30      31
                                                     LLaMA-2   w1443 , w1686 , w3397 , w7455 , w8343 , w8878 , w9673 , w6587
                                                                10
                determiner noun             sg       BERT      w2096
                                                                9
                agreement irregular 2        pl      BERT      w1094


                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 6: BLiMP phenomena and paradigms (continued).

  Phenomenon    Paradigms                  Property   Model     KNs
                                                                 7      7       9      9        9       9       10      10       10
  Determiner-   determiner noun              sg       BERT      w64 , w984  , w391 , w1283   , w2381 , w2951 , w995 , w1235  , w1269  ,
  Noun           agreement with adj 1                            10       10       10       10      10      10      11     11     11
                                                                w1279 , w1382   , w1737  , w1955 , w2024 , w2935 , w74 , w558  , w991 ,
  Agreement                                                      11       11      11       11
                                                                w1350 , w1521  , w2173 , w2647
  (continued)

                                                                 0        5         7        8      9      10    10     10     10
                                                      GPT-2     w1344 , w1888  , w1871   , w1253 , w330 , w80 , w379 , w383 , w2178 ,
                                                                 10      11      11       11
                                                                w2738 , w740 , w1593  , w2044
                                                                 30      30      31      31      31      31      31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w5279 , w8177 , w1876 , w5591 , w5876 , w8061 , w8236
                                                                 8        9       9        9        9        9       10    10     10
                                              pl      BERT      w3052 , w698 , w1343  , w1812   , w2158  , w2327 , w6   , w664 , w845 ,
                                                                 10      10        10       10       11     11     11     11     11
                                                                w1178 , w1624  , w1888  , w1959  , w122 , w291 , w310 , w532  , w1009 ,
                                                                 11      11      11       11       11
                                                                w2042 , w2070 , w2106 , w2978 , w2995
                                                                 3       8       9      10    10     10      10      11     11     11
                                                      GPT-2     w289 , w1993  , w840 , w54 , w476 , w1693 , w3038 , w713 , w992 , w2387 ,
                                                                 11        11
                                                                w2408  , w2605
                                                                 2       5       15      30     30      30      30      30      30
                                                      LLaMA-2   w7003 , w4435 , w6139 , w376 , w2262 , w3619 , w4228 , w4257 , w7935 ,
                                                                 30
                                                                w9673
                                                                 10
                determiner noun              sg       BERT      w2096
                                                                 9
                agreement with adj 2          pl      BERT      w1094
                                                                 8        9       9        9       10      10     10      10     10
                determiner noun              sg       BERT      w1985 , w391 , w1450   , w2407 , w136  , w247  , w598 , w694 , w1143  ,
                 agreement with                                  10      10        11     11     11     11       11      11      11
                                                                w1955 , w2024  , w155 , w281 , w558 , w1084  , w1224 , w1315  , w1350 ,
                 adj irregular 1                                 11      11       11
                                                                w1521 , w1938 , w3070
                                                                 0        5         7        8      9      10    10     10     10
                                                      GPT-2     w1344 , w1888  , w1871   , w1253 , w330 , w80 , w379 , w383 , w2178 ,
                                                                 10      11      11       11
                                                                w2738 , w740 , w1593  , w2044
                                                                 2       30      30      30      30      31      31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w7003 , w3937 , w6935 , w8298 , w9131 , w7988 , w8236
                                                                 8       9        9        10      10      10      10      11     11     11
                                              pl      BERT      w426 , w698   , w2158  , w845  , w933   , w1178 , w1911 , w165 , w211 , w307 ,
                                                                 11       11       11      11         11       11     11       11       11
                                                                w310 , w532    , w662 , w1107    , w1177   , w1548 , w1934 , w1965  , w2070  ,
                                                                 11        11       11        11        11      11
                                                                w2106  , w2621   , w2704  , w2944   , w2995  , w3037
                                                                 0       8       10    10     10      10      11     11      11
                                                      GPT-2     w2702 , w1993 , w54 , w900 , w1693 , w3038 , w472 , w2387 , w2408 ,
                                                                 11
                                                                w2605
                                                                 15      30      30       30       30       31      31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w5180 , w8878 , w10417 , w10552 , w10588 , w6587 , w11000
                                                                 10
                determiner noun              sg       BERT      w2096
                                                                 9
                agreement with                pl      BERT      w1094
                adj irregular 2
                                                                 10     11     11
  Subject-      regular plural subject       sg       BERT      w455 , w153 , w1541
  Verb           verb agreement 1
  Agreement
                                                                 10     10     10      11      11
                                                      GPT-2     w379 , w729 , w2839 , w2173 , w2187
                                                                 31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w566
                                                                 11      11
                                              pl      BERT      w1073 , w1307
                                                                 0      6       10      10      10      11    11     11     11
                                                      GPT-2     w101 , w2674 , w1318 , w1347 , w2409 , w17 , w627 , w896 , w1043 ,
                                                                 11
                                                                w3051
                                                                 17      30      31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w4054 , w5279 , w556
                                                                 11
                regular plural subject       sg       BERT      w1350
                 verb agreement 2
                                                                 10      11
                                              pl      BERT      w1178 , w2995
                                                                 10     11     11
                irregular plural subject     sg       BERT      w455 , w153 , w1541
                 verb agreement 1
                                                                 10     10     10      11      11
                                                      GPT-2     w379 , w729 , w2839 , w2173 , w2187
                                                                 31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w566
                                                                 11      11
                                              pl      BERT      w1073 , w1307
                                                                 0      6       10      10      10      11    11     11     11
                                                      GPT-2     w101 , w2674 , w1318 , w1347 , w2409 , w17 , w627 , w896 , w1043 ,
                                                                 11
                                                                w3051
                                                                 30      31     31      31
                                                      LLaMA-2   w5279 , w212 , w2606 , w7839
                                                                 11
                irregular plural subject     sg       BERT      w1350
                 verb agreement 2
                                                                 10      11
                                              pl      BERT      w1178 , w2995


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 7: BLiMP phenomena and paradigms (continued).

  Phenomenon    Paradigms              Property   Model     KNs
                                                             10     11     11
  Subject-      distractor agreement     sg       BERT      w455 , w153 , w1541
  Verb           relational noun
  Agreement
  (continued)

                                                             10     10     10      11      11
                                                  GPT-2     w379 , w729 , w2839 , w2173 , w2187
                                                             31
                                                  LLaMA-2   w566
                                                             9       11
                                          pl      BERT      w2253 , w1307
                                                             0      6       10      10      10      11    11     11     11
                                                  GPT-2     w101 , w2674 , w1318 , w1347 , w2409 , w17 , w627 , w896 , w1043 ,
                                                             11
                                                            w3051
                                                             30      31      31      31
                                                  LLaMA-2   w5279 , w3336 , w3658 , w7342
                                                             11     11
                distractor agreement     sg       BERT      w798 , w1541
                 relative clause
                                                             10     10     10      11      11
                                                  GPT-2     w379 , w729 , w2839 , w2173 , w2187
                                                             31
                                                  LLaMA-2   w566
                                                             9
                                          pl      BERT      w2253
                                                             0      6       10      10      10      11    11     11     11
                                                  GPT-2     w101 , w2674 , w1318 , w1347 , w2409 , w17 , w627 , w896 , w1043 ,
                                                             11
                                                            w3051
                                                             30      31     31      31
                                                  LLaMA-2   w5279 , w212 , w2606 , w7839


C.1     E FFECTS OF S UPPRESSING THE KN S

Figure 10 shows the probability change after erasing the identified singular or plural neuron. All
the results are similar to the base case paradigm presented in the main section of the paper. We
can observe similar levels of probability change as determiner noun agreement 2 with or without
adding distractors (adjectives and irregular verbs).
Figure 11 shows the probability change of subject-verb agreement paradigms on GPT-2 and
LLaMA-2. For GPT-2, we can see that the suppression of the singular neurons causes significant
probability decrease for singular verbs and essentially no effect to plural verbs. The effect of inter-
vention is more pronounced for the plural neurons. For LLaMA-2, however, as the model becomes
larger, the relative importance of each neuron becomes smaller. Therefore, we observe that the effect
of KN editing is less pronounced.


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            (10)                                                                                (9)
                                Effect of suppressing the singular neuron w2096 .                                     Effect of suppressing the plural neuron w1094 .
                     100%                                                                                      500%
Probability Change


                                                                                         Probability Change
                      50%                                                                                      400%
                                                                                                               300%
                       0%                                                                                      200%
                                                                                                               100%
                     -50%
                                                                                                                 0%
                     -100%                                                                                    -100%
                                  these
                                  those
                                    two
                                   both


                                       a
                                      an
                                  every



                                     the
                                    any


                                     my


                                                                                                                          these
                                                                                                                          those
                                                                                                                            two
                                                                                                                           both


                                                                                                                           that
                                                                                                                            one
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                        various
                                                                                                                            this


                                                                                                                          every



                                                                                                                             the
                                                                                                                            any


                                                                                                                             my
                               multiple
                                several
                                various
                                    this
                                   that
                                    one



                                unique
                                 single
                                    sole


                                      all
                                  some

                                     our
                                unified
                              scattered


                                                                                                                       multiple
                                                                                                                        several


                                                                                                                        unique
                                                                                                                         single
                                                                                                                            sole


                                                                                                                              all
                                                                                                                          some

                                                                                                                             our
                                                                                                                        unified
                                                                                                                      scattered
                                               (a) Base case Det-N agreement: determiner noun agreement 2.
                                                                            (10)                                                                                (9)
                                Effect of suppressing the singular neuron w2096 .                                     Effect of suppressing the plural neuron w1094 .
                      50%                                                                                      500%
Probability Change


                                                                                         Probability Change
                                                                                                               400%
                       0%                                                                                      300%
                                                                                                               200%
                     -50%                                                                                      100%
                                                                                                                 0%
                     -100%
                                                                                                              -100%
                                  these
                                  those
                                    two
                                   both


                                       a
                                      an
                                  every



                                     the
                                    any


                                     my


                                                                                                                          these
                                                                                                                          those
                                                                                                                            two
                                                                                                                           both


                                                                                                                           that
                                                                                                                            one
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                        various
                                                                                                                            this


                                                                                                                          every



                                                                                                                             the
                                                                                                                            any


                                                                                                                             my
                               multiple
                                several
                                various
                                    this
                                   that
                                    one



                                unique
                                 single
                                    sole


                                      all
                                  some

                                     our
                                unified
                              scattered


                                                                                                                       multiple
                                                                                                                        several


                                                                                                                        unique
                                                                                                                         single
                                                                                                                            sole


                                                                                                                              all
                                                                                                                          some

                                                                                                                             our
                                                                                                                        unified
                                                                                                                      scattered
                             (b) Det-N agreement with irregular noun inflections: determiner noun agreement with adj 2.
                                                                            (10)                                                                                (9)
                                Effect of suppressing the singular neuron w2096 .                                     Effect of suppressing the plural neuron w1094 .
                                                                                                               500%
Probability Change


                                                                                         Probability Change


                     100%                                                                                      400%
                      50%                                                                                      300%
                       0%                                                                                      200%
                     -50%                                                                                      100%
                                                                                                                 0%
                     -100%
                                                                                                              -100%
                                  these
                                  those
                                    two
                                   both


                                       a
                                      an
                                  every



                                     the
                                    any


                                     my


                                                                                                                          these
                                                                                                                          those
                                                                                                                            two
                                                                                                                           both


                                                                                                                           that
                                                                                                                            one
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                        various
                                                                                                                            this


                                                                                                                          every



                                                                                                                             the
                                                                                                                            any


                                                                                                                             my
                               multiple
                                several
                                various
                                    this
                                   that
                                    one



                                unique
                                 single
                                    sole


                                      all
                                  some

                                     our
                                unified
                              scattered


                                                                                                                       multiple
                                                                                                                        several


                                                                                                                        unique
                                                                                                                         single
                                                                                                                            sole


                                                                                                                              all
                                                                                                                          some

                                                                                                                             our
                                                                                                                        unified
                              (c) Det-N agreement with an adjective distractor: determiner noun agreement irregular 2.scattered

                                                                            (10)                                                                                (9)
                                Effect of suppressing the singular neuron w2096 .                                     Effect of suppressing the plural neuron w1094 .
                     100%
                                                                                         Probability Change
Probability Change


                                                                                                              200%
                      50%
                       0%                                                                                     100%

                     -50%
                                                                                                               0%
                     -100%
                                                                                                                          these
                                                                                                                          those
                                                                                                                            two
                                                                                                                           both


                                                                                                                            one
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                              an



                                                                                                                            sole
                                                                                                                             the
                                                                                                                            any
                                                                                                                       multiple
                                                                                                                        several
                                                                                                                        various
                                                                                                                            this
                                                                                                                           that



                                                                                                                          every
                                                                                                                        unique
                                                                                                                         single



                                                                                                                              all
                                                                                                                          some
                                                                                                                             my
                                                                                                                             our
                                                                                                                        unified
                                                                                                                      scattered
                                  these
                                  those
                                    two
                                   both


                                    one
                                       a
                                      an


                                     the
                                    any


                                     my
                                 single
                                    sole


                                      all
                                  some

                                     our
                               multiple
                                several
                                various
                                    this
                                   that



                                  every
                                unique


                                unified
                              scattered


                             (d) Adjective distractor and irregular nouns: determiner noun agreement with adj irregular 2

Figure 10: Effect of suppressing the KNs of type 2 determiner-noun agreement on BERT. We can
observe similar levels of probability change as determiner noun agreement 2 with or without adding
distractors (adjectives and irregular verbs).


                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Effect of suppressing the singular KNs                                                                                                                      Effect of suppressing the plural KNs
                              0%                                                                                                                                                         200%
       Probability Change


                                                                                                                                                                    Probability Change
                                                                                                                                                                                           0%
                            -100%

                                                                                                                                                                                         -200%
                            -200%
                                            are
                                                     is
                                                                were
                                                                       was
                                                                              have
                                                                                     has
                                                                                           run
                                                                                                   runs
                                                                                                          fight
                                                                                                                  fights
                                                                                                                             throw
                                                                                                                                     throws
                                                                                                                                              see
                                                                                                                                                     sees


                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              runs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        throw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                throws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sees
                                                           (a) Base case subject-verb agreement: regular plural subject verb agreement 1.
                                                               Effect of suppressing the singular KNs                                                                                                                      Effect of suppressing the plural KNs
                              0%
       Probability Change


                                                                                                                                                                    Probability Change
                                                                                                                                                                                         250%
                            -200%
                                                                                                                                                                                           0%
                            -400%
                                                                                                                                                                                         -250%
                            -600%
                                            are
                                                     is
                                                                were
                                                                       was
                                                                              have
                                                                                     has
                                                                                           run
                                                                                                   runs
                                                                                                          fight
                                                                                                                  fights
                                                                                                                             throw
                                                                                                                                     throws
                                                                                                                                              see
                                                                                                                                                     sees


                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              runs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        throw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                throws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sees
                                        (b) Subject-verb agreement with irregular verbs: irregular plural subject verb agreement 1.
                                                               Effect of suppressing the singular KNs                                                                                                                      Effect of suppressing the plural KNs
       Probability Change


                                                                                                                                                                    Probability Change


                              0%
                                                                                                                                                                                         200%


                            -200%                                                                                                                                                          0%

                                                                                                                                                                                         -200%
                            -400%
                                            are
                                                     is
                                                                were
                                                                       was
                                                                              have
                                                                                     has
                                                                                           run
                                                                                                   runs
                                                                                                          fight
                                                                                                                  fights
                                                                                                                             throw
                                                                                                                                     throws
                                                                                                                                              see
                                                                                                                                                     sees


                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              runs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        throw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                throws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sees
                                  (c) Subject-verb agreement with relational noun distractor: distractor agreement relational noun.
                                                               Effect of suppressing the singular KNs                                                                                                                      Effect of suppressing the plural KNs
                              0%                                                                                                                                                         200%
       Probability Change


                                                                                                                                                                    Probability Change


                            -100%                                                                                                                                                          0%

                            -200%                                                                                                                                                        -200%
                                            are
                                                     is
                                                                were
                                                                       was
                                                                              have
                                                                                     has
                                                                                           run
                                                                                                   runs
                                                                                                          fight
                                                                                                                  fights
                                                                                                                             throw
                                                                                                                                     throws
                                                                                                                                              see
                                                                                                                                                     sees


                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              runs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        throw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                throws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sees


                                  (d) Subject-verb agreement with relative clause distractor: distractor agreement relative clause.
                                                        Effect of suppressing the singular KNs                                                                                                                         Effect of suppressing the plural KNs
                             2%                                                                                                                                                          20%
Probability Change


                                                                                                                                                             Probability Change


                             0%
                            -2%                                                                                                                                                          10%
                            -5%
                            -7%                                                                                                                                                          0%
                                    reference
                                                  references
                                                                 run
                                                                             runs
                                                                                     fight
                                                                                                 fights
                                                                                                           throw
                                                                                                                           throws
                                                                                                                                      have
                                                                                                                                                    has


                                                                                                                                                                                                 reference
                                                                                                                                                                                                              references
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        runs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      throw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      throws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               has


(e) LLaMA-2 results on regular plural subject verb agreement 1. The effect of editing is less pronounced on
larger LMs, as each neuron has smaller relative importance.

                                                   Figure 11: Effect of suppressing the subject-verb agreement KNs on GPT-2.


                                                                                                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       determiner_noun_agreement_1                                   determiner_noun_agreement_2                                  determiner_noun_agreement_irregular_1                          determiner_noun_agreement_irregular_2
                                                                                                                                            70%
                                                                          40%
             50%                                                                                                                            60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                           30%
             40%                                                          30%                                                               50%
Percentage


                                                             Percentage


                                                                                                                               Percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage
                                                                                                                                            40%
             30%                                                                                                                                                                                           20%
                                                                          20%                                                               30%
             20%
                                                                                                                                            20%                                                            10%
                                                                          10%
             10%                                                                                                                            10%
             0%                                                           0%                                                                 0%                                                            0%
                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                              Layer                                                         Layer                                                           Layer                                                          Layer
                   determiner_noun_agreement_with_adj_1                          determiner_noun_agreement_with_adj_2                        determiner_noun_agreement_with_adj_irregular_1                 determiner_noun_agreement_with_adj_irregular_2
             50%                                                          40%                                                               60%                                                            40%
             40%                                                                                                                            50%
                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                           30%
Percentage


                                                             Percentage


                                                                                                                               Percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage
             30%                                                                                                                            40%
                                                                          20%                                                               30%                                                            20%
             20%
                                                                                                                                            20%
             10%                                                          10%                                                                                                                              10%
                                                                                                                                            10%
             0%                                                           0%                                                                 0%                                                            0%
                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                              Layer                                                         Layer                                                           Layer                                                          Layer


                                              (a) Layer distribution of BLiMP determiner-noun agreement paradigms.
                   regular_plural_subject_verb_agreement_1                      irregular_plural_subject_verb_agreement_1                          distractor_agreement_relational_noun                           distractor_agreement_relative_clause
                                                                          70%                                                               60%                                                            50%
             60%                                                          60%                                                               50%
             50%                                                          50%                                                                                                                              40%
                                                                                                                                            40%
Percentage


                                                             Percentage


                                                                                                                               Percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage
             40%                                                          40%                                                                                                                              30%
             30%                                                                                                                            30%
                                                                          30%                                                                                                                              20%
             20%                                                          20%                                                               20%
             10%                                                          10%                                                               10%                                                            10%
              0%                                                           0%                                                               0%                                                             0%
                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                              Layer                                                         Layer                                                           Layer                                                          Layer


                                                  (b) Layer distribution of BLiMP subject-verb agreement paradigms.
                                                                                                                              PARAREL

                                                                                                               30%
                                                                                                  Percentage


                                                                                                               20%

                                                                                                               10%

                                                                                                               0%
                                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                                                                                                               Layer


                         (c) Recreation of Dai et al.’s (2022) KN distribution result across ParaRel relations (Figure 3).

Figure 12: Percentage of knowledge neurons identified in different BLiMP paradigms using BERT.


C.2                    L AYER D ISTRIBUTION OF I DENTIFIED KN S

In Figure 12, we analysed the layers of the identified KNs on each BLiMP paradigm and compare it
with Dai et al.’s (2022) finding on PARA R EL. We notice that the vast majority of neurons of all types
are distributed in the topmost layers of BERT. This result confirms Dai et al.’s (2022) observation
but disproved their position. There is nothing unique to fact-related neurons. This finding agrees
with Niu et al.’s (2022) refutation of Jawahar et al. (2019) and Tenney et al. (2019). Syntactic
information (formal competence) and semantic information (functional competence) do not occupy
different layers of the language model.

C.3                    L EVELS OF LOCALISATION

Table 8 shows the levels of localisation on BERT across all determiner-noun agreement (DNA)
BLiMP paradigms. These measures are comparable to PARA R EL results shown in Table 9.


                                                                                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 8: Levels of localisation of determiner-noun agreement.

                                                               BERT                    GPT-2                      LLaMA-2
    Paradigm
                                                      |KN|       τ      R12    |KN|      τ        R12     |KN|       τ    R12
    determiner noun agreement 1                        3.94     0.71    0.56   0.06     0.45      0.15     3.38     0.44   0.24
    determiner noun agreement 2                        1.86     0.62    0.56     -        -         -        -        -      -
    determiner noun agreement irregular 1              5.53     0.73    0.64   1.32     0.58      0.24     4.93     0.48   0.46
    determiner noun agreement irregular 2              2.45     0.67    0.55     -        -         -        -        -      -
    determiner noun agreement with adjective 1         8.88     0.78    0.67   1.31     0.62      0.17     3.38     0.44   0.24
    determiner noun agreement with adjective 2         2.26     0.67    0.57     -        -         -        -        -      -
    determiner noun agreement with adj irregular 1     9.79     0.78    0.67   0.12     0.51      0.15     4.55     0.45   0.48
    determiner noun agreement with adj irregular 2     2.60     0.69    0.58     -        -         -        -        -      -


                      Table 9: Levels of localisation of different PARA R EL relations.

                                   BERT                                GPT-2                          LLaMA-2
         Relation
                         |KN|        τ          R12           |KN|       τ       R12       |KN|          τ    R12
         P101            0.167      0.515      0.399       1.537       0.708    0.278          1.0        0.61     0.306
         P103            0.204      0.662      0.399       1.968       0.649    0.375          7.53      0.733     0.410
         P106            1.292      0.607      0.365      10.090       0.853    0.599          0.28      0.438     0.258
         P108            1.493      0.663      0.473      10.433       0.848    0.269          18.1      0.735     0.599
         P127            1.512      0.630      0.552      11.758       0.769    0.549          0.3       0.585     0.163
         P1303          10.462      0.814      0.684      12.453       0.771    0.573          0.3        0.63     0.303
         P136           14.862      0.856      0.646      14.435       0.878    0.677          2.1        0.64     0.754
         P1376          15.640      0.842      0.628      14.892       0.794    0.624          1.4       0.592     0.435
         P138           16.992      0.958      0.874      15.365       0.794    0.621          1.4        0.62     0.605
         P140            2.008      0.689      0.263      16.543       0.848    0.707          0.7        0.64     0.290
         P1412           2.196      0.687      0.612      18.286       0.782    0.618          1.8        0.66     0.590
         P159            2.200      0.666      0.392      19.285       0.838    0.626          9.5       0.765     0.637
         P176            2.376      0.680      0.254      19.299       0.823    0.650          2.7       0.675     0.524
         P178            2.553      0.686      0.392      19.898       0.828    0.686          2.1        0.65     0.414
         P19             2.597      0.693      0.481       2.603       0.661    0.417          0.24      0.482     0.526
         P190            2.920      0.673      0.308      21.989       0.949    0.757          0.8        0.54     0.216
         P20            28.993      0.883      0.644      22.984       0.871    0.671          0.52      0.458     0.377
         P264            3.335      0.667      0.213      23.082       0.867    0.685          1.7       0.605     0.416
         P27             3.925      0.722      0.483      29.296       0.862    0.619          1.8        0.67     0.376
         P279            4.286      0.691      0.657       3.437       0.649    0.360          14.7      0.755     0.683
         P30             4.338      0.698      0.449      42.128       0.856    0.642          3.27      0.673     0.288
         P36             4.428      0.714      0.619       5.195       0.776    0.472           4        0.645     0.442
         P364            4.541      0.709      0.553       5.545       0.707    0.481          3.47       0.69     0.478
         P37             4.876      0.718      0.477       5.863       0.787    0.489          0.7        0.56     0.447
         P39             5.230      0.722      0.413       6.051       0.683    0.450          0.6        0.59     0.243
         P407            5.456      0.730      0.611       6.149       0.680    0.483          0.04      0.358     0.280
         P413            5.632      0.809      0.539       6.346       0.740    0.522          0.9        0.63     0.252
         P449            6.005      0.710      0.717       7.150       0.743    0.501          0.6        0.53     0.373
         P463            6.088      0.776      0.467       7.697       0.735    0.437          1.7        0.65     0.489
         P47             6.356      0.776      0.739       8.078       0.701    0.524          11.7        0.8     0.730
         P495            6.455      0.709      0.513       8.209       0.744    0.569          1.0       0.505     0.585
         P530            7.280      0.785      0.688       8.598       0.765    0.558          1.84      0.552     0.615
         P740            7.324      0.769      0.518       8.840       0.737    0.477          2.1       0.505     0.796
         P937            8.623      0.725      0.572       9.594       0.782    0.621          2.53      0.673     0.752


D    C AUSAL T RACING
In this section we present an extended analysis of our causal tracing analysis. We use the same
hyperparameters and settings as suggested by Meng et al. (2022).
Meng et al.’s (2022) causal tracing experiment is conducted in three steps:


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     1. In the clean run, they pass a prompt into the model and record all the hidden activation
        values.
     2. Then, they conduct a corrupt run. They perturb the prompt’s subject by adding a noise
        value ϵ to the input embedding. Because of the obfuscation, the model will like generate
        an incorrect answer.
     3. Finally, in the corrupted-with-restoration run, they let the model run with the corrupted
        value. But every time for a pair of token and layer, they replace the corrupted output with
        the original clean state. Then they let the model continue without further intervention. If
        this restoration can attenuate the effect of obfuscation, they interpret this state as having a
        strong causal importance. The difference between the corrupted output probability and the
        output probability after restoring one location is called the indirect effect of that location.

However, all of the analysis are based on observing individual causal traces. Meng et al. (2022)
also proposed to compute the average indirect effect over larger quantity of sentences. In Table 13
we present our analysis of average indirect effects across different types of information. The result
confirms our findings in Section 4.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Many factual causal traces also do not show this distinction. Example taken from Meng et al.’s (2022)
Figure 10c. The MLP module show causality at both the early and the late site.

                                         ParaRel P19                 1e 6 1.75                                              ParaRel P19                 1e 6                                                    ParaRel P19                  1e 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
    First subject token                                                                 First subject token                                                      1.2       First subject token
                                                                             1.50
 Middle subject tokens                                                              Middle subject tokens                                                              Middle subject tokens                                                         0.8
                                                                             1.25                                                                                1.0
    Last subject token                                                       1.00       Last subject token                                                       0.8       Last subject token                                                        0.6
First subsequent token                                                       0.75   First subsequent token                                                       0.6   First subsequent token                                                        0.4
       Further tokens                                                        0.50          Further tokens                                                        0.4          Further tokens
                                                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                 0.2
                                                                             0.25
            Last token                                                                          Last token                                                                         Last token
                                                                             0.00                                                                                0.0                                                                                 0.0
                          0    5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                                         0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                                           0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
                               single patched layer within GPT2-XL     AIE                                     center of interval of 10 patched mlp layers AIE                                    center of interval of 10 patched attn layers AIE


(b) We reproduced Meng et al.’s (2022) calculation of the average indirect effect of individual model compo-
nents. We do see the separation between MLP and attention modules. However, we can also see that there is a
weaker but discernible MLP causality at the late site. This shows that the previous example is not a negligible
anomaly. The causal tracing pattern is less stable than Meng et al. (2022) originally conjectured.

                                  Det-N Agreement                                                                    Det-N Agreement                                                                   Det-N Agreement
                                                                        0.015                                                                                0.015                                                                               0.0100
Determiner token                                                                    Determiner token                                                                   Determiner token
                                                                        0.010                                                                                0.010                                                                               0.0075
  Adjective token                                                                     Adjective token                                                                    Adjective token                                                         0.0050
                                                                        0.005                                                                                0.005
        Last token                                                                          Last token                                                                                                                                           0.0025
                                                                                                                                                                               Last token
                          0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                   AIE 0.000                           0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                     AIE 0.000                             0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40              AIE 0.0000
                          single patched layer within GPT2-XL                                         center of interval of 10 patched mlp layers                                        center of interval of 10 patched attn layers

(c) The pattern that the MLP modules occupy an early site and attention modules occupy a late site do not
persist for determiner-noun agreement. We used the determiner noun agreement with adjective 1 paradigm
for this experiment as it contains the adjective token that is analogous to the first subsequent and further tokens
that Meng et al. (2022) investigated.

                                   Subject-Verb Agreement            1e 6 2.0                                         Subject-Verb Agreement             1e 6                                            Subject-Verb Agreement              1e 6 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                  4
         Subject token                                                                       Subject token                                                                     Subject token
                                                                              1.5                                                                                 3                                                                                  1.5
First subsequent token                                                              First subsequent token                                                             First subsequent token
                                                                              1.0                                                                                 2                                                                                  1.0
        Further tokens                                                                      Further tokens                                                                     Further tokens
                                                                              0.5                                                                                 1                                                                                  0.5
            Last token                                                                          Last token                                                                         Last token
                           0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                   AIE 0.0                               0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                        AIE 0                              0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                         AIE 0.0
                               single patched layer within GPT2-XL                                             center of interval of 10 patched mlp layers                                        center of interval of 10 patched attn layers


(d) The pattern of two distinct early and late sites is less apparent for subject-verb agreement. In fact, the MLP
modules have the strongest causality at higher layers (30-35) than attention (∼25).


             Figure 13: Average indirect effect of different model component over multiple samples.


                                                                                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: The construction of our evaluation corpus for relation symmetry and synonym replacement

 Relation                              Edit Prompt                                 Evaluate Prompt
                                                 ∗
 Symmetry   Template:   [S] is the capital of [T→T ].                              The capital of [T∗ ] is [S∗ →S].
 P1376      Example:    Ottawa is the capital of Canada→Italy.                     The capital of Italy is Rome→Ottawa.
 Symmetry   Template:   The capital of [S] is [T→T∗ ].                             [T∗ ] is the capital of [S∗ →S].
 P36        Example:    The capital of Canada is Ottawa→Rome.                      Rome is the capital of Italy→Canada.
 Synonym    Template:   [S] works in the field of [T→T∗ ].                         [S] is a [Ts →T∗s]
 P101       Example:    Anaxagoras works in the field of philosophy→linguistics.   Anaxagoras is a famous philosopher→linguist.


E    E VALUATION OF S YMMETRY AND S YNONYM
We construct the datasets used for both the symmetry and synonym evaluation from PARA R EL
relations. Table 10 shows an overview of the data construction process.

Symmetry We used the two bijective relations: P1376 (capital of) and P36 (capital) to evaluate
the symmetry property.
For each P1376 (capital of) relation (s, t, r), we edit the model using the prompt “[S] is the capital
of” and change the target from t to t∗ . t∗ is another city from the corpus. Then, we prompt the
model with “The capital of [T∗ ] is” and see if the model outputs s with a higher probability than the
original s∗ . We identified 234 relations in total.
Similarly, for relation P36 (capital), we edit the model using the original prompt “The capital of [S]
is” and try to change the target from t to t∗ . t∗ is another country/state from the corpus. Again, if the
model outputs s with a higher probability than the original s∗ , we count the evaluation as success.
We identified 703 relations.

Synonym For synonym replacement, we use P101 (field of work). We first rewrite each field of
work to the occupation name. For example, linguistics → linguist and aviation → pilot.
Through the process, we identified several mistakes in the original P101 data. For example, some
of the field of work targets are already names of occupation, resulting in ill-formed prompts such as
“Clyde Tombaugh works in the field of astronomer.” Some of the fields of work, typically country
names, cannot be converted into occupation names. For example “Mark Mazower works in the field
of Balkans.” We discard data entries with these issues and we collect 50 distinct field of works with
their occupations. Finally, we obtain 568 entries.
We edit the model with the original prompt “[S] works in the filed of” and edit the target from t to
t∗ . t∗ is another field of work we collected from P101. Then, we use the prompt “[S] is a” to elicit
response from the edited model. Let ts and t∗s be the two occupation names correspond to t and t∗ ,
we want to see if the model can also assign a higher probability to the new target synonym t∗s than
the original ts .
For example, first we edit the model from “Anaxagoras works in the field of philosophy” to
linguistics. Then, we prompt the model with “Anaxagoras is a famous” an see whether the model
assign a higher probability to linguist rather than philosopher.


                                                            26
