Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B RO GN ET : M OMENTUM C ONSERVING G RAPH N EU -
RAL S TOCHASTIC D IFFERENTIAL E QUATION FOR
L EARNING B ROWNIAN DYNAMICS
 Suresh Bishnoi, Jayadeva, Sayan Ranu, N. M. Anoop Krishnan ∗
 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India 110016
 {srz208500,jayadeva,sayanranu,krishnan}@iitd.ac.in



                                             A BSTRACT
         Neural networks (NNs) that exploit strong inductive biases based on physical
         laws and symmetries have shown remarkable success in learning the dynamics
         of physical systems directly from their trajectory. However, these works focus
         only on the systems that follow deterministic dynamics, such as Newtonian or
         Hamiltonian. Here, we propose a framework, namely Brownian graph neural
         networks (B RO GN ET), combining stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and
         G NNs to learn Brownian dynamics directly from the trajectory. We modify the
         architecture of B RO GN ET to enforce linear momentum conservation of the system,
         which, in turn, provides superior performance on learning dynamics as revealed
         empirically. We demonstrate this approach on several systems, namely, linear
         spring, linear spring with binary particle types, and non-linear spring systems, all
         following Brownian dynamics at finite temperatures. We show that B RO GN ET
         significantly outperforms proposed baselines across all the benchmarked Brownian
         systems. In addition, we demonstrate zero-shot generalizability of B RO GN ET to
         simulate unseen system sizes that are two orders of magnitude larger and to different
         temperatures than those used during training. Finally, we show that B RO GN ET
         conserves the momentum of the system resulting in superior performance and data
         efficiency. Altogether, our study contributes to advancing the understanding of
         the intricate dynamics of Brownian motion and demonstrates the effectiveness of
         graph neural networks in modeling such complex systems.

1    I NTRODUCTION AND R ELATED W ORKS
Learning the dynamics of physical systems directly from their trajectory is an active area of research
due to their potential applications in materials modeling Park et al. (2021), drug discovery Vamath-
evan et al. (2019), motion planning Ni & Qureshi (2022), robotics Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2019);
Greydanus et al. (2019), and even astrophysics Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020). Recent works demon-
strated that physics-based inductive biases could enable the learned models to follow conservation
laws such as energy and momentum while also simplifying the learning making the model data
efficient Thangamuthu et al. (2022); Finzi et al. (2020). Among these, a family of models, such as
Lagrangian or Hamiltonian neural networks Bhattoo et al. (2023; 2022); Lee et al. (2021); Sanchez-
Gonzalez et al. (2019); Greydanus et al. (2019) and Neural ODEs Bishnoi et al. (2022); Zhong et al.
(2019); Gruver et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2018), enforces the physics-based inductive biases in a strong
sense. Here, a governing ordinary differential equation (ODE) is used along with a neural network
to learn the abstract quantities, such as energy or force, directly from the trajectory of the system.
These models have shown remarkable success in learning the dynamics of a variety of systems in
an efficient fashion, viz., particle-based systems Bishnoi et al. (2022); Thangamuthu et al. (2022),
atomistic dynamics Park et al. (2021); Huang et al. (2022), physical systems Bhattoo et al. (2023);
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2019); Greydanus et al. (2019), and articulated systems Bhattoo et al. (2022).
Despite their success, these works focus on purely deterministic systems where the dynamics are
governed by an ODE Karniadakis et al. (2021); Thangamuthu et al. (2022); Zhong et al. (2021). An
alternative approach to model physical systems is to formulate the governing equation as a stochastic
   ∗
     SB: School of Interdisciplinary Research, J: Department of Electrical Engineering, SR: Department of
Computer Science, NMAK: Department of Civil Engineering, SR and NMAK: Yardi School of Artificial
Intelligence (joint appointment).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differential equation (SDE), for instance, Brownian dynamics (BD)—widely used to study the
dynamics of particles in a fluid or solvent Van Gunsteren & Berendsen (1982). Brownian dynamics
simulations have proven to be highly valuable in numerous scientific disciplines. In physics, they
have been used to study the diffusion of particles Chung et al. (1999), the self-assembly of colloidal
systems Noguchi & Takasu (2001), and the behavior of polymers in solution Helfand et al. (1980). In
chemistry, Brownian dynamics simulations have shed light on reaction kinetics Northrup & Erickson
(1992), molecular diffusion Madura et al. (1995), and the behavior of macromolecules Cates (1985).
In biology, they have provided insights into the movement of cells Klank et al. (2018), the folding
of proteins Karplus & Weaver (1994), and the dynamics of biomolecular complexes Gabdoulline &
Wade (2001). Despite their importance in such wide domains, while there have been approaches to
inferring the nature of Brownian dynamics from observations in a statistical sense Gnesotto et al.
(2020); Genkin et al. (2021), to the best of the authors’ knowledge, no attempt has been made to learn
the dynamics of Brownian systems in particular, or SDEs in general, from their trajectory.
An alternate approach involves learning the dynamics directly using the graph representation of
the data Poli et al. (2021); Chamberlain et al. (2021); Eliasof et al. (2021); Gravina et al. (2023);
Rusch et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2019); Eliasof et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023). Here, a physical
system is modeled using a graph neural network (G NN) where the nodes represent the particles
and the edges represent the interactions. To these models, additional inductive bias in terms of
physics-informed loss functions (“soft constraints”) or architectures (“hard constraints”) can be
employed. Diverse approaches integrating soft and hard constraints have advanced the understanding
and learning of dynamical systems. Previous works explored the utilization of coupled ODEs for
real-time diagnosis of COVID-19 spread Dandekar et al. (2020), capturing system invariants Zhang
et al. (2023), and incorporating conservation laws Hansen et al. (2024), to name a few. Furthermore,
the significance of physics-informed inductive biases to enhance the performance of G NNs has also
been studied Thangamuthu et al. (2022). Architectural modifications for hard constraints include
graph neural ODEs, and Lagrangian and Hamiltonian graph neural networks Poli et al. (2021);
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2019); Bhattoo et al. (2023; 2022). Haber & Ruthotto (2017) presents
an architecture that mitigates gradient instability with ODEs and Hamiltonian-inspired forward
propagation. E et al. (2017) successfully models complex dynamics through a connection with
backward stochastic differential equations. However, most of these works focus on deterministic
systems, and there are limited efforts to extend them to stochastic systems Eliasof et al. (2023).
Here, we propose B RO GN ET, which can learn the Brownian dynamics of a system directly from
the trajectory. Exploiting a G NN-based framework, we show that the Brownian dynamics can be
learned from small systems, which can then be generalized to arbitrarily large systems. The major
contributions of the work are as follows.
• Learning stochastic dynamics from trajectory: We present a framework, B RO GN ET, that learns
  the abstract quantities governing the dynamics of stochastic systems directly from their trajectory.
  While demonstrated for Brownian dynamics, the framework presented is generic and may be
  applied to other SDEs as well.
• Graph-based modeling for zero-shot generalizability: We model the physical system as a graph
  with nodes representing particles and edges representing their interactions, which can then be used
  to learn BD. The inductive graph-based modeling naturally imparts the desirable properties of
  zero-shot generalizability to unseen system sizes and permutation invariance. In addition, we also
  demonstrate generalizability to unseen temperatures in a zero-shot fashion.
• Momentum conservation: We demonstrate that the proposed framework follows Newton’s third
  law, thereby conserving the total linear momentum of the system. This feature, in turn, provides
  superior performance for the model.


2   BACKGROUND ON B ROWNIAN DYNAMICS
The fundamental concept behind Brownian dynamics is the influence of thermal fluctuations on
the motion of particles. In a fluid, particles are subject to random collisions with the surrounding
molecules, which lead to erratic motion characterized by continuous changes in direction and speed
(see the videos in the supplementary for a visual depiction). The behavior of particles undergoing
Brownian motion can be described mathematically using SDEs, such as over-damped Langevin
equations Coffey & Kalmykov (2020). These equations incorporate deterministic forces, such as
external potentials or interactions between particles, as well as stochastic forces that represent the


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: B RO GN ET’s architecture. MLP refers to multilayer perception, G NN to graph neural
networks and ohe to one-hot encoding.
random effects of the surrounding fluid. By numerically integrating these equations, it is possible to
simulate and analyze the dynamic behavior of the particles over time.
Consider a system of N particles with masses M and interacting with each other through an interaction
potential U (Xt ), where Xt represents the position vectors of all the particles at time t, constituting a
time-dependent random variable. The Langevin equation governing the dynamics of this system is
given by Coffey & Kalmykov (2020)                           p
                          M Ẍt = −∇U (Xt ) − ζM Ẋt + 2M ζkB T Ωt                                     (1)
where −∇U (Xt ) = F (Xt ) is the force due to the inter-particle interactions, ζ is the damping
constant, T is the temperature, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and Ωt is a delta-correlated stationary
Gaussian process with zero mean that follows ⟨Ωt ⟩ = 0 and ⟨Ωt .Ωt′ ⟩ = δ(t − t′ ), where δ is the
standard Dirac-delta function. In the over-damped limit of Langevin dynamics, where no acceleration
exists, the equation reduces to Brownian dynamics as Brańka & Heyes (1998)
                                                        √
                                dXt      −∇U (Xt ))       2γkB T
                                      =              +            Ωt                              (2)
                                 dt           γ             γ
                                        |    {z    } | {z }
                                            drift term       diffusion term

where γ = M ζ. Thus, the evolution of a system can be obtained by numerically integrating the SDE
given by Eq. 2. The first term in the RHS of Eq. 2 is the deterministic inter-particle interaction (drift
term), and the stochastic nature in the dynamics comes from the second term (diffusion).

3    B RO GN ET : A G RAPH N EURAL SDE A PPROACH
To learn the trajectories of a multi-particle system governed by Brownian dynamics, we design
a neural network called B RO GN ET. B RO GN ET is essentially a Graph Neural SDE—inspired by
Graph Neural ODE, which parametrizes an ODE using a G NN. Thus, B RO GN ET parameterizes the
stochastic dynamics B(Xt ) using a neural network and learns the approximate function B̂(Xt ) by
minimizing the loss between the distribution of ground truth trajectories with that of the predicted
trajectories. However, in contrast to classical dynamics, the loss is applied over a distribution of
positions rather than the exact deterministic trajectory due to the stochastic nature of the dynamics.
We discuss the exact loss function in detail later.
The learning process is, therefore, decomposed into two factors: the standard deviation associated
with the ground-truth stochastic process corresponding to each particle and their expected positions.
In B RO GN ET, the standard deviation is learned through an MLP. On the other hand, the expected
positions are learned through a Graph Neural SDE. The choice of using a G NN to model interaction
dynamics is motivated by two key observations. First, a G NN allows us to be inductive, where the
number of model parameters is independent of the number of particles in the system. Hence, it
enables zero-shot generalizability to systems of arbitrary unseen sizes. In addition, a G NN allows
permutation-invariant modeling of the system. Below, we discuss the details.
3.1 T HE G NN A RCHITECTURE
B RO GN ET models the interaction dynamics among participating particles as a graph. The graph
topology is used to learn the approximate dynamics B̂ by minimizing the distance between distribu-
tions representing the true and predicted positions. Note that henceforth all the variables with a hat (ˆ)
correspond to the approximate variable learned by the machine learning model.
Graph structure. We represent an N -particle system as an directed graph G = {V, E}. V represents
the set of nodes, where each node represents a particle. Similarly, E represents interactions or


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


connections among particles in the form of edges. For example, in a ball-spring system or colloidal
gels, the balls or colloid particles correspond to nodes, and the springs or the interactions between
the colloidal particles correspond to edges. Note that in the case of systems such as springs, where
explicit connections are pre-defined, the graph structure remains static. However, in the case of
systems like colloidal gels, the edges are defined based on a neighborhood cut-off, and hence the
graph structure can be dynamic, with the edges between particles changing as a function of the
particle configuration. As we will see in the next paragraph, a directed graph is required only because
the edge weights we use are directional.
Input features. Each node corresponds to a particle i and is defined by its intrinsic features, such as
the particle’s type (τi ), position (Xi,t ), and velocity (Ẋi,t ) at time t. The position and velocities are
3-dimensional tuples corresponding to the x, y and z dimensions. The particle type distinguishes
between different characteristics, such as varying masses or friction coefficient for balls or particles.
For brevity, Xi,t is referred to as Xi henceforth unless specified otherwise. On the other hand, each
edge represents the connection between nodes and is represented by the 3-dimensional edge feature
wij = (Xi − Xj ), which signifies the relative displacement of the connected nodes along each
coordinate. Note that the edge weights are asymmetric due to the vectorial nature of the input.
Summary of neural architecture. Fig. 1 provides a pictorial description of B RO GN ET. In the
pre-processing layer, we utilize Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs) to create dense vector representations
for each node vi and edge eij . In systems where internal forces play a significant role in governing
dynamics, the structure’s topology holds crucial importance. To capture this dependency, we employ
a deep, message-passing Graph Neural Network (G NN). The final representation zi = hL                  i and
zij = hL  ij are  generated   by  the G  NN   for each  node   and    edge  respectively, capturing relevant
information. These representations are subsequently passed through another MLP to predict the force
of each node. We next detail these individual steps.
Pre-processing. In the pre-processing layer, a dense vector representation is constructed for each
node vi and edge eij using an MLP denoted as MLPem . The construction process can be described as
                             h0i = squareplus(MLPem (one-hot(τi )))                                      (3)
                            h0ij = squareplus(MLPem (wij ))                                              (4)

Here, squareplus represents an activation function. It is important to note that the node and edge
embedding functions, parameterized by MLPem , utilize separate weights. For the sake of brevity, we
refer to them simply as MLPem . Note that the node representations do not explicitly encode their
ground-truth positions. Only the distances between nodes are encoded in the edge representations.
This allows us to ensure translational invariance.
Force prediction. We utilize multiple layers of message-passing to facilitate communication between
nodes and edges. In the ℓth layer, the node embeddings are updated as follows:
                                                                                 
                                                      n X          n X
                 hℓ+1
                  i   = squareplus WVℓ · hℓi                hℓji            hℓij             (5)
                                                            j∈Niin        j∈Niout

Here, Niin = {vj ∈ V | eji ∈ E} and Niout =     f {vj ∈ V | eij ∈ E} represents the incoming
and outgoing neighbors of node vi respectively. denotes the vector concatenation operation.The
term WVℓ signifies a layer-specific learnable weight matrix. More simply, we sum-pool the edge
embeddings over both incoming and outgoing neighbors, concatenate them along with the target
node’s own embedding and then pass it through one linear transformation followed by non-linearity.
The embedding of an edge eij on node vi in the ℓth layer, denoted as hℓij , is computed as:
                                                             n n
                        hℓ+1
                          ij  = squareplus WEℓ · hℓij hℓi hℓj                                 (6)

Similar to WVℓ , WEℓ is a layer-specific learnable weight matrix that applies to the edge set. The
message-passing process spans L layers, with L being a hyper-parameter. In the Lth layer, the final
node and edge representations are denoted as zi = hL              L
                                                    i and zij = hij , respectively.

Finally, the pair-wise interaction force F̂ij from particle i to j is predicted as:
                                  F̂ij = squareplus(MLPV (zij ))                                         (7)
where, MLPV denotes a Multilayer Perceptron with a squareplus activation function Barron (2021).
One may also use ReLU as activation function, see empirical comparison at Fig. L in App. H


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The force on a node is defined as the summation of all forces from incoming edges and the reactive
force from its outgoing edges. Mathematically,
                                         X            X
                                   F̂i =     F̂ji +         −F̂ij                              (8)
                                              j∈Niin        j∈Niout


Here, the second term accounts for the reactive force from each outgoing edge, which is essentially
the negated version of the force particle i imparts on particle j. This inductive bias ensures Newton’s
third law that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. More importantly, this inductive
bias implicitly ensures that the net force on the system is zero, thereby strictly ensuring momentum
conservation. Formally:
Theorem 1 (Momentum Conservation) In the absence of an external field, B RO GN ET exactly
conserves the linear momentum of the system.
Proof of the theorem is provided in Appendix A. Further, as demonstrated later the empirical
results comparing the performance of B RO GN ET with a version that does not employ the momentum
conservation, namely, Brownian dynamics G NN (BDG NN), suggests that the momentum conservation
indeed results in better performance of the model.
Learning the Brownian term. While we can learn the distribution associated with the diffusion
term (see Eq.( 2)), it is well-known that Brownian motion follows multivariate Gaussian distribution.
The diffusion term is independent of the system topology and depends only the particle type and its
attributes such as radius or friction coefficient. To learn this term, we represent the node type as a
one-hot encoding, which is passed through an MLP to obtain the γ̂i associated with each particle (see
Fig. 1). This γ̂i , along with force obtained from the G NN, is substituted in the governing equation
(Eq. 2) and learned in an end-to-end√fashion. It is worth noting that the standard deviation of the
stochastic process is given by σi = 2γi kB T . Thus, all other terms other than γi in the Eq. 2 are
known apriori or are constants.
Trajectory prediction and training. Based on the predicted forces and γi s, the positions are derived
using the Euler Maruyama integrator Brańka & Heyes (1998). The loss on the prediction is computed
using Gaussian Negative Log-likelihood loss, which is then back-propagated to train the model.
Specifically, let Xi,t and X̂i,t denote the ground truth and predicted positions of particle i at time t,
respectively. The loss function is defined as follows.
                                    N T
                                                                                   !
                                                                                 2
                               1 XX                              (X i,t − X̂i,t )
                         L=                log max{σ̂i2 , ϵ} + λ                                     (9)
                              N i=1 t=2                           max{σ̂i2 , ϵ}

Here, ϵ is a small constant, and λ controls the relative weightage of the two terms. σ̂i is the standard
deviation associated with the position of each of the particles. The overall objective of the loss is to
minimize the variance-normalized deviation from the ground truth (second term), while also ensuring
a regularizing term to keep the variance low. We use Gaussian NLL loss since the stochasticity in
Brownian dynamics is a Gaussian as well (recall Eq. 2).
Note that the positions, both predicted and ground-truth, are computed directly from the predicted
and ground-truth forces, respectively, using Euler Maruyama integrator as follows.
                                                             s
                                                                2kB T
                         Xi (t + ∆t) = Xi (t) + Fi /γi ∆t +           ∆Ωt                     (10)
                                                                  γi

where ∆Ωt is a random number sampled from a standard Normal distribution. It should be noted
that the training approach presented here may lead to learning the dynamics as dictated by the Euler
Maruyama integrator. Thus, the learned dynamics may not represent the “true” dynamics of the
system, but one that is optimal for the Euler Maruyama integrator1 .

4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we benchmark the ability of B RO GN ET to learn Brownian dynamics directly from the
trajectory and establish:
• Accuracy: B RO GN ET accurately models Brownian dynamics and outperforms baseline models.
    1
        See App. B for details on Euler Maruyama integrator and other integrators for SDE.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Zero-shot generalizability: The inductive architecture of B RO GN ET allows it to accurately
  generalize to systems of unseen sizes and temperatures.
The codebase and all datasets used in this work can be accessed from the repository at https:
//github.com/M3RG-IITD/BroGNet.
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
We provide the details of the hardware and software environment in App. C.1.
• Baselines: To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no prior works on learning Brownian
dynamics directly from the trajectory. Thus, in order to compare the performance of B RO GN ET, we
propose five different baselines.
(1) Neural Network (NN): Here, we use a feedforward MLP that takes Xi vector at time t as the
input and predicts the positions at t + ∆t as the output.
(2) Brownian NN (B NN): NN in (1) does not have any physics-based inductive biases. To address
this, we propose B NN, a Neural SDE that parameterizes the Brownian dynamics using a feed-forward
MLP. Specifically, B NN takes Xt of all the particles concatenated into a vector as input and predicts
the F̂ and γ̂ as output employing a fully connected MLP. These outputs are then used in Eq. 10
to predict the updated positions. Thus, B NN employs the inductive-bias in terms of the Brownian
equation of motion.
(3) Brownian full graph network (BF GN): The models in (1) and (2) do not exploit the topology of
the system and are not permutation invariant. To this extent, we employ BF GN a graph-based baseline
that takes the position as input and outputs the forces and γ for each node. This output is then sub-
stituted in Eq. 10 to obtain the updated position. Thus, BF GN is a graph-based version of B NN. Note
that BF GN employs the full graph network architecture Cranmer et al. (2020); Sanchez-Gonzalez et al.
(2020), a versatile architecture that has been demonstrated for a variety of particle-based systems. It is
worth noting that BF GN is not translational invariant due to the explicit use of positions as node inputs.
(4) Brownian Dynamics G NN (BDG NN): We also present a physics-informed baseline, BDG NN.
BDG NN has all the inductive biases of B RO GN ET except Newton’s third law. Specifically, the force
on each particle i is computed as:
                                    Fi = squareplus(MLPV (zi ))                                        (11)
Note that BDG NN has the same architecture as B RO GN ET and hence allows us to evaluate the role
of momentum conservation as an inductive bias in the B RO GN ET.
(5) Brownian Neural Equivariant Interatomic Potentials (BNequIP): BNequIP employs an equiv-
ariant G NNs proposed by (Batzner et al., 2022) and directly predicts the force vector as the output.
(6) Momentum-informed BDG NN (MIBDG NN): In order to study the effect of adding momentum
conservation as a “soft-constraint”, we add an additional term to the loss function
                                                                                 P      of BDG NN for
momentum conservation. Specifically, we add a third term to Eq. 9, namely, || Fi || = 0.
• Datasets and systems: To compare the performance B RO GN ET, we selected three different
systems, namely, linear spring, linear spring with binary particle types, and non-linear spring systems,
all following Brownian dynamics at finite temperatures. The first is a model system with particles
interacting with each other based on a linear spring and subjected to Gaussian noise. The second
system comprises a non-linear spring where the force on a spring is proportional to the fourth power
of displacement. The third system corresponds to a linear spring system with two different types
of particles having different γ. For linear and non-linear spring systems, models are trained on
5−spring system only, which are then evaluated on other system sizes. In case of linear spring with
binary particle types, models are trained on 10−spring system and evaluated on other system sizes.
The details of all the systems to generate the ground truth data are provided in App. C. Further, the
detailed data-generation procedure is given in App. D.
• Evaluation Metric: To quantify performance, we use the following metrics.
Position error: The position error is the normalized Euclidean distance between the ground truth
and predicted positions. Mathematically, let (x, y, z) and x̂, ŷ, ẑ be the ground truth and predicted
positions, respectively, of a given particle. Furthermore, let σx/y/z be the ground-truth standard
deviation of the positions of the particle. The error is, therefore:
                                                                 1/2
                                              X   c − ĉ  2
                                  PE =                                                           (12)
                                                           σc
                                            c∈{x,y,z}

Brownian error: The Brownian error quantifies the difference between the standard deviation


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


estimated by the neural network and that of the ground truth using the RMSE metric.
Trajectory roll-out error: The above two metrics individually look at the errors in positions and
the standard deviation. In this metric, we holistically compare the distance between the distribution
of trajectories in the ground truth against the ones predicted by B RO GN ET. Specifically, given a
Brownian system, we simulate 100 ground-truth trajectories across 100 time steps over each particle
in the system. Similarly, we predict the trajectories using B RO GN ET. We next compute the average
distance between the ground-truth distribution and the predicted one using KL-divergence across all
particles. KL-divergence is defined as follows:                        !
                                               X                X̂ (x)
                               DKL (X̂ ∥X ) =       X̂ (x) log                                   (13)
                                                                X (x)
                                               x∈X̂

Here, X and X̂ represent the distributions over the ground truth and predicted trajectories, respec-
tively. Both these distributions are univariate normal distributions since the stochastic component in
Brownian dynamics is normally distributed (Eq. 2). Hence, Eq. 13 reduces to the following:
                                                σ1   σ 2 + (µo − µ1 )2      1
                           DKL (X̂ ∥X ) = log      + 0         2        −                        (14)
                                                σ0           2σ1            2
Here, σ0 and µ0 are the standard-deviation and mean of distribution X̂ and similarly σ1 and µ1 denote
the standard deviation and mean of X .
• Model architecture and training setup: We use 10000 data points generated from 100 trajectories
with random initial conditions to train all the models. Detailed training procedures and hyper-
parameters are provided in App. E. For all versions of the graph architectures, MLPs are two layers
deep. All models were trained till the decrease in loss saturates to less than 0.001 over 100 epochs.
The model performance is evaluated on a forward trajectory, a task it was not explicitly trained for, of
0.1s. To compute the evaluation metrics, all the results are obtained over trajectories generated from
100 different initial conditions. Further, to evaluate the zero-shot generalizability, the models trained
on 5 spring systems are evaluated on 50, and 500 spring systems. Further, the models trained at 1
unit temperature are evaluated at 10 and 100 unit temperatures.
4.2 C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES
Fig. 2 shows the trajectory error,
Brownian error, and the position er-
ror and the geometric mean of these
errors over the trajectory for all the
baselines, namely, NN, B NN, BF GN,
BDG NN, MIBDG NN, and BNequIP
in comparison to B RO GN ET for lin-
ear 5−spring system. We observe
that B RO GN ET and MIBDG NN sig-
nificantly outperform all other base-
lines in terms of overall evaluation
metrics. Specifically, we observe that
the B RO GN ET outperforms BDG NN,
which differs from the B RO GN ET Figure 2: Comparison of B RO GN ET on a linear 5−spring
only in terms of momentum con- system against baselines, NN, B NN, BF GN, BDG NN,
servation. This suggests that the MIBDG NN and BNequIP using (a) trajectory roll-out error,
momentum conservation bias added (b) Brownian error, and (c) position error. All models are
B RO GN ET significantly enhances the trained using 10000 data points. The plots are obtained
performance of the model. Interest- based on 1000 forward simulations by the trained model
ingly, we observe that the MIBDG NN from 100 initial conditions, each evaluated with 10 random
significantly outperforms B RO GN ET. seeds random. Additionally, the geometric mean of (d)
This shows that the additional regular- trajectory roll-out error, (e) Brownian error, and (f) position
izer in the loss function enables im- error is shown in the bottom subplot.
proved learning of the dynamics.
Figure 3 shows the performance of B RO GN ET on non-linear 5−spring system, and Figure 4 shows
the performance on binary linear 10−spring systems, respectively. As in the case of the linear
spring system, we observe that B RO GN ET outperforms all other baselines in learning the Brownian
dynamics for non-linear spring systems and binary linear spring systems. However, we note that


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the difference between the performance of B RO GN ET with other baselines is lower in binary spring
systems. Nevertheless, these results suggest the ability of B RO GN ET to learn the dynamics of
complex multi-particle systems interacting with each other based on non-linear interaction forces.
4.3 Z ERO - SHOT
GENERALIZABILITY
Now, we evaluate the zero-shot gen-
eralizability of the learned models to
unseen system sizes and temperatures.
To this extent, we use the learned mod-
els, BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN,
BNequIP and B RO GN ET trained on N
= 5 and T = 1 units. First, these mod-
els are evaluated on system sizes of
50 and 500 springs, up to two orders
of magnitude larger than those used in
the training data. Figure 5(a-c) shows
the trajectory rollout error of BF GN,
BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BNequIP and Figure 3: Comparison of B RO GN ET on a non-linear
B RO GN ET on 5−, 50−, and 500− 5−spring system against baselines NN, B NN, BF GN,
spring systems, respectively. Inter- BDG NN, MIBDG NN and BNequIP using (a) trajectory roll-
estingly, we observe all four models out error, (b) Brownian error, and (c) position error. All
exhibit inductivity to larger system models are trained using 10000 data points. The plots are
sizes, thanks to the G NN. Further, obtained based on 1000 forward simulations by the trained
we observe that the trajectory roll- model from 100 initial conditions, each evaluated with 10
out error for all the models is com- random seeds. Additionally, the geometric mean of (d) tra-
parable with the increasing system jectory roll-out error, (e) Brownian error, and (f) position
size, even when evaluated on a sys- error are shown in the bottom subplot.
tem size of 500. All the error met-
rics on all three types of systems linear spring, binary linear spring, and non-linear spring
are included in the App. F. These results suggest that the B RO GN ET can be trained on small
datasets and generalized to arbitrarily large system sizes for performing inference on the Brow-
nian dynamics of the system. It should be noted that both NN and B NN, due to their architec-
ture (feed-forward MLP), are not inductive and do not allow inference on larger system sizes.
Another important aspect of Brown-
ian dynamics is the ability to simu-
late the learned systems correspond-
ing to different thermodynamic condi-
tions, namely, different temperatures.
Figure 5(e,f) shows the trajectory roll-
out error of linear spring systems with
five particles at temperatures 10 and
100 units, respectively. We again
observe that B RO GN ET and MIB-
DG NN outperforms BF GN, BDG NN,
and BNequIP with very low errors on
the roll-out. This suggests that both
the stochastic Brownian terms and the
deterministic force term learned by
the B RO GN ET are accurate and scal- Figure 4: Comparison of B RO GN ET on a binary linear
able to large system sizes and different 10−spring system against baselines using (a) trajectory roll-
thermodynamic conditions.                out error, (b) Brownian error, and (c) position error. All
                                         models are trained using 10000 data points. The plots are
4.4 M OMENTUM CONSERVATION
                                         obtained based on 1000 forward simulations by the trained
Note that the Brownian motion has a model from 100 initial conditions, each evaluated with 10
net-zero acceleration, so the momen- random seeds random. Additionally, the geometric mean
tum remains conserved. To evaluate of (d) trajectory roll-out error, (e) Brownian error, and (f)
this, we compute the total force ex- position error are shown in the bottom subplot.
perienced by each particle during the


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Trajectory roll-out error of BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BNequIP and B RO GN ET trained
on N = 5 and T =1 to unseen system sizes (N = 50, and 500) and unseen temperatures (T = 10 and
100) on the linear spring system. The plots are obtained based on 100 forward simulations by the
trained model with random initial conditions.
dynamics predicted by the models. Figure 6 shows the geometric mean of the total force expe-
rienced by the system. Interestingly, we see that all the models except B RO GN ET predict finite
force, while B RO GN ET predicts force close to zero. Although MIBDG NN exhibits lower er-
ror than other models, B RO GN ET outperforms MIBDG NN in this metric; as expected from a
hard constraint vs. soft constraint. This shows that the additional inductive bias of momentum
conservation enforced in the architecture of B RO GN ET contributes to its improved performance.
4.5 DATA EFFICIENCY
We also evaluated the data efficiency of
B RO GN ET compared to the baselines.
Specifically, we evaluated the performance
of B RO GN ET trained with dataset size
varying as 100, 500, 1000, 5000, and
10000 and compared it with the base-
lines BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN and
BNequIP, trained with the respective Figure 6: Momentum Error of linear, non-linear, and
dataset. The results shown in Fig. 7 suggest binary-linear spring based on 100 forward simulations
that B RO GN ET can learn efficiently by the trained model with 10 random initial conditions.
from a small dataset size compared to
the baselines, which could be attributed to the momentum conservation bias in the system.

5   C ONCLUSION
We demonstrate a graph-based neural
SDE framework that can learn Brownian
dynamics directly from the data. We
demonstrate the approach to linear and
non-linear springs and binary linear spring
systems subjected to a stochastic dynamic
term and following Brownian dynamics. Figure 7: Geometric mean of (a) trajectory error,
In order to compare the performance of (b) Brownian error, and (c) position error of BF GN,
B RO GN ET, we proposed several baselines, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BN EQU IP, and B RO GN ET
namely, NN, B NN, BF GN, BDG NN, trained on varying dataset size. All the results are eval-
MIBDG NN, and BNequIP. Note that these uated on 1000 forward simulations; 100 initial condi-
baselines were proposed due to the paucity tions, each evaluated with 10 random seeds.
of baselines in the literature. We show that the B RO GN ET and MIBDG NN architectures, with their
unique momentum conservation, significantly outperforms all other baselines. Specifically, we show
that MIBDG NN exhibits superior performance in learning the dynamics due to the additional term
in the loss function, while B RO GN ET exhibits superior momentum conservation due to the hard
architectural constraint. We also demonstrate the zero-shot generalizability of the learned model
to unseen system sizes and unseen temperatures. These results suggest that B RO GN ET presents
a robust framework to learn Brownian dynamics from small amounts of data.
Limitations and future works: This work focuses on Brownian dynamics, which is an over-damped
limit of the Langevin equation. How does the model perform in the case of a Langevin equation
where the acceleration is non-zero? How can the model be extended to other SDEs? We aim to
explore these questions in our future work. Moreover, the present architecture cannot learn the
dynamics in the presence of external fields. Extending the model to the dynamics of real-world
systems, including experimental datasets, is also an outstanding problem.


                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NMAK and SR acknowledge the financial support for this research provided by Intel and Google
Research Scholar Award. The authors thank the IIT Delhi HPC facility for providing computational
and storage resources. SB acknowledges the financial support from the Prime Minister’s Research
Fellowship (PMRF), Ministry of Education, Government of India.

R EFERENCES
Jonathan T. Barron. Squareplus: A softplus-like algebraic rectifier, 2021.
Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Kornbluth,
  Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E (3)-equivariant graph neural networks for
  data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 13(1):2453, 2022.
Ravinder Bhattoo, Sayan Ranu, and NM Krishnan. Learning articulated rigid body dynamics
  with lagrangian graph neural network. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  29789–29800, 2022.
Ravinder Bhattoo, Sayan Ranu, and NM Anoop Krishnan. Learning the dynamics of particle-based
  systems with lagrangian graph neural networks. Machine Learning: Science and Technology,
  2023.
Suresh Bishnoi, Ravinder Bhattoo, Sayan Ranu, and NM Krishnan. Enhancing the inductive biases
  of graph neural ode for modeling dynamical systems. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
AC Brańka and DM Heyes. Algorithms for brownian dynamics simulation. Physical Review E, 58
 (2):2611, 1998.
ME Cates. Brownian dynamics of self-similar macromolecules. Journal de Physique, 46(7):1059–
 1077, 1985.
Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Maria I. Gorinova, Stefan D Webb, Emanuele Rossi,
  and Michael M. Bronstein. GRAND: Graph neural diffusion. In The Symbiosis of Deep Learning
  and Differential Equations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=_1fu_cjsaRE.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential
  equations. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 6572–6583, 2018.
Shin-Ho Chung, Toby W Allen, Matthew Hoyles, and Serdar Kuyucak. Permeation of ions across
  the potassium channel: Brownian dynamics studies. Biophysical Journal, 77(5):2517–2533, 1999.
W. T. Coffey and Yu P. Kalmykov. The Langevin Equation: With Applications to Stochastic Problems
  in Physics, Chemistry and Electrical Engineering (Third edition), volume 27 of World Scientific
  Series in Contemporary Chemical Physics. World Scientific, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland and
  Université de Perpignan, France, 2020.
Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel,
 and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Raj Dandekar, Chris Rackauckas, and George Barbastathis. A machine learning-aided global
  diagnostic and comparative tool to assess effect of quarantine control in covid-19 spread. Patterns,
  1(9):100145, 2020. ISSN 2666-3899. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100145. URL
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389920301938.
Weinan E, Jiequn Han, and Arnulf Jentzen. Deep learning-based numerical methods for high-
 dimensional parabolic partial differential equations and backward stochastic differential equations.
 Communications in Mathematics and Statistics, 5(4):349–380, November 2017. ISSN 2194-671X.
 doi: 10.1007/s40304-017-0117-6. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40304-017-0117-6.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moshe Eliasof, Eldad Haber, and Eran Treister. PDE-GCN: Novel architectures for graph neural
 networks motivated by partial differential equations. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
 and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=wWtk6GxJB2x.
Moshe Eliasof, Eldad Haber, and Eran Treister. Adr-gnn: Advection-diffusion-reaction graph neural
 networks, 2023.
Marc Finzi, Ke Alexander Wang, and Andrew G Wilson. Simplifying hamiltonian and lagrangian
 neural networks via explicit constraints. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Bal-
 can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
 13880–13889. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
 9f655cc8884fda7ad6d8a6fb15cc001e-Paper.pdf.
Razif R Gabdoulline and Rebecca C Wade. Protein-protein association: investigation of factors
  influencing association rates by brownian dynamics simulations. Journal of molecular biology,
  306(5):1139–1155, 2001.
Mikhail Genkin, Owen Hughes, and Tatiana A Engel. Learning non-stationary langevin dynamics
 from stochastic observations of latent trajectories. Nature Communications, 12(1):5986, 2021.
Federico S Gnesotto, Grzegorz Gradziuk, Pierre Ronceray, and Chase P Broedersz. Learning the
  non-equilibrium dynamics of brownian movies. Nature communications, 11(1):5378, 2020.
Jonathan Godwin*, Thomas Keck*, Peter Battaglia, Victor Bapst, Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Kimberly
  Stachenfeld, Petar Veličković, and Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez. Jraph: A library for graph neural
  networks in jax., 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind/jraph.
Alessio Gravina, Davide Bacciu, and Claudio Gallicchio. Anti-symmetric DGN: a stable architecture
  for deep graph networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=J3Y7cgZOOS.
Samuel Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:15379–15389, 2019.
Nate Gruver, Marc Anton Finzi, Samuel Don Stanton, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Deconstructing
  the inductive biases of hamiltonian neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Eldad Haber and Lars Ruthotto. Stable architectures for deep neural networks. Inverse Problems,
  34(1):014004, December 2017. ISSN 1361-6420. doi: 10.1088/1361-6420/aa9a90. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-6420/aa9a90.
Derek Hansen, Danielle C. Maddix, Shima Alizadeh, Gaurav Gupta, and Michael W. Mahoney.
  Learning physical models that can respect conservation laws. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,
  457:133952, January 2024. ISSN 0167-2789. doi: 10.1016/j.physd.2023.133952. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2023.133952.
Eugene Helfand, ZR Wasserman, and Thomas A Weber. Brownian dynamics study of polymer
  conformational transitions±. Macromolecules, 13(3):526–533, 1980.
Wenbing Huang, Jiaqi Han, Yu Rong, Tingyang Xu, Fuchun Sun, and Junzhou Huang. Equiv-
 ariant graph mechanics networks with constraints. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2022.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.
Martin Karplus and David L Weaver. Protein folding dynamics: The diffusion-collision model and
 experimental data. Protein science, 3(4):650–668, 1994.
Rebecca L Klank, Steven S Rosenfeld, and David J Odde. A brownian dynamics tumor progression
  simulator with application to glioblastoma. Convergent science physical oncology, 4(1):015001,
  2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Seungjun Lee, Haesang Yang, and Woojae Seong. Identifying physical law of hamiltonian systems
  via meta-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=45NZvF1UHam.

Jeffry D Madura, James M Briggs, Rebecca C Wade, Malcolm E Davis, Brock A Luty, Andrew Ilin,
  Jan Antosiewicz, Michael K Gilson, Babak Bagheri, L Ridgway Scott, et al. Electrostatics and
   diffusion of molecules in solution: simulations with the university of houston brownian dynamics
   program. Computer Physics Communications, 91(1-3):57–95, 1995.

Ruiqi Ni and Ahmed H Qureshi. Ntfields: Neural time fields for physics-informed robot motion
  planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00120, 2022.

Hiroshi Noguchi and Masako Takasu. Self-assembly of amphiphiles into vesicles: a brownian
  dynamics simulation. Physical Review E, 64(4):041913, 2001.

Scott H Northrup and Harold P Erickson. Kinetics of protein-protein association explained by
  brownian dynamics computer simulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 89(8):
  3338–3342, 1992.

Cheol Woo Park, Mordechai Kornbluth, Jonathan Vandermause, Chris Wolverton, Boris Kozinsky,
  and Jonathan P Mailoa. Accurate and scalable graph neural network force field and molecular
  dynamics with direct force architecture. npj Computational Materials, 7(1):1–9, 2021.

Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Junyoung Park, Atsushi Yamashita, Hajime Asama, and Jinkyoo
 Park. Graph neural ordinary differential equations, 2021.

T. Konstantin Rusch, Ben Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Siddhartha Mishra, and Michael Bron-
   stein. Graph-coupled oscillator networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
   Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
   18888–18909. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/rusch22a.html.

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Victor Bapst, Kyle Cranmer, and Peter Battaglia. Hamiltonian graph
  networks with ode integrators. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–1909, 2019.

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468. PMLR, 2020.

Samuel Schoenholz and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Jax md: a framework for differentiable physics. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.

Abishek Thangamuthu, Gunjan Kumar, Suresh Bishnoi, Ravinder Bhattoo, NM Krishnan, and Sayan
  Ranu. Unravelling the performance of physics-informed graph neural networks for dynamical
  systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Jessica Vamathevan, Dominic Clark, Paul Czodrowski, Ian Dunham, Edgardo Ferran, George Lee,
  Bin Li, Anant Madabhushi, Parantu Shah, Michaela Spitzer, et al. Applications of machine learning
  in drug discovery and development. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 18(6):463–477, 2019.

WF Van Gunsteren and HJC Berendsen. Algorithms for brownian dynamics. Molecular Physics, 45
 (3):637–647, 1982.

Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M. Solomon.
  Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds, 2019.

Qitian Wu, Chenxiao Yang, Kaipeng Zeng, Fan Nie, Michael Bronstein, and Junchi Yan. Advective
  diffusion transformers for topological generalization in graph learning, 2023.

Wang Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Subhro Das, Alexandre Megretski, Luca Daniel, and Lam M. Nguyen.
 Concernet: A contrastive learning based framework for automated conservation law discovery and
 trustworthy dynamical system prediction, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Symplectic ode-net: Learning
  hamiltonian dynamics with control. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Benchmarking energy-conserving
  neural networks for learning dynamics from data. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp.
  1218–1229. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A     P ROOF OF T HM . 1

P ROOF. Consider a system without any external field where the dynamics is governed only by the
internal deterministic forces, for instance, a n-spring system and stochastic force terms representing
the interaction with the environment, for example, spring-particle systems in fluid system with the
stochastic term representing the collision of the particles with the atoms of the fluid environment. Note
that the deterministic term consisting of the forces is also termed as the drift term as it contributed to
the overall drift of the system, if any. Accordingly, the stochastic term is referred to as the diffusion
term. Since, the acceleration of each of the particles is zero, the net force on the system should be
zero, that is, the total linear momentum of the system due to the internal deterministic forces remain
                                                                                   Pn
conserved. The conservation of linear momentum for this system implies that i=1 F̂i = 0. Assume
that the total error between the predicted and actual forces of all the particles at time t to be ε̂t . To
prove that B RO GN ET conserve the linear momentum exactly, it is sufficient to prove that ε̂t = 0,
since the stochastic term has zero mean. Consider,
                                   n
                                   X          n
                                              X                Xn        n
                                                                         X
                             ε̂t =    ε̂i,t =   (F̂i − Fi ) =      F̂i −     Fi                       (15)
                                  i=1        i=1               i=1       i=1
Note that in Brownian dynamics, which is the over damped limit of Langevin equation P (Eq. 1), the
                                                                                        n
acceleration of each particle is assumed to be zero. Thus, without loss of generality, i=1 Fi =
Fi = 0, in the absence of an external field. Hence,
                                                                
             Xn          n
                         X        Xn      X           X
       ε̂t =     ε̂i,t =    F̂i =             F̂ji +      −F̂ij  = 0                  □
              i=1          i=1       i=1   j∈Niin        j∈Niout

Thus, the sum of the predicted force of the system remains zero leading to the conservation of linear
momentum of the system.

B     E ULER M ARUYAMA I NTEGRATOR

Consider a system of N particles having masses M and interacting with each other through an
interaction potential U (X(t)), where X(t) represents the position vectors of all the particles at time
t, that constitute a time-dependent random variable. The Taylor series expansion of the position of a
particle i at time t + ∆t is given by
                           Xi (t + ∆t) = Xi (t) + ∆tẊi (t) + ∆t2 Ẍi (t) + . . .                    (16)
In the over-damped limit of Langevin dynamics, namely, Brownian dynamics, acceleration and higher
order terms are assumed to be zero. Thus, substituting for velocity given by Eq. 2 in Eq. 16, we get
                                                             s
                                                                2kB T
                         Xi (t + ∆t) = Xi (t) + Fi /γi ∆t +            ∆Ωt                      (17)
                                                                  γi
where ∆Ωt is a random number sampled from a standard Normal distribution. Note that the Euler-
Maruyama is the simplest form of a stochastic numerical integrator. Further, higher order integrals
can also be employed to integrate the SDEs.

C     E XPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS

C.1    S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT
• Simulation environment. All the training and forward simulations are carried out in the JAX
environment Schoenholz & Cubuk (2020). The graph architecture is implemented using the jraph
package Godwin* et al. (2020). All the codes related to dataset generation and training are available
in https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/BroGNet.
Software packages: numpy-1.20.3, jax-0.2.24, jax-md-0.1.20, jaxlib-0.1.73, jraph-0.0.1.dev0
Hardware: Memory: 16GiB System memory, Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @
2.60GHz.



                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2    L INEAR n- SPRING SYSTEM

In this system, n-point masses are connected by elastic springs that deform linearly with extension
or compression. Note that similar to a pendulum setup, each mass mi is connected only to two
masses mi−1 and mi+1 through springs so that all the masses form a closed connection. Thus, the
deterministic force experienced by each mass i due to a spring connecting i to its neighbor j is
Fij = −k(||Xi − Xj || − Rij ), where Rij is the equilibrium length of the spring and k represent the
un-deformed length and the stiffness, respectively, of the spring.


C.3    N ON - LINEAR n- SPRING SYSTEM

This system is similar to a linear n-spring system with the difference that the spring force is non-linear.
Specifically, the deterministic force experienced by each mass i due to a spring connecting i to its
neighbor j is Fij = −k(||Xi − Xj || − Rij )3 , where Rij is the equilibrium length of the spring and
k represent the un-deformed length and the stiffness, respectively, of the spring.


C.4    B INARY LINEAR n- SPRING SYSTEM

This system is similar to a linear n-spring system with the difference that the system consists of two
different types of particles with different masses, friction coefficient, and γ. Thus, the deterministic
force experienced by each mass i due to a spring connecting i to its neighbor j remains the same as
Fij = −k(||Xi − Xj || − Rij ), where Rij is the equilibrium length of the spring and k represent the
un-deformed length and the stiffness, respectively, of the spring. However, the stochastic part varies
depending on the type of the particle.


D     DATASET GENERATION

All the datasets are generated using the known deterministic forces of the systems, along with the
stochastic, as described in Section C and Eq.2. For each system, we create the training data by
performing forward simulations with 100 random initial conditions. For both linear and nonlinear
n−spring system, n = 5 is used for generating the training data. For the binary system, a 10 particle
system is used for generating the data with the ratio of particle type 1 to type 2 as 3:7. A timestep of
10−3 s is used to integrate the equations of motion for all the systems. The Euler-Maruyama algorithm
is used to integrate equations of motion due to its ability to handle stochastic differential equations.
The details of the parameters used for each of the systems are given below.
• Linear n-spring system

                                         Parameter                      Value
                                         Mass (M )                      1 unit
                                        Stiffness (k)                   1 unit
                                    Damping constant (ζ)                1 unit
                                            kB T                        1 unit
                            Equilibrium length of the spring (Rij )     1 unit

• Nonlinear n-spring system

                                         Parameter                      Value
                                         Mass (M )                      1 unit
                                        Stiffness (k)                   1 unit
                                    Damping constant (ζ)                1 unit
                                            kB T                        1 unit
                            Equilibrium length of the spring (Rij )     1 unit

• Binary linear n-spring system


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Parameter                        Value
                                          Mass (M )                       1 unit
                                         Stiffness (k)                    1 unit
                                              (γ1 )                       1 unit
                                              (γ2 )                       2 unit
                                             kB T                         1 unit
                            Equilibrium length of the spring (Rij )       1 unit
                               Ratio of particle type1 to type2           30:70

From the 100 simulations for the systems obtained from the rollout starting from 100 random initial
conditions, 100 data points are extracted per simulation, resulting in a total of 10000 data points.
For training, we create several sets of trajectories with positions from two consecutive timesteps t
and t + ∆t, where the input for the model is the positions of all the particles at t and the output
against which the model is trained is the position of all the particles at t + ∆t employing the loss
function as defined in Eq. 9. Note that in the present work, we use only trajectories of length one
timestep only. The trained models are evaluated on 1000 trajectories generated from 100 different
initial conditions with each initial condition simulated for 10 random seeds, all of which are unseen
during the training. The trajectories considered are of 100 timesteps, that is, 0.1 s. Note that this is
not a task the models are trained for; the training was done only on one timestep trajectories. All the
error metrics presented in the work are averaged over the 1000 trajectories for each of the models and
casees unless specified otherwise.
For zero-shot generalizability, for each case of different system sizes and temperatures, we directly
evaluate the trained models on 1000 trajectories. No fine tuning or additional training is performed
for any of the different system sizes or temperatures.

E     T RAINING DETAILS AND HYPER - PARAMETERS

The detailed procedures followed for the training of the models and the hyperparameters employed
for each of the models, identified based on good practices, are provided in this section.

E.1    T RAINING DETAILS
The training dataset is divided in 80:20 ratio randomly, where the 80% is used for training and 20%
is used as the validation set for hyperparametric optimization. Further, the trained models are tested
on its ability to predict statistically equivalent trajectory, a task it was not trained on. Specifically, the
systems are evaluated on a 0.1s long trajectory, that is 100× larger than the training trajectory. The
error metrics are computed based on 1000 different trajectories from 100 initial conditions, each
run with 10 random seeds. All models are trained till the losses saturated. A learning rate of 10−3
was used with the Adam optimizer for the training. Detailed hyperparameters employed for all the
models are provided next.


E.2    H YPER - PARAMETERS
The hyper-parameters used for different models, namely, NN, B NN, BF GN, BDG NN, and B RO GN ET
are given in the tables below.

•NN, B NN

                                      Parameter                       Value
                              Hidden layer neurons (MLP)                16
                             Number of hidden layers (MLP)               2
                                  Activation function               squareplus
                                       Optimizer                     ADAM
                                     Learning rate                    1.0e−3
                                       Batch size                       20

•BF GN


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Parameter                     Value
                          Node embedding dimension                  8
                          Edge embedding dimension                  8
                          Hidden layer neurons (MLP)               16
                         Number of hidden layers (MLP)              2
                              Activation function              squareplus
                       Number of layers of message passing          1
                                   Optimizer                    ADAM
                                  Learning rate                  1.0e−3
                                   Batch size                      20

•BDG NN, B RO GN ET

                                   Parameter                     Value
                          Node embedding dimension                  5
                          Edge embedding dimension                  5
                          Hidden layer neurons (MLP)                5
                         Number of hidden layers (MLP)              2
                              Activation function              squareplus
                       Number of layers of message passing          1
                                   Optimizer                    ADAM
                                  Learning rate                  1.0e−3
                                   Batch size                      20

•BNequIP

                       Parameters                                Value
                   graph_net_steps                                   2
                         use_sc                                   True
                    nonlinearities                  {’e’: ’raw_swish’, ’o’: ’tanh’}
                       n_element                                     1
                     hidden_irreps                    ’128x0e + 64x1e + 4x2e’
                       sh_irreps                             ’1x3e + 1x0e’
                       num_basis                                     8
                          r_max                                    2.5
               radial_net_nonlinearity                        ’raw_swish’
                 radial_net_n_hidden                                64
                 radial_net_n_layers                                 1
                          shift                                      0
                          scale                                      1
                      n_neighbors                                  10.
                    scalar_mlp_std                                  5.
                        Optimizer                                ADAM
                       Learning rate                             1.0e−2
                        Batch size                                 100



F   Z ERO - SHOT GENERALIZABILITY

Here, we evaluate the zero-shot generalizability of B RO GN ET in comparison to BF GN, BDG NN,
MIBDG NN, and BNequIP for linear, non-linear, and binary linear n− spring systems. Figures H I
and J show the trajectory, Brownian, and position error, respectively, of BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN,
BNequIP, and B RO GN ET evaluated on 50, 500, and 5000 particle systems. Note for linear and
non-linear springs, the models are trained on 5−particle systems, while for binary linear spring
system, the models are trained on 10−particle systems. We observe that B RO GN ET significantly
outperforms other models. Further, Fig. K shows the Inference time w.r.t number of particle for
BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, B RO GN ET and BN EQU IP.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure H: Rollout error of BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BNequIP, and B RO GN ET tested on N =
50, 500, 5000 for linear (row 1), non-linear spring (row 2), and binary linear spring (row 3) systems
evaluated on 1000 forward trajectories. Note that for linear and non-linear systems, the models are
trained on 5−particle systems whereas for binary system, the models are trained on 10−particle
system.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure I: Brownian error of BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BNequIP, and B RO GN ET trained on N =
5 system and tested on N = 50, 500, 5000 for linear (row 1), non-linear spring (row 2), and binary
linear spring (row 3) systems evaluated on 1000 forward trajectories.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure J: Position error of BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, BNequIP, and B RO GN ET trained on N =
5 system and tested on N = 50, 500, 5000 for linear (row 1), non-linear spring (row 2), and binary
linear spring (row 3) systems evaluated on 1000 forward trajectories.


Figure K: Inference time w.r.t number of particle for BF GN, BDG NN, MIBDG NN, B RO GN ET and
BN EQU IP. Note that in this the forward simulation time is computed as an average of 30 trajectories.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Models         Training time (in sec)       Forward Simulation time (in sec)
            NN                       391                               0.012
            B NN                     635                               0.222
            BF GN                    1755                              0.642
            BDG NN                   1934                              0.411
            BNequIP                 27535                             21.319
            B RO GN ET               2126                              0.506

Table A: Training time for 10,000 epochs and forward simulation time for 100 timesteps of NN, B NN,
BF GN, BDG NN, NequIP, and B RO GN ET on linear 5 spring system. Note that the forward simulation
time is computed as the average of 100 initial condition with each initial condition simulated for 10
different random seeds (altogether, an average of 1000 trajectories).


Figure L: Comparison of activation function SquarePlus, ReLU, LeakyReLU and Sigmoid on linear
5− spring system with B RO GN ET. All the results are evaluated based on 1000 forward simulations
based on 100 initial conditions, each evaluated with 10 random seeds.
G T RAJECTORY VISUALIZATION

Visualizations of the trajectories of linear n-spring systems using ground truth and B RO GN ET is
included as a video in the link: https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/BroGNet/tree/main/videos. Note that
B RO GN ET is trained on a 5−particle system.



H   S QUARE P LUS , R E LU, L EAKY R E LU VS S IGMOID

Here, we evaluate B RO GN ET performance with respect to different activation functions: SquarePlus,
ReLU, LeakyReLU and Sigmoid. From Fig. L, we observe that all the activation functions give
comparable performance. We used SquarePlus in order to potentially extend BrogNet to learn energy
instead of force in future work. In this case, the activation function needs to be double differentiation.


I   G ENERALIZATION TO UNSEEN γ

Here, we evaluate B RO GN ET performance with respect to different gamma values: 0.1, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0,
1.2, 1.4, and 10. As γ increases performance improves. This is due to the fact that for a higher value
of γ, there will be a smaller standard deviation for the stochastic term.



J   I MPORTANCE OF G RAPH T OPOLOGY

Here, we evaluate B RO GN ET when there is correct graph topology vs B RO GN ET R ND when there
is random connection between senders and receivers. From Fig. N it is clear that performance is
significantly high with correct graph topology


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure M: Generalization to unseen gamma using B RO GN ET architecture


                      Figure N: B RO GN ET vs B RO GN ET R ND architecture


K   P ERFORMANCE W. R . T. HYPERPARAMETERS

Here, we evaluate the performance of B RO GN ET w.r.t. number of layers of message passing [1, 2,
3] and the number of hidden layer neurons [5, 8, 16, 32]. In the paper for B RO GN ET we choose
the number of layers of message passing = 1 and the number of hidden layer neurons = 5. For other
architectural details, check Appendix E


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure O: Performance of B RO GN ET architecture w.r.t. hyperparameters


                                               23
