Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D EEP SE(3)-E QUIVARIANT G EOMETRIC R EASONING
FOR P RECISE P LACEMENT TASKS

 Ben Eisner ∗                                     Yi Yang, Todor Davchev, Mel Veceric, Jon Scholz
 Carnegie Mellon University                       Google DeepMind

 David Held
 Carnegie Mellon University



                                               A BSTRACT

            Many robot manipulation tasks can be framed as geometric reasoning tasks, where
            an agent must be able to precisely manipulate an object into a position that satisfies
            the task from a set of initial conditions. Often, task success is defined based on the
            relationship between two objects - for instance, hanging a mug on a rack. In such
            cases, the solution should be equivariant to the initial position of the objects as
            well as the agent, and invariant to the pose of the camera. This poses a challenge
            for learning systems which attempt to solve this task by learning directly from
            high-dimensional demonstrations: the agent must learn to be both equivariant as
            well as precise, which can be challenging without any inductive biases about the
            problem. In this work, we propose a method for precise relative pose prediction
            which is provably SE(3)-equivariant, can be learned from only a few demonstra-
            tions, and can generalize across variations in a class of objects. We accomplish this
            by factoring the problem into learning an SE(3) invariant task-specific represen-
            tation of the scene and then interpreting this representation with novel geometric
            reasoning layers which are provably SE(3) equivariant. We demonstrate that our
            method can yield substantially more precise predictions in simulated placement
            tasks than previous methods trained with the same amount of data, and can ac-
            curately represent relative placement relationships data collected from real-world
            demonstrations. Supplementary information and videos can be found at this URL.


1       I NTRODUCTION

A critical component of many robotic manipulation tasks is deciding how objects in the scene should
move to accomplish the task. Many tasks are based on the relative relationship between a set of
objects, sometimes referred to as “relative placement” tasks (Simeonov et al. (2022); Pan et al.
(2023); Simeonov et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2022)). For instance, in order for a robot to set a table, the
position of the silverware has a desired relationship relative to the plate. These types of problems
can be described as geometric reasoning tasks - if you know the locations of each object in the scene,
and you know what kind of relationship the objects should have to accomplish the task, then you can
logically infer the target position of the objects. We would like our robotic agents to also possess
these geometric reasoning faculties to solve such relative placement problems.
In this work, we consider the task of training robotic agents to perform relative placement tasks di-
rectly from high-dimensional inputs by watching a small number of demonstrations. Although there
have been many recent advances in predicting complex robot behaviors from raw sensor observa-
tions (Lee et al. (2020); Miki et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2023); Ha & Song (2022); Akkaya et al.
(2019)), high-dimensional observations pose particular challenges in geometric reasoning tasks.
For example, the amount by which each object should be moved to reach the goal configuration
should be SE(3)-equivariant to the initial locations of the object. However, prior work (Pan et al.
(2023)) demonstrates that if a general-purpose neural network is trained on a small number of high-
dimensional demonstrations with no additional inductive biases, it will typically not learn to be
    ∗
        Corresponding author: baeisner@andrew.cmu.edu


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


robust to the initial object configurations. Prior work to address this issue (Pan et al. (2023)) incor-
porates geometric reasoning into the network, but is not provably equivariant. Other work that is
provably equivariant (Simeonov et al. (2022)) is outperformed both by (Pan et al. (2023)) and by our
method.
To achieve both strong empirical performance and provable equivariance, we propose a visual rep-
resentation which can be used for equivariant manipulation in relative placement tasks. Our key
insight is to decouple representation learning into an invariant representation learning step and an
equivariant reasoning step. We achieve this using a novel layer for differentiable multilateration, in-
spired by work in true-range multilateration (Zhou (2009)). In this work, we propose the following
contributions:

    • A novel dense representation for relative object placement tasks, which is geometrically inter-
      pretable and fully invariant under SE(3) transformations to objects in the scene.
    • A method for solving relative placement tasks with differentiable geometric reasoning using a
      novel layer for differentiable multilateration, which can be trained end-to-end from observa-
      tions of a small number of demonstrations without additional labels.
    • A provably SE(3)-equivariant neural network architecture predicting this representation di-
      rectly from high-dimensional raw inputs.
    • A set of simulated experiments which demonstrate superior placement performance in several
      relative placement tasks - both on precision metrics and on overall success. Our experiments
      also demonstrate that our method generalizes within a class of objects with reasonable varia-
      tion, and can be applied to real-world demonstration datasets.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Object Pose Estimation: One approach to solving relative placement tasks is via object pose esti-
mation. Recently several approaches have proposed using test-time optimization or correspondence
detection to align current observations with demonstration observations with known pose (Florence
et al. (2018); Simeonov et al. (2023; 2022)). However, (Simeonov et al. (2022)) requires one of
the objects to remain in a fixed location, while (Simeonov et al. (2023)) requires user input to spec-
ify relationships of interest - our method has no such restriction and requires no user input. Most
similar to our work is TAX-Pose (Pan et al. (2023)), which computes cross-object correspondences
to estimate a task-specific alignment between a pair of objects, correcting these correspondences
with a learned residual. Both TAX-Pose and our work attempt to learn to predict, for each point
on an object, where that point should end up to accomplish the relative placement task. However,
we compute this mapping quite differently - while TAX-Pose establishes “cross-correspondence”
and updates with a residual vector to regress the next point’s location, we learn an SE(3)-invariant
representation (which we call RelDist) of the pair of objects, and infer the point’s location from this
representation using differentiable multilateration. By construction, our framework is fully SE(3)-
invariant by construction, whereas TAX-Pose is not.
SE(3) Equivariance in Visual Prediction: Equivariance of geometric predictions under SE(3)
transformations of objects in a scene (including invariance to camera transformations) is a desirable
property of many visual prediction systems. Several works design provably equivariant prediction
methods (Cohen & Welling (2016); Weiler & Cesa (2019); van der Pol et al. (2020)) and use such
methods for robot manipulation (Wang et al. (2022b); Huang et al. (2022); Wang & Walters (2022);
Wang et al. (2022a)). Vector Neurons (Deng et al. (2021)) are used to design provably-SE(3) in-
variant and equivariant versions of standard point cloud analysis architectures like DGCNN (Wang
et al. (2019)) and PointNet (Qi et al. (2017)), which we incorporate in the feature-encoder in this
work. Neural Descriptor Fields (NDF) (Simeonov et al. (2022)) also use Vector Neurons (Deng et al.
(2021)) to achieve provable equivariance, but suffer from suboptimal performance; NDF is outper-
formed by TAXPose (Pan et al. (2023)) which we compare to in this work. Other methods attempt
to learn equivariance via training (Pan et al. (2023)). Another approach is to search over SO(2) or
SO(3) (Zeng et al. (2021); Lin et al. (2023)), evaluating candidates with a scoring network to align
objects in a scene for a given task. However, such methods have not been demonstrated to perform
the precise SE(3) relative placement tasks used in this work.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    BACKGROUND
We consider deep geometric reasoning tasks based on point cloud observations, and build on top of
several separate lines of prior work:
Multilateration: Given a receiver with an unknown position p in 3D, a set of K beacons with known
positions qk in 3D space, and a set of K measurements rk of the scalar distance from each beacon
to the receiver, the multilateration task is to estimate the position of the receiver p. Multilateration
is similar to triangulation, except that the direction of the beacons to the receiver is unknown. If the
squared error cost is used, this reasoning task reduces to a non-linear least-squares optimization:
                                            K
                                            X                           2
                                     min          ||qk − p||22 − rk2                                 (1)
                                       p
                                            k=1

There are several different approaches to solving this problem, as discussed in a survey paper on
multilateration (Sirola (2010)). We leverage the closed-form solution to this problem; see (Zhou
(2009)) for details.
The orthogonal Procrustes problem: Given two sets of N corresponding 3D points A and B, the
orthogonal Procrustes problem is to find a rigid transform TAB ∈ (RAB , tAB ) which best aligns
them. Specifically, if the squared error cost is used, this reasoning task reduces to a constrained
least-squares optimization task:
                             N
                             X                             2
                   min             ||RAB Ai + tAB − Bi ||2 ,           s.t.   RAB ∈ SO(3)            (2)
                 RAB ,tAB
                             i=1

This problem has a well-known closed-form solution based on Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) (Sorkine-Hornung & Rabinovich (2017)).
Equivariance/Invariance: This work considers two geometric functional properties: SE(3) equiv-
ariance (Eq. 3) and invariance (Eq. 4), under transform T ∈ SE(3), which respectively satisfy:
          f (x) = y =⇒ f (T x) = T y         (3)          f (x) = y =⇒ f (T x) = y         (4)
Point Cloud Analysis Architectures: We make use of Dynamic Graph Convolutional Neural Net-
works (DGCNN) (Wang & Solomon (2019)) as the primary backbone architecture for learning per-
point features. Roughly, each layer of DGCNN performs a two-step operation: 1) it computes a
per-point connectivity graph, roughly its neighborhood (in either Euclidean space or latent space),
typically using K-Nearest Neighbors; and 2) for each point, performs some sort of learned aggrega-
tion of the local neighborhood, which is permutation-invariant. Stacking such layers, an architecture
can flexibly capture global and local context of a point cloud.
On top of DGCNN, we also make use of Vector Neurons (Deng et al. (2021)), which is a set of deep
learning primitives which are designed to be SE(3)-Equivariant. These primitives can be directly
dropped into DGCNN to replace existing layers. Roughly, Vector Neurons accomplish SE(3) equiv-
ariance by treating each point’s Euclidean coordinate independently (through a batching operation),
and constructing primitives that operate on the coordinates independently.

4    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
Relative Placement Tasks: In this work, we con-
sider relative placement tasks, as defined in prior
work (Simeonov et al. (2022); Pan et al. (2023);
Simeonov et al. (2023)). We borrow mathematical
definitions of the task from (Pan et al. (2023)). Rel-
ative placement tasks require predicting a rigid body
transform which transports a specific rigid object A
from an initial position to a desired, task-specific fi-   Figure 1: Invariance of relative placement
nal position with respect to another rigid object B.       tasks under transformations. In this case, a
Suppose T∗A and T∗B are SE(3) poses for objects            ring on peg maintains the same relative posi-
A and B respectively such that the placement task is       tion under a rigid transformation T.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          SE(3)-Invariant Prediction                     SE(3)-Equivariant Reasoning



             SE(3)-Inv.
              Encoder
                                                                   MUL


                            X-Attn


                                     Kernel
                                                                                       PRO


                                                                   MUL
             SE(3)-Inv.
              Encoder


Figure 2: Method overview. First, the point clouds PA , PB are each encoded with a dense SE(3)-
equivariant encoder, after which cross-attention is applied to yield task-specific dense representa-
tions. Then, the kernel matrix RAB is constructed through the learned kernel Kψ . This matrix is
then passed into MUL to infer the desired final point clouds, and then passed into PRO to extract a
final transform which moves object A into its goal position.


complete, expressed with respect to some arbitrary world frame. Following Pan et al. (2023), the
task is also considered complete if A and B are positioned such that, for some T ∈ SE(3):

    RelPlace(TA , TB ) = S UCCESS iff ∃T ∈ SE(3) s.t. TA = T ◦ T∗A and TB = T ◦ T∗B .                  (5)

Cross-Pose: We are interested in predicting a transform which brings object A to a goal position
relative to object B, to satisfy the placement condition defined in Eq. 5. Rather than estimating
each object’s pose independently and computing a desired relative transform, we would like to learn
a function TAB = f (PA , PB ) which takes as input point cloud observations of the two objects,
PA , PB and outputs an SE(3) transform which would transport PA into their desired goal position
with respect to B. Pan et al. (2023) define this transform as the cross-pose for a specific instance
of a relative placement task, as follows: when objects A and B have been rigidly transformed from
their goal configuration by Tα and Tβ , respectively, the cross-pose is defined as:

                                      f (Tα ◦ T∗A , Tβ ◦ T∗B ) = TAB := Tβ ◦ T−1
                                                                              α                        (6)

meaning that applying this transformation to object A will then transform it back into a goal con-
figuration relative to object B. Note that the cross-pose function is equivariant in the sense that
                                                −1
f (TA ◦ PA , TB ◦ PB ) = TB ◦ f (PA , PB ) ◦ TA    .
Our method assumes that we receive point cloud observations of the scene (e.g. from LiDAR/depth
cameras/stereo), and that the pair of objects being manipulated (e.g. the mug and the rack) have been
segmented. For training the cross-pose prediction module, we assume access to a set of demonstra-
tions of pairs of objects in their final goal configuration (e.g. demonstrations in which objects A and
B have poses TA , TB such that RelPlace(TA , TB ) = S UCCESS, according to Eqn. 6).


5   A F RAMEWORK FOR SE(3) E QUIVARIANT M ANIPULATION

Method Overview: We now describe our method for precise relative object placement which is
provably SE(3)-equivariant under transformations to individual objects. At a high level, we: 1)
Generate SE(3)-invariant per-point features for objects in the scene; 2) Use cross-attention to aug-
ment these features with task-specific information; 3) Apply a learned kernel function, which takes
in a pair of points on two different objects and predicts how far apart they should be to satisfy the
task; 4) Use a differentiable closed-form estimator of the least-squares solution to the multilateration
problem to estimate the desired task-specific final location of each point; and 5) Compute the least-
squares transform between the estimated point locations and the input locations, using differentiable
SVD. See Figure 2 for a high-level overview of our approach.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   R EL D IST : A N SE(3)-I NVARIANT R EPRESENTATION FOR R ELATIVE P LACEMENT

The key insight of this work for solving relative placement tasks is as follows: suppose that we wish
to predict the desired goal position of object A, which should be placed in some location relative
to object B. One approach is to predict the desired pose of object A directly, relative to object B;
previous work Pan et al. (2023) shows that this approach has poor performance. Another approach
used in prior work that performs better Pan et al. (2023) is to predict the desired location of each point
pAi in object A. Instead, our approach is to predict a set of desired distance relationships between
pA                                                                          A
  i and at least 3 points on object B. Specifically, for each point pi in object A, and for some
set of points {pB
                1 , . . . , p B
                              K } on object B, we predict the desired Euclidean distance rij = d(pA     B
                                                                                                   i , pj )
                  A            B
between points pi and pj in the desired goal configuration. As long as the number of points K used
from object B is at least 3, we can use multilateration (Section 3) to estimate the desired location of
pAi .

Note that these desired distance between point pA                                      B
                                                   i on object A and some point pj on object B is
invariant to the current poses of objects A and B. Specifically, if object A is transformed by Tα and
object B is transformed by Tβ , then the desired distance between these points is constant:

                               rij = d(pA    B             A         B
                                        i , pj ) = d(Tα ◦ pi , Tβ ◦ pj )                               (7)
Further, these distances are scalar values, so they are not defined in any reference frame, which
means that they are invariant to shifts in the origin of the coordinate system. We refer to rij as
RelDist. This representation gives a convenient target for neural network prediction - one simply
needs to predict a set of pairwise invariant relationships d(pA    B
                                                              i , pj ) across two objects.


5.2   P REDICTING R EL D IST

We now describe a provably SE(3)-invariant architecture for predicting RelDist :
Dense SE(3)-Invariant Features: We assume that we are given a point cloud for objects A and
B, given by PA ∈ RNA ×3 and PB ∈ RNB ×3 , respectively. The first step of our approach is to
compute an invariant feature for each point in these point clouds. In other words, the feature should
not change if either object is transformed by an SE(3) transformation. Further, we wish each point to
have a unique feature. Given point clouds PA and PB , we can use a provably SE(3)-Invariant point
cloud neural network such as DGCNN Wang & Solomon (2019) implemented using Vector Neuron
layers Deng et al. (2021). Alternatively, one could train a standard DGCNN to produce SE(3)-
Invariant representations, although the resulting features would not be guaranteed to be invariant.
We consider both approaches in our experiments.
Specifically, we learn functions fθA and fθB which map the point clouds PA and PB to a set of
invariant d-dimensional per-point features ΦA and ΦB :

                      ΦA = fθA (PA ) ∈ RNA ×d ,         ΦB = fθB (PB ) ∈ RNB ×d                        (8)
Task-Specific Cross-Attention: Although the representations ΦA , ΦB are object specific, the rel-
ative placement task requires reasoning about cross-object relationships. For instance, for hanging
a mug on a rack, the network needs to reason about the relative location of the mug handle and the
peg on the rack. To reason about these cross-object relationships, we learn a cross-attention mod-
ule, using multi-head cross attention Vaswani et al. (2017), which we sum with the pre-attention
embeddings from Eq. 8:
                                         Φ′A , Φ′B = X-Attnγ (ΦA , ΦB )                                (9)
                                 Φ̂A = ΦA + Φ′A ,       Φ̂B = ΦB + Φ′B                                (10)

A Kernel Function for predicting RelDist : Let ϕA           B
                                                     i and ϕj represent the learned embeddings for
       A                          B
point pi on object A and point pj on object B, respectively. We now wish to define a symmetric
function K which takes a pair of embeddings ϕA         B
                                                  i , ϕj and computes a positive scalar rij ∈ R
                                                                                                   +

which predicts the desired distance between points pA        B
                                                      i and pj when objects A and B are placed in
                                  A   B
the goal configuration: rij = K(ϕi , ϕj ). This function K can be thought of as a type of kernel, for


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which there are various choices of functions. In this work, we select a simple learned kernel with
the following form:

                                           1
                Kψ (ϕA    B                            A    B             B    A

                     i , ϕj ) = softplus     MLP  ψ (ϕ i , ϕj ) + MLPψ (ϕ j , ϕi )            (11)
                                           2
where ψ are a set of learned parameters. Details can be found in the Appendix C.1. This allows us
to build the kernel matrix RAB :

                         Kψ (ϕA    B
                                                     Kψ (ϕA    B
                                                                   
                              1 , ϕ1 )      ···           1 , ϕNB )
                              .             ..             ..             + (N ×N )
                 RAB =       ..                                     ∈ (R ) A B                            (12)
                                                                   
                                                .           .
                             Kψ (ϕA
                                  NA , ϕB
                                        1 ) · · ·   Kψ (ϕA     B
                                                         NA , ϕNB )

which can be interpreted exactly as the set of RelDist values for all pairs of points pA      B
                                                                                       i and pj
between objects A and B. Note again that this prediction is SE(3)-Invariant for any individual
transformations of objects A or B.

5.3   F ROM R EL D IST TO C ROSS -P OSE


      (a) Initial observation.              (b) Sample points.             (c) Estimate rij for point pairs.


  (d) Infer p′A
             i = MUL(RiB , PB ).    (e) Repeat MUL(RiB , PB ) for all i.     (f) Infer gripper goal pose.

Figure 3: Reasoning with multilateration (a) in a 2D environment with block and gripper. (b) For
each sampled point on the gripper, (c) we estimate the desired distances between the gripper point
and points on the block. We then use multilateration (d) to extract a least-squares solution to compute
the desired gripper point location. Doing this for every point on the gripper, (e) we can reconstruct
the desired position for each gripper point. (f) These corresponding points can be used to infer a
rigid transform which brings the gripper to the final goal position.

We now describe how we can turn our invariant representation into a Cross-Pose prediction with the
desired properties above. A visual walkthrough can be found in Figure 3.
Estimating Corresponding Points with Differentiable Multilateration: Given the estimated set
of RelDist values RAB , we would like to estimate the intended position of each point in object A


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with respect to object B (or vice versa). The ith row RiB of RAB contains a set of scalars indicating
the desired distances from points on object B to the point pAi on object A when placed in the goal
configuration. We would like to use these relative distances to estimate the goal position of this
point. Since RAB is a predicted quantity and may have some noise, we wish to find the point p′A    i
which minimizes the Mean-Squared error with respect to that row:
                                             NB
                                             X                               2
                           p′A
                            i = arg min                ||pB    ′A 2     2
                                                          j − pi ||2 − rij                      (13)
                                    p′A                                      2
                                     i       j=1

This describes a nonlinear least-squares optimization problem, a class of problems which has no
general closed-form global minimizer. However, it has been shown that there is a differentiable,
closed-form global minimizer Zhou (2009) for this specific problem in Equation 13, which we
will refer to as the function MUL: p′Ai   = MUL(RiB , PB ). See Figures 3c and 3d for a visual-
ization of this point estimation process, and Appendix A.1 for details. By computing this func-
tion on each row of RAB , we can compute the desired goal position for each point on A, as:
P̃A = {MUL(RiB , PB )}i∈[NA ] (see Figure 3e). Importantly, this solution to the multilateration
problem is provably SE(3)-equivariant to transformations on object B, given a fixed RAB (see Ap-
pendix B for proof).
Estimating Cross-Pose with SVD: Given a set of initial points PA and their corresponding esti-
mated final task-specific goal positions P̃A , we can set up a classic weighted Procrustes problem to
compute the estimated cross-pose TAB between objects A and B, as defined in Section 3. This has a
known closed-form solution based on the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (see Appendix A.2)
which can be implemented to be differentiable Papadopoulo & Lourakis (2000); Pan et al. (2023).
For the relative placement task, once we estimate TAB , we use motion planning to move object
A by TAB into the goal pose. Because MUL and PRO are all differentiable functions, the whole
method can be trained end-to-end, using the same loss functions as defined in Pan et al. (2023) (see
Appendix C for details).

6     E XPERIMENTS

6.1   RLB ENCH TASKS - ACHIEVING P RECISE P LACEMENT


Figure 4: RLBench (James et al. (2020)) relative placement tasks. Top: the initial state of a demon-
stration. Bottom: the final state of a demonstration, where a successful placement has been achieved.

Experiment Setup: To assess the ability of our method to make precise predictions in relative place-
ment tasks, we select 5 manipulation tasks tasks from the RLBench benchmark (James et al. (2020)
which require varying amounts of precision to successfully accomplish each task. Specifically, we
choose the following tasks: stack wine, toilet roll, phone on base, insert peg, and
hang hanger. Each of these tasks involves placing a singular object in a task-specific configu-
ration relative to some other object. We collect 10 expert demonstrations for each task, and extract


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


point clouds for initial and final keyframes using ground truth segmentation from multiple simu-
lated RGB-D images. This forms the basis for a per-task relative placement task, where the goal is
to predict the desired goal configuration for each object given the initial point cloud. To evaluate
the performance of a prediction system, we generate 1000 unseen initial starting positions for the
object in the scene, and measure the both the rotation error ϵr and the centroid translation error ϵp
of the predictions compared to the goal poses reached in expert demonstrations. We evaluate both
TAX-Pose Pan et al. (2023) and our method on each task. Results are presented in Table 1.

                               RLBench Placement Tasks
          stack wine toilet roll hang hanger phone on base                              insert peg
  Method ϵr (◦ ) ϵp (m) ϵr (◦ ) ϵp (m) ϵr (◦ ) ϵp (m) ϵr (◦ ) ϵp (m)                    ϵr (◦ ) ϵp (m)
 TAX-Pose 1.485 0.003 1.173 0.001 5.471 0.012 4.144           0.005                     7.098 0.004
   Ours   0.764 0.001 1.150 0.001 0.624 0.002 0.804           0.001                     1.209 0.003

Table 1: RLBench Placement Tasks, prediction error (↓ is better): We measure the precision of our
method when predicting the cross-pose which brings each object into the goal position. We report
both the angular error ϵr (◦ )and the translational error ϵp (m), compared to the goal poses achieved
by expert demonstrations.

Analysis: For every task in our evaluation, our method achieves highly precise placements, with
rotational errors less than 1.25◦ and translational errors less than 3 millimeters (and frequently only
1mm). For each task, this level of precision is well within the tolerances for successfully completing
the task. Additionally, we substantially outperform our closest baseline (TAX-Pose) in nearly every
metric (which matches our translational precision in only on toilet roll). In particular, our
method is 2-9x more precise in rotation on 4 of the tasks. Because each task includes only a single
object which varies only in initial pose, this evaluation can be interpreted roughly as a ceiling for
how precisely these relative relationships can be represented. We believe that this is strong evidence
that our invariant-equivariant architecture is capable of representing significantly more precise re-
lationships in general than prior work. Furthermore, we show in Appendix D that our method can
learn highly precise relationships from only a single demonstration.

6.2   NDF TASKS - C ATEGORY-L EVEL G ENERALIZATION

Experiment Setup: To evaluate the ability of our method to generalize precise placements across
a class of objects with reasonable variation, we evaluate our method on the NDF relative placement
tasks, as proposed in Simeonov et al. (2022). These tasks have the following structure: an object
is positioned in a tabletop scene, along with a robot arm with parallel-jaw gripper. The task is to
predict two poses for the robot to execute: first, a Grasp pose which will lead to a stable grasp on
the object when the gripper is actuated; second, a Place pose, where the grasped object should be
placed to accomplish the task. At training time, the agent is given 10 demonstrations of each stage
of the task (grasp and place), with a variety of objects from the same object category. The agent
must then learn a relative pose prediction function for each scenario which can generalize to novel
instances of objects. There are two variants of each task evaluation: when the object is initialized to
be resting upright on the table, bottom-side down (“Upright”), and when the object is initialized at an
arbitrary orientation above the table for the robot to grasp (“Arbitrary”). At test time, we randomly
sample 100 initial configurations from each distribution and report average metrics across all trials.
We report success rates at various thresholds of penetration between the placed object and the scene
as a proxy for precision. See Appendix E for more details and motivation for this metric.
We compare our method to the following baselines: Dense Object Nets (Florence et al. (2018)),
Neural Descriptor Fields (Simeonov et al. (2022)), and TAX-Pose (Pan et al. (2023)) (see Appendix
E.2 for details).
Analysis: Our numerical results are presented in Table 3. Our method achieves substantially more
precise placements in both the upright and arbitrary mug hanging tasks: while other methods per-
form well when geometric feasibility is not considered in the evaluation (infinity column), our
method yields substantially more feasible predictions in both settings, when penalizing for colli-
sions (penetration thresholds of 1 or 3 cm). Results for the remaining NDF tasks can be found in


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Mug Hanging (Upright/Arbitrary)
                     Grasp                   Place                               Overall
      Method                     <1cm        <3cm           ∞         <1cm        <3cm         ∞
            1
      DON           0.91/0.35       -           -        0.50/0.45       -          -       0.45/0.17
            2
      NDF           0.96/0.78       -           -        0.92/0.75       -          -       0.88/0.58
                3
    TAX-Pose        1.00/0.50   0.15/0.32   0.70/0.75    0.93/0.85   0.15/0.14   0.70/0.40 0.93/0.44
       Ours         1.00/0.43   0.35/0.36   0.78/0.66    0.99/0.88   0.35/0.19   0.78/0.32 0.99/0.41


Table 2: NDF Mug Hanging, Success Rate (↑ is better): The success rate of each method when
running the relative placement tasks with the objects starting either upright on the table (left number)
or in arbitrary poses above the table (right number). Each column group shows the success rates for
the Grasp phase and Place phase, as well as Overall performance (when both grasp and place
are successful in a trial). Additionally, for Place and Overall we report success when maximum
penetration is thresholded at the given distance (1cm, 3cm, ∞).
Appendix E; however, our results on the Bottle and Bowl tasks are inconclusive, as implementations
of the symmetry-breaking techniques proposed by Pan et al. (2023) - which are crucial to good per-
formance for our closest baseline, TAX-Pose - were not released, and we were not able to reproduce
the performance reported by Pan et al. (2023). We also performed multiple ablations to understand
the effect of different design decisions of our method; see Appendix F for details.

6.3    R EAL -W ORLD S ENSOR E XPERIMENTS

Experiment Description: To demonstrate the abil-
ity of our method to generalize to real-world sen-
sors, we design an experiment that closely fol-
lows the real-world experiments proposed in Pan
et al. (2023). Specifically, we choose the real-world
mug-hanging experiment from this work. The au-
thors from Pan et al. (2023) have provided us with
a dataset real-world mug-hanging demonstrations,
collected in the setup displayed in Figure 9. We
then train our method in the same way as we did
simulated mugs. See Figure 10a and 11 and Ta-
ble 7 in the Appendix for qualitative and quanti-
tative evaluations of this offline dataset. We find
that our method produces predictions consistent with Figure 5: A real-world demonstration of
successful mug-hanging.                               mug-hanging.

7     C ONCLUSION & L IMITATIONS
In this work, we present a provably SE(3)-Equivariant system for predicting task-specific object
poses for relative placement tasks. We propose a novel cross-object representation, RelDist, which
is an SE(3)-Invariant geometric representation for cross-object relationships. We also propose a pair
of SE(3)-Equivariant geometric reasoning layers that use multilateration and SVD, respectively, to
extract a relative pose prediction. Finally, we demonstrate that this representation provides superior
performance in high-precision tasks in simulated environments, and is applicable to point cloud data
collected in real-world manipulation demonstrations.
This method has several limitations. First, it cannot handle symmetric objects or multimodal place-
ment tasks without an external mechanism for symmetry-breaking, as only a single pose is predicted
even when multiple poses may be valid. This might be addressed by exploring generative versions
of this model. Further, our method assumes that we have segmented the two task-relevant objects
(e.g. the mug and the rack). Still, we hope that our method provides a foundation for future work on
SE(3)-Equivariant learning for relative placement tasks.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
DGE-1745016 (NSF GRFP), as well as by NIST under Grant No. 70NANB23H178.

R EFERENCES
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.

Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016.

Congyue Deng, Or Litany, Yueqi Duan, Adrien Poulenard, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Leonidas
  Guibas. Vector neurons: A general framework for SO(3)-equivariant networks. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). IEEE, October 2021.

Peter R Florence, Lucas Manuelli, and Russ Tedrake. Dense object nets: Learning dense visual
  object descriptors by and for robotic manipulation. In Aude Billard, Anca Dragan, Jan Peters,
  and Jun Morimoto (eds.), Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Robot Learning, volume 87 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 373–385. PMLR, 2018.

Huy Ha and Shuran Song. Flingbot: The unreasonable effectiveness of dynamic manipulation for
  cloth unfolding. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 24–33. PMLR, 2022.

Haojie Huang, Dian Wang, Robin Walters, and Robert Platt. Equivariant transporter network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.09400, 2022.

S James, Z Ma, D R Arrojo, and A J Davison. RLBench: The robot learning benchmark learning
  environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–3026, April 2020.

Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 5(47):eabc5986, 2020.

Yen-Chen Lin, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan T Barron, Yilun Du, Wei-Chiu Ma, Anthony
  Simeonov, Alberto Rodriguez Garcia, and Phillip Isola. MIRA: Mental imagery for robotic affor-
  dances. In Karen Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski (eds.), Proceedings of The 6th Conference
  on Robot Learning, volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1916–1927.
  PMLR, 2023.

Weiyu Liu, Tucker Hermans, Sonia Chernova, and Chris Paxton. Structdiffusion: Object-centric
 diffusion for semantic rearrangement of novel objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.04604, 2022.

Takahiro Miki, Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hut-
  ter. Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the wild. Science Robotics,
  7(62):eabk2822, 2022.

Chuer Pan, Brian Okorn, Harry Zhang, Ben Eisner, and David Held. TAX-Pose: Task-Specific
  Cross-Pose estimation for robot manipulation. In Karen Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski
  (eds.), Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, volume 205 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 1783–1792. PMLR, 2023.

Théodore Papadopoulo and Manolis IA Lourakis. Estimating the jacobian of the singular value
  decomposition: Theory and applications. In Computer Vision-ECCV 2000: 6th European Con-
  ference on Computer Vision Dublin, Ireland, June 26–July 1, 2000 Proceedings, Part I 6, pp.
  554–570. Springer, 2000.

Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anthony Simeonov, Yilun Du, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Alberto Rodriguez,
  Pulkit Agrawal, and Vincent Sitzmann. Neural descriptor fields: SE(3)-Equivariant object rep-
  resentations for manipulation. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 6394–6400, May 2022.
Anthony Simeonov, Yilun Du, Yen-Chen Lin, Alberto Rodriguez Garcia, Leslie Pack Kaelbling,
  Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Pulkit Agrawal. SE(3)-Equivariant relational rearrangement with neu-
  ral descriptor fields. In Karen Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski (eds.), Proceedings of The 6th
  Conference on Robot Learning, volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  835–846. PMLR, 2023.
Niilo Sirola. Closed-form algorithms in mobile positioning: Myths and misconceptions. In 2010
  7th Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communication, pp. 38–44, March 2010.
Olga Sorkine-Hornung and Michael Rabinovich. Least-squares rigid motion using svd. Computing,
  1(1):1–5, 2017.
Elise van der Pol, Thomas Kipf, Frans A Oliehoek, and Max Welling. Plannable approximations to
  mdp homomorphisms: Equivariance under actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11963, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł Ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I Guyon, U Von Luxburg,
  S Bengio, H Wallach, R Fergus, S Vishwanathan, and R Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Dian Wang and Robin Walters. So (2) equivariant reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022.
Dian Wang, Jung Yeon Park, Neel Sortur, Lawson LS Wong, Robin Walters, and Robert Platt. The
  surprising effectiveness of equivariant models in domains with latent symmetry. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.09231, 2022a.
Dian Wang, Robin Walters, Xupeng Zhu, and Robert Platt. Equivariant q learning in spatial action
  spaces. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1713–1723. PMLR, 2022b.
Yue Wang and Justin M Solomon. Deep closest point: Learning representations for point cloud
  registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  3523–3532, 2019.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon.
  Dynamic graph CNN for learning on point clouds. ACM Trans. Graph., 38(5):1–12, October
  2019.
Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General e (2)-equivariant steerable cnns. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ruihan Yang, Ge Yang, and Xiaolong Wang. Neural volumetric memory for visual locomotion con-
  trol. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 1430–1440, 2023.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, and Johnny Lee. Transporter
  networks: Rearranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Jens Kober, Fabio Ramos,
  and Claire Tomlin (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Robot Learning, volume 155 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 726–747. PMLR, 2021.
Yu Zhou. An efficient least-squares trilateration algorithm for mobile robot localization. In 2009
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3474–3479, October
  2009.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
A     SE(3)-E QUIVARIANT G EOMETRIC R EASONING

In the following sections, we provide the closed-form solutions used for the multilateration and SVD
layers, respectively.

A.1   M ULTILATERATION

In Zhou (2009), the problem of multilateration (i.e. estimating the position of a receiver p given a
set of distances rk to k beacons with known positions qk ) is considered:

                                          N
                                          X                            2
                                   min
                                    ∗
                                                ||pi − p2 ||22 − ri2   2
                                                                                                (14)
                                    p
                                          i=1


Zhou (2009) derives two closed-form, differentiable minimizers to this problem, one of which is
for the overspecified case (more than 3 non-co-planar beacons) and for the degenerate case where
there are many co-planar beacons. In our approach, we utilize the first solution, as it is simpler to
implement and the point distributions for objects are almost never coplanar in our experiments. See
Algorithm 1 for pseudocode of this approach. This function is called as MUL(R, P).

Algorithm 1 Multilateration (MUL)
Input: R ∈ {ri |ri ∈ R+ }[N ] , P ∈ {pi |pi ∈ R3 }[N ]
         PN
  a ← N1 i=1 (pi pTi pi − ri2 pi )
          PN
  B ← N1 i=1 −2pi pTi + (pTi pi )I + ri2 I

         PN
  c ← N1 i=1 pi
  f = a + Bc
           P+    2ccT c
             N
  H = − N2 i=1 pi pTi + 2ccT
  q = −H−1 f
  p∗ = q + c
Output: p∗


As each operation in the algorithm is differentiable with respect to R, the entire function MUL is
differentiable.

A.2   P ROCRUSTES

The problem of finding the (weighted) least-squares minimizing rigid transformation to align two
sets of points is the well-known Procrustes problem Sorkine-Hornung & Rabinovich (2017):

                             N
                             X                          2
                      min          wi ||Rpi + t − qi ||2 ,      s.t.   R ∈ SO(3)                (15)
                      R,t
                             i=1


This problem has a well-known closed-form minimizer, given by the pseudocode in Algorithm 2.
Because this algorithm solves the Procrustes problem, we refer to it as PRO for short. This function
is called as PRO(P, Q, w) where w are an optional set of weights and may be omitted if the weights
are all equal to 1.


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Least-squares solution to the Procrustes problem (PRO)
Input: P ∈ {pi |pi ∈ R3 }[N ] , Q ∈ {qi |qi ∈ R3 }[N ] , w ∈ {wi |wi ∈ R+ }[N ]
         PN
          i=1 wi pi
    p̄ ← P N
               w
         PNi=1 i
              wi qi
    q̄ ← Pi=1
           N
           i=1 wi
 X ← {pi − p̄}[N ]
 Y ← {qi − q̄}[N ]
 W ← diag(w)
 S ← XWYT
 (U, Σ, VT ) ← SVD(S)                                                ▷ Singular-Value Decomposition
 D←I
 D[N, N ] ← det(VUT )
 R ← VDUT
 t ← q̄ − Rp̄
Output: R, t


All operations in Algorithm 2 are differentiable (including SVD, if a differentiable implementation
is used Papadopoulo & Lourakis (2000); Pan et al. (2023)); therefore PRO is also differentiable.

B     P ROOF OF F ULL -S YSTEM E QUIVARIANCE IN P LACEMENT TASKS
We now offer a proof that in relative placement tasks for objects A and B, our entire proposed system
is equivariant under SE(3) transforms to either A or B. As a reminder, SE(3) equivariance (Eq. 3)
and invariance (Eq. 4), under transform T ∈ SE(3), are defined as follows:

           f (x) = y =⇒ f (T x) = T y          (16)            f (x) = y =⇒ f (T x) = y         (17)
Let us now define what it means for the cross-pose function TAB = f (PA , PB ) to be equivariant.
Recall that we are focusing on relative placement tasks, in which the goal is to move objects A and
B into a desired relative transformation (defined formally in Section 3). The cross-pose TAB defines
how object A needs to be transformed to move into the goal pose relative to object B. For example,
suppose T∗A and T∗B are SE(3) poses for objects A and B respectively such that the placement
task is complete. Now suppose that objects A and B have been rigidly transformed by Tα and Tβ ,
respectively. Then the cross-pose is given by
                           f (Tα ◦ T∗A , Tβ ◦ T∗B ) = TAB := Tβ ◦ T−1
                                                                   α                            (18)
which is the transform one would need to apply to object A to move it back into the goal pose, which
is defined relative to object B. If we futher transform object A by TA and object B by TB , then the
cross-pose becomes
                  f (TA ◦ Tα ◦ T∗A , TB ◦ Tβ ◦ T∗B ) = (TB ◦ Tβ ) ◦ (TA ◦ Tα )−1                (19)
                                                                            −1
                                                       = TB ◦ (Tβ ◦ T−1
                                                                     α ) ◦ TA                   (20)
                                                                     −1
                                                       = TB ◦ TAB ◦ TA                          (21)
Thus, we will define a cross-pose function f as equivariant if it satisfies
                                                                        −1
                          f (TA ◦ PA , TB ◦ PB ) = TB ◦ f (PA , PB ) ◦ TA                       (22)
We can now prove our theorem:
Theorem 1. Let f be the method defined in Section 5, given by
                         TAB = f (PA , PB ) = PRO(PA , MUL(RAB , PB ))                          (23)
in which RAB is computed from PA and PB using Equations 8, 9, 10, 11, 12; MUL is described in
Sec. 5.3 and defined formally in Appendix A.1, and PRO is described in Sec. 5.3 and defined formally
in Appendix A.2. Then f is equivariant under SE(3) transformations to either of its inputs PA or
PB .


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Assuming:

       • fθA , fθB (Eqn. 8) are SE(3)-invariant
       • MUL(RAB , PB ) is SE(3)-equivariant with respect to PB

       • PRO(PA , P̃A ) is left- and right- SE(3)-equivariant with respect to its inputs PA , P̃A ,
         respectively, in the sense defined by Equation 24.

If fθA , fθB are SE(3)-invariant, then the features ΦA and ΦB output by these functions do not
change with any transformations of the input; we thus refer to ΦA and ΦB as “invariant features.”
Thus, RAB (Eqn. 12) must also be an SE(3)-invariant feature, because it is a function exclusively
of invariant features ΦA and ΦB .
Therefore:
                 f (TA ◦ PA , TB ◦ PB ) = PRO (TA ◦ PA , MUL(RAB , TB ◦ PB ))
                                        = PRO (TA ◦ PA , TB ◦ MUL(RAB , PB ))
                                                                            −1
                                         = TB ◦ PRO(PA , MUL(RAB , PB )) ◦ TA
                                                                −1
                                         = TB ◦ f (PA , PB ) ◦ TA
where the first line follows from the definition of f in Eqn. 23 and because RAB is an invariant fea-
ture as explained above; the second line follows from the second assumption; the third line follows
from the third assumption; and the fourth line is just the definition of f in Eqn. 23.

As noted in the main text, to make fθA , fθB to be SE(3)-invariant, we can either use Vector Neuron
layers Deng et al. (2021) or we can train a standard network to produce SE(3)-Invariant represen-
tations, although the resulting features would not be guaranteed to be invariant. We consider both
approaches in our experiments.
The function MUL is discussed in Sec. 5.3 and defined formally in Appendix A.1. As can be seen,
this function consists of linear operations and thus is trivially SE(3)-equivariant with respect to its
second input.
The third assumption follows by the linear algebra properties of Singular Value Decomposition; fol-
lowing the steps of Algorithm 2, if we compute PRO(TA ◦P, TB ◦Q), then X, Y will be transformed
to RA · X, RB · Y respectively, where RA , RB are the rotation components of TA , TB , since PRO
first subtracts off the mean of P and Q. Since SVD computes a set of matrices (U, Σ, VT ) where
U and V are rotation matrices, then U and V will then be transformed to RA · U and RB · V. We
then compute the rotation matrix R that is output by the algorithm as VDUT , so the output is then
                             T                                    −1
transformed to RB · R · RA     , which is equivalent to RB · R · RA  . The translation component is
similarly transformed, which leads us to the property that
                                                                 −1
                         PRO(TA ◦ P, TB ◦ Q) = TB ◦ PRO(P, Q) ◦ TA                                (24)

C     T RAINING D ETAILS
We present various implementation details for our method.

C.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURES

Point-Cloud Encoders: We use standard segmentation-style DGCNN Wang et al. (2019) and VN-
DGCNN Deng et al. (2021) (DGCNN with Vector Neuron layers) architectures for our encoders.
Pytorch implementations with identical network structure can be found (DGCNN) here and (VN-
DGCNN) here.
Cross-Attention Layer: We implement a single multi-head attention block with 4 heads, with a
similar network structure as implemented in Pytorch here.
Kernel Network: Our implementation of the kernel network is a small MLP with 2 hidden layers
of size [300, 100], ReLU activation, and BatchNorm.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Examples from the dataset of mugs used to train our method. Notice that the mugs vary in
geometry, but have similar overall structure.


C.2    S AMPLING IN M ULTILATERATION

In Equation 12, we described RAB as an NA × NB matrix. In practice, NA and NB can be quite
large (> 1000), and each pair must be passed into an MLP to evaluate the kernel. For sufficiently
large point clouds, this leads to an explosion in GPU memory, where even a single training example
will not fit in GPU memory4 . To address this issue, we instead sample K points from each point
cloud PA and PB to construct a K ×K kernel matrix. In this work, we sample uniformly at random.
Importantly, this sampling happens only during the construction of the kernel matrix - everything
upstream (encoders and cross-attention) are computed on the full-resolution point clouds. In our
results, we report a model where K = 256, and we show an ablation in Appendix F an example of
performance where K = 100.

C.3    P RETRAINING

Following Pan et al. (2023), we pretrain our encoders (both DGCNN and VN-DGCNN) to produce
SE(3)-invariant encodings using contrastive learning. This effectively learns to map each unique
region of a mug, for instance, to a unique representation space (similar to Dense Object Nets Flo-
rence et al. (2018) representations). The pretraining involves sampling from SE(3), yielding an
SE(3)-invariant DGCNN encoder. However, our VN-DGCNN is already SE(3)-invariant, so this
pretraining step has effect of producing contrastive embeddings which improve performance and
convergence speed when training our method using VN-DGCNN encoders. See Appendix F for a
comparison of how pretraining affects model performance.

C.4    S UPERVISION

We use identical supervision as proposed in Pan et al. (2023), combining the Point Displacement
Loss, Direct Correspondence Loss, and Correspondence Consistency Loss. See Pan et al. (2023) for
details. Examples of training mugs can be found in Figure 6


   4
     Our implementation may not be perfectly efficient with its GPU utilization, but the N 2 relationship is
fundamentally a bottleneck for this method.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL RLB ENCH E XPERIMENTS
                                                                          Angle Error                                                            Translation Error
Ablation: Sample Efficiency: To                                                         TAX-Pose                                  0.012                           TAX-Pose
                                                            5                           Ours (RelDist)                                                            Ours (RelDist)
understand how the number of train-
                                                                                                                                  0.010
ing demonstrations affects the preci-                       4
sion of our method, we train vari-


                                                                                                         Translation Error (mm)
                                                                                                                                  0.008


                                          Angle Error (°)
ants of our method and TAX-Pose                             3
with 1, 5, and 10 training demos from                                                                                             0.006
the stack wine task. Results are                            2
                                                                                                                                  0.004
found in Table 7. We find that our
method achieves very high levels of                         1                                                                     0.002
precision with only a single demon-
                                                            0                                                                     0.000
stration, and has substantially higher                          1            5                      10                                    1            5                      10
                                                                    Number of Demonstrations                                                  Number of Demonstrations
sample efficiency than TAX-Pose.
                                          Figure 7: A comparison between number of training demon-
                                          strations and prediction precision on the stack wine task.

E A DDITIONAL NDF TASK
I NFORMATION AND R ESULTS
E.1   E VALUATION M ETRICS

In the original NDF and TAX-Pose papers, the
performance of each method is evaluated based
on whether the object is successfully grasped
by the gripper (“Grasp Success”), successfully
placed in a goal location (“Place Success”),
and both successfully grasped and successfully
placed in the same episode (“Overall Success”).
When considering the precision of a pose pre-
diction method for a task, however, there is one
critical detail of the original evaluation metric Figure 8: Comparison of a mug placement with
which impedes our ability to measure preci- and without penetration. Left: a placement with
sion: specifically, in the original evaluation pro- 3.4cm of collision. Right: a placement with 0.7cm
tocol, placement success is measured by tele- of collision.
porting an object (without collision) to its pre-
dicted pose, enabling collisions, stepping a physics simulator for 5 seconds, and detecting whether
or not the object has hit the floor at the end of this period. This gives rise to the following degenerate
case: if a prediction is made which would result in an intersection of the object with the gripper or
environment (for instance, the mug is in direct intersection with the base of the rack), the object may
simply stick in place because of the intersection and not fall to the ground (despite being geometri-
cally invalid). See Figure 8 for a visualization of a geometrically invalid and valid placement, both
of which are measured as a “success” in the original paper.
To get some sense of how precise these methods actually are, we propose a simple modification to
the success metric: after the mug has been teleported to a placement location, we detect whether any
penetrations between the mug and the rack have occurred (a trivial computation in our simulated
environment), and mark the placement as a failure if the penetration magnitude exceeds a certain
threshold (we evaluate on thresholds 1cm, 3cm, and unbounded). Like before, we also mark the
placement as a failure if the object falls on the floor after being released by the gripper.


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Mug Hanging (Upright/Arbitrary)
                     Grasp                   Place                                Overall
      Method                     <1cm        <3cm            ∞         <1cm        <3cm          ∞
            5
      DON           0.91/0.35       -           -         0.50/0.45       -           -       0.45/0.17
            6
      NDF           0.96/0.78       -           -         0.92/0.75       -           -       0.88/0.58
                7
 TAX-Pose           1.00/0.50   0.15/0.32   0.70/0.75     0.93/0.85   0.15/0.14   0.70/0.40 0.93/0.44
       Ours         1.00/0.43   0.35/0.36   0.78/0.66     0.99/0.88   0.35/0.19   0.78/0.32 0.99/0.41
                                  Bowl Placement (Upright/Arbitrary)
                     Grasp                   Place                                Overall
      Method                     <1cm        <3cm            ∞         <1cm        <3cm          ∞
      DON           0.50/0.08       -           -         0.35/0.20       -           -       0.11/0.00
       NDF          0.91/0.79       -           -         1.00/0.97       -           -       0.91/0.78
  TAX-Pose          0.87/0.66   0.47/0.40   0.53/0.56 0.57/0.64       0.37/0.26   0.43/0.37 0.47/0.44
       Ours         0.67/0.59   0.36/0.19   0.49/0.42     0.66/0.68   0.26/0.08   0.35/0.23   0.46/0.35
                                  Bottle Placement (Upright/Arbitrary)
                     Grasp                   Place                                Overall
      Method                     <1cm        <3cm            ∞         <1cm        <3cm          ∞
      DON           0.79/0.05       -           -         0.24/0.02       -           -       0.24/0.01
       NDF          0.87/0.78       -           -         1.00/0.99       -           -       0.87/0.77
  TAX-Pose          0.24/0.16   0.89/0.58   0.92/0.65 0.99/0.72       0.22/0.14 0.23/0.14     0.24/0.14
       Ours         0.65/0.42   0.25/0.19   0.47/0.42     0.52/0.53   0.17/0.08 0.35/0.22 0.37/0.25


Table 3: NDF Tasks, Success Rate (↑ is better): The success rate of each method when running the
relative placement tasks with the objects starting either upright on the table (left number) or in arbi-
trary poses above the table (right number). Each column group shows the success rates for the Grasp
phase and Place phase, as well as Overall performance (when both grasp and place are successful
in a trial). Additionally, for Place and Overall we report success when maximum penetration is
thresholded at the given distance (1cm, 3cm, ∞). In Mug hanging, our method outperforms nearly
every baseline.

E.2    BASELINES

We compare our method to the following baselines:

        • Dense Object Nets Florence et al. (2018): Dense Object Nets learns a representation which
          is viewpoint-invariant, and then attempts to match a novel image with an existing demon-
          stration. The approach to using Dense Object Nets to solve the relative placement task is
          given in Simeonov et al. (2022).
        • Neural Descriptor Fields Simeonov et al. (2022): Learns an SE(3)-equivariant field, which
          is then optimized at test time to match a set of demonstrations.
        • TAX-Pose Pan et al. (2023): This approach shares some similarities with ours, except
          that this approach learns a residual flow field which is not SE(3)-invariant by construction,
          instead of our method which estimates pairwise distances.

E.3    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present additional simulated results on two tasks presented in the NDF paper
Simeonov et al. (2022): Bottle Placement and Bowl Placement. Training datasets for these tasks are


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generated in an identical fashion to the NDF Mug-Hanging task described in Section 6, as are the
evaluation procedures and metrics.
NDF Bottle Placement Task: In this task, the robot must grasp a bottle, and place it on a shelf in its
workspace. The bottle is frequently symmetric. Following Pan et al. (2023), we add an additional
color channel to the object to break this symmetry.
NDF Bowl Placement Task: Similar to bottle, in this task, the robot must grasp a bowl, and place it
on a shelf in its workspace. The bowl is frequently symmetric. Following Pan et al. (2023), we add
an additional color channel to the object to break this symmetry.

E.4   A NALYSIS

We find that our method performs comparably to the closest baseline, TAX-Pose, when trained using
the exact code and training procedure provided by Pan et al. (2023). However, performance for both
our retrained version of TAX-Pose and our own method are substantially worse (by roughly the
same amount) than the original reported TAX-Pose results - this is primarily due to the fact that no
implementation of symmetry-breaking technique described in Pan et al. (2023) was provided in the
initial code release, and we were not able to reproduce reported results with our own implementation.
Pan et al. (2023) report this technique as being very important for good performance. We believe
that additional details are needed to reproduce the strong performance reported in Pan et al. (2023),
and will update this manuscript once we obtain the implementation from the authors.


F     A BLATIONS

We further perform the following ablations to understand the effect of changing different parts of
our method. Ablation results can be found in Tables 4, 5, and 6.

                                  Mug Hanging (z/SE(3))
                                   Grasp      Place         Overall
                      Method             <1cm <3cm ∞ <1cm <3cm ∞
                 TAX-Pose, no SE(3) 0.29 0.01 0.35 0.37 0.00 0.05 0.06
                   Ours, no SE(3)   0.35 0.24 0.77 0.87 0.05 0.27 0.31

Table 4: Ablation: Removing SE(3) Data Augmentation - Arbitrary Mug Hanging, Success Rate
(↑ is better): Compared to the standard training proposed by TAX-Pose (Pan et al. (2023)), we
remove all SE(3) data augmentations from the training pipeline. We train only on demonstration
poses z directly (which are mostly vertical). TAX-Pose performance degrades significantly, while
our method’s performance remains strong.

Impact of SE(3) Data Augmentations: In the original training procedure for TAX-Pose (Pan et al.
(2023)), the authors introduce substantial data augmentation in the form of random SE(3) transforms
to inputs in order to achieve neural networks which are approximately SE(3)-equivariant. To demon-
strate that our method can achieve high success rates without these complex data augmentations, we
train a version of both our provable-equivariant model, as well as the standard TAX-Pose model.
We report our findings in Table 4. We find that while TAX-Pose fails entirely to generalize to mugs
in novel configurations, because our method is provably SE(3)-Equivariant, it demonstrates strong
performance across SE(3) even when trained on mugs in a narrow range of starting poses.
Pretraining: We evaluate the effect of pretraining on performance for both tasks. The optimal
setting of fθA , fθB are SE(3)-Invariant, which the pretraining process approximately initializes for
DGCNN (our VN-DGCNN is guaranteed to be invariant). In Pan et al. (2023), the authors show that
pretraining the standard DGCNN encoder improves test-time performance. However, we want to see
whether or not this pretraining procedure improves performance for the VN-DGCNN version (which
is guaranteed to be invaraint). Intuitively, this pretraining would simply initialize the representation
for all points on each object to be far from one another. Interestingly, in addition to helping training
converge faster, pretraining substantially improves performance.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sampling: We evaluate whether the value of K in the sampling procedure for computing the ker-
nel matrix RAB detailed in Appendix C affects performance (see “VN-DGCNN (K = 100)” in
Tables 5 and 6). We find that increasing the number of sampled points improves the performance,
which intuitively suggests that the multilateration optimization will be able to reduce the variance
of predictions (and thus increase prediction precision) with more samples.
Vector Neurons: We evaluate how training a standard DGCNN network to predict SE(3)-invariant
features for each object encoder compares to using the fully SE(3)-invariant VN-DGCNN to predict
those same features. We find that the standard DGCNN network is superior on some precision
metrics, while VN-DGCNN has superior overall performance. Because we are using networks of
a similar size, this suggests that there may a representational penalty for limiting a network to be
fully-equivariant. Additionally, many of the mugs are perfectly or nearly symmetrical - this means
that the VN-DGCNN network may not have sufficient representational flexibility to differentiate
between two instances, i.e. to “tiebreak” depending on the object’s initial orientation.

                       Grasp          Place                    Overall
       Method                =0cm <1cm <2cm <3cm ∞ =0cm <1cm <2cm <3cm ∞
        DON             0.91   -    -    -    - 0.50 -       -    -    - 0.45
        NDF             0.96   -    -    -    - 0.92 -       -    -    - 0.88
   TAX-Pose (release)   1.00 0.01 0.07 0.26 0.61 0.95 0.01 0.07 0.26 0.61 0.95
  TAX-Pose (retrained)  1.00 0.04 0.24 0.44 0.67 0.96 0.04 0.24 0.44 0.66 0.96
 VN-DGCNN (K=100) 1.00 0.02 0.16 0.36 0.64 0.97 0.02 0.16 0.36 0.64 0.97
VN-DGCNN (no-pretrain) 0.99 0.03 0.21 0.49 0.79 0.93 0.03 0.20 0.48 0.78 0.92
       DGCNN            0.98 0.05 0.31 0.64 0.83 0.97 0.05 0.30 0.63 0.82 0.96
  VN-DGCNN (Ours)       1.00 0.03 0.28 0.57 0.80 0.98 0.03 0.28 0.57 0.80 0.98

Table 5: Ablations - Upright Mug Hanging, Success Rate (↑ is better): The success rate of each
method when running the mug-hanging task with the mugs starting upright on the table. Each
column group shows the success rates for the Grasp phase and Place phase, as well as Overall
performance (when both grasp and place are successful in a trial). Additionally, for Place and
Overall we report success when maximum penetration is thresholded at the given distance. Across
nearly all metrics, our method outperforms the baselines.


                            Grasp          Place                    Overall
        Method                    =0cm <1cm <2cm <3cm ∞ =0cm <1cm <2cm <3cm ∞
         DON                 0.35   -    -    -    - 0.45 -       -    -    - 0.17
         NDF                 0.78   -    -    -    - 0.75 -       -    -    - 0.58
    TAX-Pose (release)       0.74 0.04 0.18 0.48 0.74 0.89 0.03 0.14 0.35 0.55 0.65
   TAX-Pose (retrained)      0.68 0.03 0.20 0.42 0.61 0.86 0.01 0.14 0.30 0.42 0.58
 VN-DGCNN (K=100) 0.61              0.04   0.22    0.39   0.63 0.91 0.02   0.12   0.22   0.39 0.56
VN-DGCNN (no-pretrain) 0.44         0.05   0.28    0.52   0.71 0.82 0.02   0.13   0.24   0.32 0.37
      DGCNN            0.68         0.04   0.30    0.51   0.70 0.89 0.03   0.20   0.35   0.48 0.61
  VN-DGCNN (Ours)      0.67         0.04   0.29    0.55   0.72 0.92 0.03   0.18   0.36   0.47 0.62

Table 6: Ablations - Arbitrary Mug Hanging, Success Rate (↑ is better): The success rate of each
method when running the mug-hanging task with the mugs starting in arbitrary orientations above
the table.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENTS
Experiment Description: To demonstrate the abil-
ity of our method to generalize to real-world robotics Method Trans. Error (m) Rot. Error (◦ )
scenarios, we design an experiment that closely fol-
lows the real-world experiments proposed in Pan           Ours           0.1               35◦
et al. (2023). Specifically, we choose the real-world
mug-hanging experiment from this work. The au- Table 7: Average prediction error on un-
thors from Pan et al. (2023) have graciously pro- seen, real-world mugs. The metrics are com-
vided us with a dataset real-world mug-hanging puted comparing the predicted position of the
demonstrations, collected in the setup displayed in mug to the actual position of the mug in the
Figure 9. This dataset consists of 20 different demonstration.
demonstrations of various mugs placed on a single
rack, where the rack is placed in different places in the workspace of a robot. The demonstrations
consist of initial and final observations of the mug and rack. We split this dataset into 10 training
mugs and 10 test mugs. We then train our method in the exact same way as we did our simulated
mugs, and evaluate on the test mugs.
Analysis of Results: Our evaluation is both quantitative and qualitative. First, our quantitative
evaluation procedure is to randomly perturb a real test demo capture, and attempt to predict its a
success configuration. We then compute a translational and rotational error, to meausre how far the
mug was placed relative to the test demonstrations. See Table 7. Because the mug can rotate freely
around the peg, the relatively high rotation error is not indicative of poor predictions - in fact, these
metrics are frequently within the tolerance for successful mug hanging given scene geometry.
To further qualitatively support this claim, consider real predictions we provide in Figure 11. We
see that predictions are consistent with successful mug-hanging, with the handle placed over the peg
of the rack. Furthermore, the format of these predictions (a simple rigid transform) is identical to
those in Pan et al. (2023), which led in their work to successful robotic placement in a real system.
While we do not execute a motion policy based on these predictions on a real-world robot arm, we
believe that this qualitative and quantitative evidence provides strong support for our claim that our
model could be successfully used in a real-world robot system similar to that proposed by Pan et al.
(2023).


       (a) A real training mug                          (b) A demonstration of mug-hanging

Figure 9: An example of how demonstrations were collected in a real-world robot workspace. Im-
ages provided by the authors of Pan et al. (2023).


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Captured mug point clouds    (b) Captured rack point clouds   (c) Captured mug-hanging demo

Figure 10: Examples of training data collected with the setup in Figure 9. The mugs are segmented
from the rack by the procedure outlined in Pan et al. (2023), and then used as training data for our
method.


Figure 11: Images of distinct, unseen real-world mugs in their predicted goal configurations. Our
method makes high-quality predictions on novel mug instances in unseen configurations from
real-world sensor data. Because we make outputs in the same format as in Pan et al. (2023), we
believe that these predictions are strong evidence that our method could successfully be used to
solve relative placement tasks on a real-world robot system similar to that proposed in Pan et al.
(2023).


                                                 21
