Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O NE -V ERSUS -OTHERS ATTENTION :
S CALABLE M ULTIMODAL I NTEGRATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review
                                              A BSTRACT
            Multimodal learning models have become increasingly important as they surpass
            single-modality approaches on diverse tasks ranging from question-answering to
            autonomous driving. Despite the importance of multimodal learning, existing
            efforts focus on NLP applications, where the number of modalities is typically at
            most four (images, text, audio, video). However, data inputs in other domains, such
            as clinical medicine, may include many more modalities like X-rays, PET scans,
            MRIs, genetic screening, genomic data, clinical notes, creating a need for both
            efficient and accurate information fusion. Many state-of-the-art models rely on
            pairwise cross-attention or early fusion through self-attention, which do not scale
            well for applications with more than three modalities. The complexity per layer of
            computing attention in either paradigm is, at best, quadratic with the number of
            modalities, potentially requiring considerable computational resources. To address
            this, we propose a new attention mechanism, One-Versus-Others (OvO) attention,
            that scales linearly with the number of modalities, thus offering a significant
            reduction in computational complexity compared to existing multimodal attention
            methods. Using three diverse real-world datasets as well as an additional simulation
            experiment, we show that our method improves performance compared to popular
            fusion techniques while decreasing computation costs 1 .

1       I NTRODUCTION
Multimodal learning has emerged as a promising approach, which enables joint learning from
multiple modalities of data (e.g., text and images). Combining different modalities allows for a more
comprehensive and accurate understanding of tasks such as image and video captioning (46; 33),
audio-visual speech recognition (36), sentiment analysis (29), and medical decision support (21).
Multimodal learning has been explored through various backbone methods in machine learning
(e.g., Decision Trees) and various Neural Network architectures. While feature-level integration was
mostly used in more traditional machine learning algorithms, Neural Networks have allowed for
the intermediate fusion of modalities through layers and late fusion at the decision-making stage.
However, both fusion paradigms lack a key component - capturing explicit interaction between
modalities. For example, in detecting hateful social media posts (41), imaging features help reinforce
and ground the textual information and thus lead to more robust decision-making. The success
of the Transformer (43) on various NLP tasks and, consequently, the Vision Transformer’s (ViT
(8)) success on vision tasks motivated the extension of the Transformer to the multimodal case.
Multimodal Transformers, such as LXMERT (40) and ViLBERT (19), introduced a fusion method
that captures interactions between modalities using cross-attention. On the other hand, models such
as VisualBERT (16) and VL-BERT (37) used early fusion, where vision and language inputs are
concatenated early to learn multimodal through self-attention. However, most multimodal models
are based on vision-language tasks, requiring a one-to-one correspondence between all modalities.
For example, such an alignment may temporally sync a video, the corresponding audio track, and a
textual transcript of people talking. Facial movement, sound waves, and textual inputs describe and
complement each other. In other scenarios, such as clinical decision support, data inputs may include
an MRI scan and genetic screening to diagnose a disease. While both are valid multimodal inputs,
even domain experts cannot tell which pixels in the image correspond to a specific mutation. Thus,
vision-language models that rely on modality alignment are unsuitable for generalized multimodal
applications, motivating the need for a domain-neutral approach.
For domains producing datasets without alignment, self-attention or cross-attention remain viable
strategies (10) for data integration. However, both self-attention and cross-attention grow quadratically
    1
        Code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/OvO-09E6/


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with the number of modalities, posing a scalability challenge. To address this gap, we propose a new
attention mechanism, One-Versus-Others (OvO) attention. OvO takes outputs from one modality
encoder and computes the dot product against a weight matrix and the average of the weights from all
other modalities encoders (hence the name, One-Versus-Others). Our approach significantly reduces
computational complexity, as it grows linearly with the number of modalities (see Section 3.3). Figure
1 shows a four-modality example to demonstrate the difference between our approach (scales linearly)
and self-attention/cross-attention (scales quadratically). OvO is a general attention scheme that can
be integrated into existing multimodal architectures instead of cross-attention or self-attention. We
validated our approach on a simulation dataset showing scalability gains in an extreme multimodal
setting (20 modalities). Furthermore, we used three diverse real-world datasets that vary in modalities,
encoder types (pre-trained and not), number of samples, and application domains to show our model’s
versatility in different multimodal settings. Our results demonstrate that our method improves
performance compared to self-attention and cross-attention while decreasing computation costs.
Concretely, we make the following contributions: (1) we present, OvO, a generalizable multimodal
integration scheme that is domain-neutral and does not require modality alignment; (2) OvO scales
linearly with the number of modalities while also performing competitively to self-attention and
cross-attention; (3) we perform robust benchmarking on new simulated and real-world multimodal
integration tasks.


Figure 1: Integration scheme comparison. (a) Early fusion to self-attention with scaled dot product
attention (43), and (b) Pairwise cross-attention integration with scaled dot product attention (43).
(b) Our proposed method, One-Versus-Others (OvO), does not rely on pairwise interactions or long
concatenated sequences but rather captures all modalities in a single attention score. A modality is
represented by mi and W is a learnable parameter (see Section 3.1).

2    R ELATED WORK
Commonly, the representations from each modality in the multimodal Transformers are passed
through one of two paradigms - early fusion followed by self-attention or fusion through cross-
attention. The early fusion group (e.g., Uniter (4), VisualBERT (16), Vl-BERT (37)) extends the
BERT architecture by concatenating the embedded visual inputs and the embedded textual inputs
as a single input, before passing the inputs through attention (see Figure 1 (a)). Given modalities
m1 and m2 , queries (Q), keys (K), and values (V ) are computed from their concatenated sequence
(e.g., Q1,2 = concat(m1 , m2 )). The final output from a standard Transformer block is denoted by Z,
Equation 1 shows the early fusion paradigm.


                          Z1,2 = M ultiheadedAttention (Q1,2 , K1,2 , V1,2 )
                                                                                                    (1)
                          Z = T ransf ormer(Z1,2 )

The cross-attention scheme (used in ViLBERT (19), LXMERT (40), ActBERT (47), MulT (42),
etc.) inputs each modality into its own Transformer, the outputs of which are fed to a cross-modal
Transformer (see Figure 1 (b)). For such Transformers, the cross-modal interactions are captured
through cross-attention, where queries (Q), keys (K), and values (V ) are computed from the modality
inputs (m1 and m2 ), and then the keys and values from each modality are fed to the multi-headed


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


attention block of the other modality. The output, Z, is shown in Equation 2.
                             Z1 = M ultiheadedAttention (Q2 , K1 , V1 )
                          (
                             Z2 = M ultiheadedAttention (Q1 , K2 , V2 )                             (2)
                             Z = T ransf ormer (concat (Z1 , Z2 ))

Since many multimodal tasks are centered in natural language (video and image captioning, visual
question and answering, audio-visual speech recognition, image retrieval, etc.), it is no surprise that
BERT (6) is a key component of many multimodal Transformers (e.g., VideoBERT (38), ViLBERT
(19), VisualBERT (16), VL-BERT (37), Pixel-BERT (13), ActBERT (47), ImageBERT (30)). How-
ever, most concrete innovations have been focused on improving performance for specific natural
language tasks rather than building new domain-neutral multimodal integration methods. While the
early fusion and cross-attention paradigms could be extended to three modalities, seen in TriBERT
(31) and VATT (1), these models face scalability challenges for more than three modalities. Cross-
attention methods can leverage joint representations formed from cross-attention but do not scale
well to larger numbers of modalities as they are computed in a pairwise fashion.    Thus, if there are
k modalities, computing pairwise fusion between each pair will result in k2 matrix computations.

Moreover, attention is not a symmetric calculation, which means that most commonly, it is computed
bi-directionally (e.g., image to text and text to image), leading to an even greater computational
burden. Early fusion involves the concatenation of modalities before the Transformer layer, which
similarly does not scale well with the number of modalities. Self-attention is quadratic with respect
to sequence length (43), and since early fusion methods concatenate inputs before attention, the com-
putational complexity will increase quadratically as the number of modalities increases (see Section
3.3). Furthermore, concatenation is not order invariant, making the ordering of modalities an impor-
tant consideration, potentially requiring similar bi-directional computations as cross-attention. Our
integration method, OvO, addresses the limitations mentioned above in a scalable and domain-neutral
manner.

3     M ETHODS
3.1   O NE -V ERSUS -OTHERS (OVO) ATTENTION

Instead of integrating modalities in a pairwise way or through a concatenated stream, we propose a
new attention mechanism, One-Versus-Others (OvO) Attention, which grows linearly with number
of modalities rather than quadratically as required by cross-attention or self-attention (see Section
A). Given modality mi , where k is the number of modalities and i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}, W is a neural
network weight matrix that is shared across all modalities (see Figure 1 (c)). The similarity score
function calculated for modality mi with respect to a set of other modalities (mj : j ̸= i) is shown in
Equation 3, and the context vector for modality mi using OvO Attention is shown in Equation 4:

                                                                 Pk
                                                                   j ̸= i   mj
                         score (mi , {mj : j ̸=   i}) = mTi W                                       (3)
                                                                    k−1


       OvOAttention (mi , {mj : j ̸= i}) = sof tmax(score (mi , {mj : j ̸= i})) · mi                (4)

The formula takes in one modality and computes the dot product against all the other modalities with
a weight matrix that can learn interactions throughout training. We chose to sum over the "other"
modalities instead of concatenation for two reasons: (1) the concatenation vector will continue to
increase in length with the number of modalities, which will result in a less scalable framework; (2)
concatenation is not invariant to the order of modalities, which could affect the model prediction,
whereas a sum provides position invariance.
Note that for k = 2 modalities (m1 , m2 ), the similarity score function simplifies to that of general
attention (20):

                                                         m2
                          score (m1 , {m2 }) = mT1 W        = mT1 W m2                              (5)
                                                         1

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2     M ULTI - HEADED OVO ATTENTION

To directly compare early fusion through self-attention and pairwise cross-attention, we extend OvO
attention to the multi-headed attention framework. Multi-headed attention allows the model to attend
to different input subspaces simultaneously. This is achieved by splitting the input embeddings into
multiple linear projections, each processed independently through a self-attention mechanism. The
outputs of each attention head are then concatenated and projected again to obtain the final output of
the multi-headed attention layer. Formally, taking the input modality mi with respect to a set of other
modalities (mj : j ̸= i), the multi-headed attention layer for OvO attention is defined as follows:


        M ultiheadedOvOAttention(mi , {mj : j ̸= i}) = concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O
                                             m                                                      (6)
        headk = OvOAttention(mi Wkmi , {mj Wk j : j ̸= i})

Here, h is the number of attention heads, Wk is a learnable weight matrix for the k-th attention head,
W O is a learnable weight matrix that projects the concatenated outputs of the attention heads back to
the original dimension, and OvO Attention is defined in Equation 4.

3.3     M ODEL C OMPLEXITIES

This section highlights the complexities associated with the three paradigms used in our experimental
setting: early fusion followed by self-attention, pairwise cross-attention, and One-Versus-Others
(OvO) Attention. Table 1 summarizes the complexity per layer. Let k represent the number of
modalities, n be the feature length of each modality (assuming equal), and d be the representation
dimension of the respective weight matrices. As established in (43), self-attention has complexity of
O(n2 · d). In the multimodal case, self-attention concatenates modalities before attention, leading to
a sequence length of k · n, influencing the quadratic term. Thus, the complexity of self-attention is
O((k · n)2 · d) = O(k 2 · n2 · d). Cross-attention computes attention over all pairwise permutations
                         k!
of modalities: k P2 = (k−2)!  = k(k − 1). Thus, the number of operations required by cross-attention
is O(k · (k − 1) · n · d) = O((k 2 − k) · n2 · d). When focusing on the fastest-growing terms in big
                    2

O notation, the final complexity per layer simplifies to O(k 2 · n2 · d). One-Versus-Others (OvO)
Attention requires one attention calculation per modality, making it linear with respect to k. Thus, the
complexity per layer for OvO is O(k · n2 · d). Appendix Section A provides step-by-step details for
the complexity calculations.


Table 1: Per-Layer complexities of model paradigm. The per-layer complexity of early fusion
through self-attention, cross-attention, and OvO attention are shown as a function of number of
modalities k, feature-length of a modality n, and representation dimension d.
                   Model                                  Complexity Per Layer
                   Self-Attention                               O(k 2 · n2 · d)
                   Cross-Attention                              O(k 2 · n2 · d)
                   One-Versus-Others (OvO) Attention            O(k · n2 · d)
4       E XPERIMENTS
We used one simulation experiment and three diverse real-world datasets to examine our method
against three standard integration techniques: concatenation with no attention (baseline), early fusion
with self-attention, and cross-attention. Note that even though our method is only computationally
beneficial when combining three or more modalities, we used a two-modality dataset as a base-case
to ensure that we are not compromising performance in any multimodal scenario, even where we do
not offer scalability gains. We chose datasets where modality alignment is not apparent as such tasks
are less frequently explored but still essential to solve (e.g., clinical decision support).

4.1     S IMULATION DATASET

We simulated 20 modalities under an artificial constraint that all modalities are needed to obtain
an accurate classification. This is, for example, analogous to a medical setting where a physician


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview of the simulation dataset. We simulated 20 modalities to test the capabilities of
our method. The first classification label was created by 20 random values that add up to 1. Each
value was then vectorized by sampling randomly around the chosen number. The second label is
created by randomly selecting numbers that are each less than 0.15, which are also vectorized. The
input per sample is 20 vectors with corresponding labels of 0 or 1.


requires a diverse range of information to reach a clinical decision. We consider two classes: (1) 20
random feature values that sum up to 1.0, and, (2) 20 random feature values that are each less than
0.15. These classes were created such that the correct label can only be inferred after inspecting all
features. For example, 0.14 is less than 0.15, but it could also be a value that adds to 1 (seen in the
last column of Figure 2). If 0.10 was the threshold, the mean of the 20 values would be 0.05, and
thus, the sum would also be very close to 1, on average. This would render the task too difficult, and
there would not be a significant difference between the samples across the two labels. Setting the
threshold to 0.2 would render the task too easy, as on average, the numbers are consistently greater in
the second class and the classes could be differentiated using only one modality. Thus, we chose 0.15
as the threshold. Each value was then vectorized by sampling randomly around the selected number,
such that each modality is a vector of size 20 rather than a single number, leading to a combined total
of 400 features. Overall, the dataset contains 2,000 samples (1,000 for each class). Our constructed
simulation dataset tests the scaling capabilities of our method to the extent that real-world datasets
could not reach. Figure 2 illustrates the simulation data setting.

4.2     R EAL - WORLD DATASETS

4.2.1    H ATEFUL M EMES C HALLENGE DATASET
The Hateful Memes Challenge (14) is an important multimodal dataset to identify hate speech.
Originally, the dataset consisted of 10,000 images with associated text annotated with various types
of hate speech, but since the original test labels are kept proprietary, we can only use 9,000 samples.
The memes were selected in such a way that strictly unimodal classifiers would struggle to classify
them correctly. The two modalities are images and text, and the task is to classify a meme as hateful
or not. The purpose of using a two-modality dataset is to ensure there is no drop in performance in
all multimodal scenarios, not just ones where the scalability is significant. The field of multimodal
learning has primarily used the attention formula that is consistent with Transformers (43), but we
want to highlight that there are other attention formulas (such as (20)) that are effective for multimodal
integration.

4.2.2    A MAZON REVIEWS DATASET
The Amazon customer review dataset (27) aims to understand consumer opinions and experiences
with products sold on Amazon. We sampled from the Electronics category, as it was one of the largest
and most commonly used (17; 12; 28). We used three modalities from the dataset – review images,
text, and the metadata (price, brand name, product category, etc.) associated with each review. The


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


task is to classify the binary sentiment of each review - positive (4-5 stars) or negative (1-2 stars),
with a total of around 20,000 samples. While sentiment classification with the Amazon reviews data
is well-studied unimodally through text (12; 17; 15; 28), we offer a unique multimodal approach to
the task. Existing multimodal approaches on Amazon reviews focus on review helpfulness (11; 18),
or product similarity (5) rather than sentiment classification. Furthermore, other papers use only text
and images or only images and metadata (as text); an image-text-tabular multimodal task has yet to
be explored. Intuitively, images and metadata can both be useful for review sentiment prediction - if
the image highlights a broken item with the metadata showing a high price or trusted brand, consumer
dissatisfaction may be implied.


4.2.3    T HE C ANCER G ENOME ATLAS (TCGA) DATASET

TCGA is a cancer genomics program that molecularly characterized over 20,000 primary cancers and
matched normal samples spanning 33 cancer types. Accurate prediction of cancer type is an important
task but has primarily focused on single-modality approaches (9; 34; 7; 22). Sun et el. (39) used
multiple modalities from TCGA but did so for survival prediction rather than cancer classification.
We used patients diagnosed with lung (26), stomach (25), colon (24), liver (2), or kidney (44) cancer
to create our dataset consisting of 5 modalities – whole-slide images, clinical data (tabular), copy
number variation or CNV (tabular), gene expression (tabular), and DNA Methylation (tabular). CNV,
DNA Methylation, and gene expression all describe different genomic information; full descriptions
can be found in Appendix B. Clinical data includes demographics, laboratory tests, and family
relationships. Imaging includes pathology slide images of tissue sampled from the tumor. In total,
we had 338 colon cancer patients, 329 kidney, 301 lung, 228 liver, and 226 stomach patients after
filtering described in Appendix B. This is a five-class classification task with five modalities.


4.3     BASELINES

Our multimodal baselines include a conventional concatenation fusion with no attention, early fusion
followed by self-attention, and pairwise cross-attention fusion. The architectures of all models are
identical except for the integration stage. For example, since modality-specific encoders can produce
different dimension sizes, we add a linear layer before integration to create the same input dimensions.
While this step is not strictly necessary for concatenation, we still add the layer there so that no
additional factors influence computation costs and performance. While there are many multimodal
Transformers available for the vision-language domain, our focus is on examining the underlying
fusion mechanism and creating a general integration paradigm for any application, including ones
outside of vision-language.


4.4     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

In the Hateful Memes Dataset, the competition creators pre-determined the validation set and the
train set, but the test set labels were not made publicly available. Thus, we created our own test set by
randomly sampling 1000 memes from the training set, matching the size of the original competition
test set. In all other datasets, for consistency, we randomly sampled 80% of the data for the training
set and 10% each for test and validation sets, as there was not an established public split. Our
hyperparameter tuning scheme was consistent for each dataset and each model. For each experiment,
we used validation accuracy to determine the best parameters. Please see details in Appendix C on
exact numbers used to tune for the number of attention heads, learning rate, and number of training
steps and Appendix D for compute times and GPU details. We randomly picked 10 random seeds
for every experiment - once the best hyperparameters were picked, ten models initialized with those
seeds and parameters were run. Then, using the trained 10 models, we evaluated on the test set and
took the average of the 10 along with the standard deviation, which is reported in Section 5. To
evaluate our model against other integration techniques, we use accuracy and F1-score as measures
of performance and the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) as the measure of runtime
complexity. In real-world datasets, FLOPs were measured per sample and reported as the difference
between concatenation and multimodal attention (∆FLOPs).

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     R ESULTS
5.1   S IMULATION RESULTS

Using 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 simulated modalities, we examine the performance and computation cost
across the three integration methods. Most notably, while self-attention and cross-attention grow
quadratically with respect to the number of modalities, k, (O(k 2 · n2 · d)), our method scales linearly
(O(k · n2 · d)), as shown in Figure 3 (a). Furthermore, incorporating all 20 modalities makes the task
trivial for our method and concatenation. However, cross-attention requires 20 pairwise calculations,
which do not help with the classification task (e.g., the local interaction between modality 1 and
modality 2 has no impact on the label), thus showing a slight performance drop (Figure 3 (b)). The
reported results are averaged across 10 random seeds, demonstrating that OvO attention has less
performance variability than cross-attention.


Figure 3: The impact of using OvO attention to fuse simulated data. (a) Compute measured in
FLOPs and (b) performance measured in accuracy as a function of increasing the number of simulated
modalities. OvO attention improves performance at a lower computational cost.


5.2   R ESULTS ON REAL - WORLD DATASETS

Using three diverse real-world datasets, both in terms of the number of modalities, application
domains, and classification tasks, we show that our method consistently improves performance
compared to early fusion and pairwise fusion while decreasing computational cost. For the Hateful
Memes and Amazon reviews tasks, we used pre-trained models for unimodal text and image classifi-
cation (BERT and ResNet). In the Amazon reviews case, we used a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) as
our unimodal model for the tabular metadata. The same unimodal model architecture was used to
encode each modality in the multimodal models. Thus demonstrating how our method provides a
more efficient way to integrate modalities than using existing state-of-the-art methods. We perform
significance testing between OvO attention’s and the next best performing model’s accuracy and
F1-score means, detailed in the Appendix E. The Hateful Memes results are shown in Table 2 and
demonstrate that our model performed better than the baselines, offering a statistically significant
improvement in performance to cross-attention (p-value < 0.01) and a slight improvement in FLOPs.
This is reasonable as we do not offer substantial scalability gains in the two-modality setting (see
Equation 5).
The Amazon Reviews results are shown in Table 3 and demonstrate both performance and scalability
advantages of OvO attention. Since the textual modality is most valuable in sentiment prediction, the
performance of BERT alone is higher than concatenation, self-attention, and cross-attention. This
indicates that the noise from metadata and images interferes with model performance. However, OvO
attention can extract information from the other two modalities for a significant performance increase
rather than a decrease (p-value < 0.01). Lastly, TCGA results are shown in Table 4. While here,
cross-attention had a slightly better performance than OvO, our model offers substantial scalability
benefits and, across 10 random seeds, performed consistently, showing robustness and stability.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Hateful Memes results. Modalities are Image (I) and Text (T). We report the average of 10
random seeds for accuracy, F1-scores, and standard deviations. (*) FLOPs were measured per sample
and reported as the difference between concatenation and multimodal attention. We offer improved
performance compared to cross-attention across all metrics.
             Model               Modalities ↑ Accuracy ↑ F1-Score ↓ ∆ FLOPs
             ResNet              I            60.3 ±1.77 56.3 ±1.67 -
             BERT                T            66.0 ±1.15 61.8 ±1.75 -
             Concatenation       I, T         68.8 ±1.03 64.8 ±0.98 *
             Self-Attention      I, T         68.2 ±0.79 64.9 ±0.92 1.37 x 106
             Cross-Attention I, T             69.1 ±0.57 65.4 ±0.72 1.44 x 106
             OvO Attention I, T               70.7 ±0.87 67.7 ±0.97 1.05 x 106


Table 3: Amazon Reviews results. Modalities are Image (I), Text (T), and Tabular (Tb). We report
the average of 10 random seeds for accuracy, F1-scores, and standard deviations. (*) FLOPs were
measured per sample and reported as the difference between concatenation and multimodal attention.
We outperform cross-attention across all metrics and offer significant scalability gains.
             Model             Modalities ↑ Accuracy ↑ F1-Score ↓ ∆ FLOPs
             Neural Network Tb                57.6 ±0.70 57.5 ±0.75 -
             ResNet            I              66.3 ±0.67 66.6 ±0.64 -
             BERT              T              92.6 ±0.52 92.9 ±0.39 -
             Concatenation     I, T, Tb       92.2 ±0.42 92.8 ±0.25 *
             Self-Attention    I, T, Tb       92.4 ±0.39 92.4 ±0.39 1.90 x 106
             Cross-Attention I, T, Tb         91.6 ±0.70 92.2 ±0.63 1.90 x 106
             OvO Attention I, T, Tb           93.1 ±0.30 93.0 ±0.31 0.52 x 106


Furthermore, the difference between cross-attention and OvO attention accuracy and F1-scores was
not statistically significant (p-value > 0.01).


Table 4: TCGA results. Modalities are Gene Expression (GE), Image (I), Clinical (C), Copy Number
Variation (CNV), and DNA Methylation (M). We report the average of 10 random seeds for accuracy
and F1-scores along with standard deviations. (*) FLOPs were measured per sample and reported as
the difference between concatenation and multimodal attention. We perform competitively compared
to cross-attention across all metrics and notably offer more stability as OvO had much lower variation
across the seeds (at the two decimals level).
  Model                                Modalities           ↑ Accuracy ↑ F1-Score ↓ ∆ FLOPs
  Convolutional Neural Network I                            56.7 ±2.99      55.6 ±4.03 -
  Neural Network                       C                     60.8 ±0.47 57.2 ±0.26 -
  Neural Network                       CNV                   93.4 ±0.80 94.1 ±0.74 -
  Neural Network                       M                     97.0 ±0.43 97.4 ±0.36 -
  Neural Network                       GE                    97.6 ±1.19 97.7 ±1.00 -
  Concatenation                        GE, I, C, CNV, M      97.8 ±1.50 97.9 ±1.26 *
  Self-Attention                       GE, I, C, CNV, M      96.8 ±0.96 97.0 ±0.89 6.56 x 106
  Cross-Attention                      GE, I, C, CNV, M 99.2 ±1.04 99.3 ±0.92 5.26 x 106
  OvO Attention                        GE, I, C, CNV, M     98.3 ±0.07 98.4 ±0.06 0.33 x 106


5.3   C ASE STUDY: DETERMINING MODALITY IMPORTANCE USING ATTENTION VECTORS

Our model, OvO, generates a single attention vector per modality, allowing us to discern which
modality receives the highest attention score and provide insight into the model’s decision-making
process. Using the TCGA dataset, where OvO was highly successfull, we demonstrated the trans-
parency of OvO attention by investigating the attention vectors on this task (see Appendix F for
the heatmap of the Amazon reviews dataset). As shown in Figure 4, each attention context vector
is computed by averaging across the embedding dimension and the 10 random seeds used for our
best model. The horizontal axis enumerates the test set patients, while the vertical axis denotes


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the "main" modality from the attention score (the modality not inside the average).In Figure 4, we
observed the gene expression attention vector as the highest scored, corroborated by Table 4 where
gene expression emerged as the highest performing single modality. Although DNA Methylation
performs well unimodally, it isn’t emphasized in the heatmap due to its established strong biological
correlation with gene expression (45; 3; 35), avoiding redundancy. Similarly, the clinical modality’s
low performance is reflected in the attention heatmap, while imaging, the only non-tabular modality,
provides new information to the model and thus highlighted. Overall, the construction of OvO offers
a more interpretable framework than self-attention and cross-attention.


Figure 4: Attention heatmap for the TCGA dataset. Each attention vector is computed by averaging
across the embedding dimension and the 10 random seeds used to report our best model. The x-axis
includes the patients from the test set, and the y-axis includes the "main" modality from the attention
context vector. The attention weights are Gene Expression (GE) vs. others, Image (I) vs. others,
Clinical (C) vs. others, Copy Number Variation (CNV) vs. others, and DNA Methylation (M) vs.
others. This figure is consistent with our understanding of the biological relationship between gene
expression and DNA Methylation as well as our single-modality results from Table 4.
6   D ISCUSSION
Our proposed method, OvO, provides a way to overcome one of the major challenges associated
with multimodal datasets - computational resource demand and cost. OvO is also more interpretable,
enabling adoption in high-stakes settings, such as clinical decision support.
While many deep learning studies utilize datasets with millions of samples, we were limited by our
computational resources. We argue that the primary difference between our approach from early
fusion and pairwise fusion is not about the number of samples but the number of modalities. To
support this claim, we demonstrated the efficiency of OvO on 20 modalities in our simulation and
conducted a complexity analysis. We believe that our results, based on the resources available, give a
robust showcase of the main concept of our work.
The literature on Transformers and, specifically, Multimodal Transformers provides a long list of
architectures, some of which make efforts towards scalability. However, such models focus on the
vision-language domain, and are not applicable in all multimodal scenarios (e.g., clinical decision
support). Thus, we chose three common fusion paradigms (similar to (23)) that encapsulate most
of the underlying attention mechanisms in the multimodal literature. We aim to modify the basic
attention mechanism in such models to make multimodal fusion more scalable with an increasing
number of modalities.

7   C ONCLUSION
We present One-Versus-Others (OvO), a new scalable multimodal attention mechanism. The proposed
formulation involves averaging the weights from each modality during training, significantly reducing
the computational complexity compared to early fusion through self-attention and cross-attention
methods. OvO outperformed self-attention, cross-attention, and concatenation on three diverse real-
world datasets and on a simulation dataset that shows the scalability gains in an extremely multimodal
setting. The results demonstrate that the proposed approach improves performance compared to
state-of-the-art fusion techniques while decreasing computation costs.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Alongside this paper, we provide the source code for our work1 . The repository contains the
implementation details of all of our experiments as well as a requirements file to install the necessary
libraries and a ReadMe.md file containing running instructions to reproduce our results. In the
text, we describe implementation details in Section 4.4 and provide details in Appendix C on exact
numbers used to tune for the number of attention heads, learning rate, and number of training steps.
In Appendix D, we describe the compute times and GPU requirements used in our work. Data
preprocessing steps are also included in the source code, as well as in Appendix B. Lastly, Appendix
Section A provides step-by-step details for the complexity calculations shown in Section 3.3.


R EFERENCES
 [1] Hassan Akbari, Liangzhe Yuan, Rui Qian, Wei-Hong Chuang, Shih-Fu Chang, Yin Cui, and
     Boqing Gong. Vatt: Transformers for multimodal self-supervised learning from raw video,
     audio and text. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24206–24221, 2021.
 [2] Adrian Ally, Miruna Balasundaram, Rebecca Carlsen, Eric Chuah, Amanda Clarke, Noreen
     Dhalla, Robert A Holt, Steven JM Jones, Darlene Lee, Yussanne Ma, et al. Comprehensive
     and integrative genomic characterization of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cell, 169(7):1327–1341,
     2017.
 [3] Dafni Anastasiadi, Anna Esteve-Codina, and Francesc Piferrer. Consistent inverse correlation
     between dna methylation of the first intron and gene expression across tissues and species.
     Epigenetics & chromatin, 11(1):1–17, 2018.
 [4] Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng,
     and Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European conference
     on computer vision, pages 104–120. Springer, 2020.
 [5] Nilotpal Das, Aniket Joshi, Promod Yenigalla, and Gourav Agrwal. Maps: Multimodal attention
     for product similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
     Computer Vision, pages 3338–3346, 2022.
 [6] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
     deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
     2018.
 [7] Mayur Divate, Aayush Tyagi, Derek J Richard, Prathosh A Prasad, Harsha Gowda, and Shiv-
     ashankar H Nagaraj. Deep learning-based pan-cancer classification model reveals tissue-of-
     origin specific gene expression signatures. Cancers, 14(5):1185, 2022.
 [8] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai,
     Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al.
     An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
 [9] Stephen B Edge and Carolyn C Compton. The american joint committee on cancer: the 7th
     edition of the ajcc cancer staging manual and the future of tnm. Annals of surgical oncology,
     17(6):1471–1474, 2010.
[10] Michal Golovanevsky, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ritambhara Singh. Multimodal attention-based
     deep learning for alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
     Association, 29(12):2014–2022, 2022.
[11] Wei Han, Hui Chen, Zhen Hai, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong Bing. Sancl: Multimodal review
     helpfulness prediction with selective attention and natural contrastive learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2209.05040, 2022.
[12] Tanjim Ul Haque, Nudrat Nawal Saber, and Faisal Muhammad Shah. Sentiment analysis on
     large scale amazon product reviews. In 2018 IEEE international conference on innovative
     research and development (ICIRD), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[13] Zhicheng Huang, Zhaoyang Zeng, Bei Liu, Dongmei Fu, and Jianlong Fu. Pixel-bert: Aligning
     image pixels with text by deep multi-modal transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00849,
     2020.
[14] Douwe Kiela, Hamed Firooz, Aravind Mohan, Vedanuj Goswami, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik
     Ringshia, and Davide Testuggine. The hateful memes challenge: Detecting hate speech in
     multimodal memes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2611–2624, 2020.
[15] Haoxin Li, Phillip Keung, Daniel Cheng, Jungo Kasai, and Noah A Smith. Narrowbert: Accel-
     erating masked language model pretraining and inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04761,
     2023.
[16] Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A
     simple and performant baseline for vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557,
     2019.
[17] Tian Li, Xiang Chen, Shanghang Zhang, Zhen Dong, and Kurt Keutzer. Cross-domain sentiment
     classification with contrastive learning and mutual information maximization. In ICASSP 2021-
     2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
     pages 8203–8207. IEEE, 2021.
[18] Junhao Liu, Zhen Hai, Min Yang, and Lidong Bing. Multi-perspective coherent reasoning for
     helpfulness prediction of multimodal reviews. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
     the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
     Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5927–5936, 2021.
[19] Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic
     visiolinguistic representations for vision-and-language tasks. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 32, 2019.
[20] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. Effective approaches to attention-
     based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.
[21] Yue Ming, Xiying Dong, Jihuai Zhao, Zefu Chen, Hao Wang, and Nan Wu. Deep learning-based
     multimodal image analysis for cervical cancer detection. Methods, 205:46–52, 2022.
[22] Mohanad Mohammed, Henry Mwambi, Innocent B Mboya, Murtada K Elbashir, and Bernard
     Omolo. A stacking ensemble deep learning approach to cancer type classification based on tcga
     data. Scientific reports, 11(1):1–22, 2021.
[23] Arsha Nagrani, Shan Yang, Anurag Arnab, Aren Jansen, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun.
     Attention bottlenecks for multimodal fusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 34:14200–14213, 2021.
[24] Cancer Genome Atlas Network et al. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human
     colon and rectal cancer. Nature, 487(7407):330, 2012.
[25] Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network et al. Comprehensive molecular characterization of
     gastric adenocarcinoma. Nature, 513(7517):202, 2014.
[26] Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network et al. Comprehensive molecular profiling of lung
     adenocarcinoma. Nature, 511(7511):543, 2014.
[27] Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. Justifying recommendations using distantly-
     labeled reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical
     methods in natural language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural
     language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 188–197, 2019.
[28] Aditya Pandey and Kunal Joshi. Cross-domain consumer review analysis. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2212.13916, 2022.
[29] Soujanya Poria, Navonil Majumder, Devamanyu Hazarika, Erik Cambria, Alexander Gelbukh,
     and Amir Hussain. Multimodal sentiment analysis: Addressing key issues and setting up the
     baselines. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 33(6):17–25, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[30] Di Qi, Lin Su, Jia Song, Edward Cui, Taroon Bharti, and Arun Sacheti. Imagebert: Cross-modal
     pre-training with large-scale weak-supervised image-text data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07966,
     2020.
[31] Tanzila Rahman, Mengyu Yang, and Leonid Sigal. Tribert: Full-body human-centric audio-
     visual representation learning for visual sound separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13412,
     2021.
[32] Johanna Samulin Erdem, Yke Jildouw Arnoldussen, Vidar Skaug, Aage Haugen, and Shanbeh
     Zienolddiny. Copy number variation, increased gene expression, and molecular mechanisms of
     neurofascin in lung cancer. Molecular Carcinogenesis, 56(9):2076–2085, 2017.
[33] Paul Hongsuck Seo, Arsha Nagrani, Anurag Arnab, and Cordelia Schmid. End-to-end generative
     pretraining for multimodal video captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 17959–17968, 2022.
[34] Kee Pang Soh, Ewa Szczurek, Thomas Sakoparnig, and Niko Beerenwinkel. Predicting cancer
     type from tumour dna signatures. Genome medicine, 9(1):1–11, 2017.
[35] John CG Spainhour, Hong Seo Lim, Soojin V Yi, and Peng Qiu. Correlation patterns be-
     tween dna methylation and gene expression in the cancer genome atlas. Cancer informatics,
     18:1176935119828776, 2019.
[36] George Sterpu, Christian Saam, and Naomi Harte. Attention-based audio-visual fusion for
     robust automatic speech recognition. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference
     on Multimodal Interaction, pages 111–115, 2018.
[37] Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Furu Wei, and Jifeng Dai. Vl-bert:
     Pre-training of generic visual-linguistic representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08530,
     2019.
[38] Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A
     joint model for video and language representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     international conference on computer vision, pages 7464–7473, 2019.
[39] Dongdong Sun, Ao Li, Bo Tang, and Minghui Wang. Integrating genomic data and pathological
     images to effectively predict breast cancer clinical outcome. Computer methods and programs
     in biomedicine, 161:45–53, 2018.
[40] Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from
     transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07490, 2019.
[41] Surendrabikram Thapa, Aditya Shah, Farhan Jafri, Usman Naseem, and Imran Razzak. A
     multi-modal dataset for hate speech detection on social media: Case-study of russia-ukraine
     conflict. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Challenges and Applications of Automated
     Extraction of Socio-political Events from Text (CASE), pages 1–6, 2022.
[42] Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Paul Pu Liang, J Zico Kolter, Louis-Philippe Morency, and
     Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Multimodal transformer for unaligned multimodal language sequences.
     In Proceedings of the conference. Association for Computational Linguistics. Meeting, volume
     2019, page 6558. NIH Public Access, 2019.
[43] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
     Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 30, 2017.
[44] Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network Analysis working group: Baylor College of Medicine
     Creighton Chad J. 1 2 Morgan Margaret 1 Gunaratne Preethi H. 1 3 Wheeler David A. 1
     Gibbs Richard A. 1, BC Cancer Agency Gordon Robertson A. 4 Chu Andy 4, Broad Institute
     Beroukhim Rameen 5 6 Cibulskis Kristian 6, Brigham & Women’s Hospital Signoretti Sabina
     7 54 59, Brown University Vandin Hsin-Ta Wu Fabio 8 8 Raphael Benjamin J. 8, University
     of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Verhaak Roel GW 9 Tamboli Pheroze 10 Torres-Garcia
     Wandaliz 9 Akbani Rehan 9 Weinstein John N. 9, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Reuter Victor 11 Hsieh James J. 12 Rose Brannon A. 11 Ari Hakimi A. 12 Jacobsen Anders
     13 Ciriello Giovanni 13 Reva Boris 13, National Cancer Institute Ricketts Christopher J. 14
     Marston Linehan W. agibbs@ bcm. edu 14 c, University of California Santa Cruz Stuart Joshua
     M. 15, Chapel Hill Kimryn Rathmell W. 16 University of North Carolina, et al. Comprehensive
     molecular characterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Nature, 499(7456):43–49, 2013.
[45] Wanxue Xu, Mengyao Xu, Longlong Wang, Wei Zhou, Rong Xiang, Yi Shi, Yunshan Zhang,
     and Yongjun Piao. Integrative analysis of dna methylation and gene expression identified
     cervical cancer-specific diagnostic biomarkers. Signal transduction and targeted therapy,
     4(1):55, 2019.
[46] Jun Yu, Jing Li, Zhou Yu, and Qingming Huang. Multimodal transformer with multi-view
     visual representation for image captioning. IEEE transactions on circuits and systems for video
     technology, 30(12):4467–4480, 2019.
[47] Linchao Zhu and Yi Yang. Actbert: Learning global-local video-text representations. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     8746–8755, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS FOR M ULTIMODAL
      I NTEGRATION S CHEMES
In this section, we present the step-by-step details of the computational complexity analysis presented
in Section 3.3. The analysis is done with respect to the size of the input modalities associated with the
three paradigms used in our experimental setting: early fusion followed by self-attention, cross-modal
attention, and One-Versus-Others (OvO) Attention.

A.1   E ARLY F USION

The early fusion approach involves first combining the modalities and then processing the concate-
nated sequence with the self-attention mechanism.
Step 1: Concatenation of Modalities.
Let k be the number of modalities and n be the feature-length of each modality.
                               Total length after concatenation = k × n
The complexity for this operation is linear:
                                               O(k · n)

Step 2: Compute Queries, Keys, and Values.
The self-attention mechanism derives queries (Q), keys (K), and values (V) for the concatenated
sequence (length k · n) using linear transformations with representation dimension, d. The complexity
of each transformation operation is:
                                              O(k · n · d)

Step 3: Compute Attention Scores.
Attention scores are computed by taking the dot product of queries and keys. The self-attention
mechanism has quadratic complexity with respect to the sequence length and linear complexity with
respect to the representation dimension d (43). Thus, given the concatenated sequence’s length of
k · n and the dimension of the keys and queries d, the complexity of this step is:
                                   O((k · n)2 · d) = O(k 2 · n2 · d)

Step 4: Calculate the Weighted Sum for Outputs.
For each of the k · n positions in the concatenated sequence, we compute the softmax of the attention
scores to produce the attention weights. These weights are then multiplied with their corresponding
d-dimensional values to compute the weighted sum, which becomes the output. The computational
complexity of these operations is:
                                             O(k 2 · n2 · d)

When combining all steps, the dominating terms in the computational complexity stem from the
attention scores’ computation and the weighted sum, culminating in an overall complexity of:
                                             O(k 2 · n2 · d)

A.2   C ROSS - MODAL ATTENTION

For cross-modal attention, each modality attends to every other modality.
Step 1: Compute Queries, Keys, and Values for Inter-Modal Attention.
From a given modality, compute a query (Q), and from the remaining k − 1 modalities, compute
keys (K) and values (V). Keys, queries, and values are obtained using linear transformations with
representation dimension d. The complexity of each transformation operation is:

                                O(n · d) for each query, key, value set


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Considering all modalities:
                                        O(k · (k − 1) · n · d)
                                                                                            k!
The term k · (k − 1) comes from the number of pairwise permutations of k, given by k P2 = (k−2)! =
k(k − 1).
Step 2: Calculate Attention Scores for Inter-Modal Attention.
The queries and keys from different modalities are used to compute attention scores, which represent
how much one modality should attend to another.
                              O(n2 · d) for each pair of modalities (43)
Considering all modalities:
                                        O(k · (k − 1) · n2 · d)

Step 3: Calculate the Weighted Sum for Outputs.
For every modality interaction, calculate the softmax of the attention scores to obtain the attention
weights. These weights are then used in conjunction with the values vector to derive the weighted
sum for the output:

                                O(n2 · d) for each pair of modalities
Considering all modalities:
                                        O(k · (k − 1) · n2 · d)

When evaluating all steps together, the dominating factors in computational complexity arise from
the computation of attention scores and the weighted sum. Thus, the collective complexity for
cross-modal attention, where each modality attends to every other, equates to:
                           O(k · (k − 1) · n2 · d) = O((k 2 − k) · n2 · d)

For the complexity of cross-modal attention, the dominant term is k 2 . The k − 1 term effectively
becomes a constant factor in relation to k 2 . As k tends toward larger values, the difference between
k 2 and k 2 − k diminishes. This is a consequence of the principles of big O notation, which focuses
on the fastest-growing term in the equation while dismissing constant factors and lower-order terms.
As a result, for asymptotic analysis, the complexity
                                         O(k 2 − k) · n2 · d
can be simplified to:
                                            O(k 2 · n2 · d)
.

A.3   O NE -V ERSUS -OTHERS (OVO) ATTENTION C OMPLEXITY

Step 1: Averaging of "Other" Modalities.
Let k be the number of modalities and n be the feature-length of each modality. For each modality
mi , averaging over the other k − 1 modalities results in a complexity of:
                                                O(n)
Given that this needs to be computed for all k modalities:
                                               O(k · n)

Step 2: Calculate Attention Scores with Shared Weight MatrixPW.
                                                                   n
                                                                     ̸= i mj
The modality vector mi and the average of "other" modalities, j n−1          , are used to compute
attention scores, which represent how much one modality should attend to the others. Multiplication
with the weight matrix W (with representation dimension d) and the dot product with the summed
modalities lead to:

                                              O(n2 · d)


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Considering this operation for all k modalities:
                                             O(k · n2 · d)

Step 3: Calculate the Weighted Sum for Outputs.
For every modality interaction, calculate the softmax of the attention scores to obtain the attention
weights. These weights are then used in conjunction with the mi vector (analogous the values (V)
vector) to derive the weighted sum for the output:

                                 O(n2 · d) for each pair of modalities
Considering all modalities:
                                             O(k · n2 · d)

When evaluating all steps together, the dominating factors in computational complexity arise from
the computation of attention scores. Thus, the collective complexity for cross-modal attention, where
each modality attends to every other, equates to:
                                             O(k · n2 · d)

In summary, One-Versus-Others (OvO) Attention exhibits a computational complexity that grows
linearly with respect to the number of modalities (O(k · n2 · d)). In contrast, both early fusion
through self-attention and cross-attention approaches demonstrate quadratic growth with respect to
the number of modalities (O(k 2 · n2 · d)). This makes OvO a more scalable option for multimodal
integration.

B    TCGA M ODALITY D ESCRIPTIONS AND D ETAILED P RE - PROCESSING
CNV defines the varying number of repeats of genetic fragments found in a human genome. The
number of repeats of specific genetic fragments influences gene expression levels and has been
associated with the progression of different cancers (32). Any genomic regions missing CNV values
or only having one unique value across all cases were removed. DNA methylation represents the
amount of condensation of genetic regions due to the chemical alteration imposed by methyl groups.
This condensation generally represses gene activity near the genetic region. Any genomic regions
with missing values were removed. Clinical data includes information such as the patient’s diagnosis,
demographics, laboratory tests, and family relationships. Categorical features were isolated and a
coefficient of variation test was run to determine highly variable features. Features with a coefficient
of variation higher than 70 were kept for analysis, along with the target variable. These features were
converted into numerical format using one-hot-encoding. Gene expression data is collected through
RNA-sequencing. Levels of gene expression are recorded by detecting the amounts of transcripts
found for each gene. These levels can be used to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying
cancer. Transcriptomic data was filtered to only include protein-coding genes and measured in
fragments per kilobase of exon per million mapped fragments (FPKM). Imaging - TCGA collects
pathology slide images of tissues sampled from the tumor. This modality provides visual information
about the malignant region and can help with diagnosis and treatment planning. The image data was
filtered only to include DX images, which result from a single X-Ray exposure, rotated to landscape
view, then cropped to the median aspect ratio of 1.3565. We filtered for patients that had all five
modalities, and we also only chose the patients that were still alive, to create a more balanced number
of patients between cancer types (338 colon cancer patients, 329 kidney, 301 lung, 228 liver, and 226
stomach patients, after the filtering). The task we created is to classify each patient’s cancer type. For
all modalities, features with missing values were dropped. For CNV, DNA Methylation, and gene
expression data, feature reduction was performed using a random forest classifier, only on training
data, ensuring the test was not seen by the random forest. Using the validation set, we determined the
best number of estimators (out of 50, 100, 150).

C    H YPERPARAMETER T UNING
For each experiment, we used the validation accuracy to determine the best hyperparameters. We
tuned the learning rate (0.01 - 1 ∗ 10−8 ), batch size (16, 32, 64, 128), epochs (200 epochs with early


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stopping if validation accuracy did not increase for 5 epochs), and number of attention heads for the
OvO and pairwise cross-modal attention models (1, 2, 4, 8, 16). For the neural network encoders,
we tuned the number of linear layers ranging from 1 to 4. Similarly, for the convolutional neural
network, we tuned the number of convolution layers ranging from 1 to 4.

D    C OMPUTE R ESOURCES

For each experiment, we use one NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. For the Hateful Memes task,
single-modality models ran for roughly 40 minutes, and multi-modal models ran for roughly 55
minutes on average. For the Amazon reviews task, the single modality pre-trained models ran for
roughly 50 minutes, the single modality neural network ran for a minute, and the multi-modal models
ran for approximately an hour on average. For the TCGA task, single-modality models ran for 5
minutes, while multi-modal models ran for roughly 15 minutes on average. In the simulation dataset,
the maximum modalities was 20 which took our model, OvO, roughly 2 minutes to run, while the
cross-modal attention baseline took about 20 minutes to run on average.

E    S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING

We use a t-test to determine if there is a significant difference in accuracy and F1-score means
between OvO attention and the next best-performing multimodal model. Our sample size is 10 from
each group, as we initialized the models with 10 random seeds. For the Hateful Memes dataset,
we compare against cross-attention as it performed the second best after OvO. Using an α = 0.01,
we have evidence to reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is a statistically significant
difference in means between cross-attention and OvO attention. The p-value for the accuracy scores
is 1.22e−8 and the p-value for F1-scores is 1.89e−5 . For the Amazon reviews dataset, we compare
against self-attention as it performed the second best after OvO. We get a p-value for accuracy scores
of 4.77e−4 and a p-value of 4.87e−4 for F1-scores. Thus, we demonstrate a statistically significant
difference in accuracy and F1-score means between self-attention and OvO attention. Lastly, for the
TCGA dataset, we do not have evidence to reject the null hypothesis and cannot say that the accuracy
and F1-score means were different between OvO and cross-attention since the p-values were greater
than α = 0.01 (p-value of 0.04 for accuracy means, and p-value of 0.02 for F1-score means). This
demonstrates that although cross-attention performed slightly better than OvO, it was not statistically
significant.

F    C ASE STUDY FOR ATTENTION VECTORS ON A MAZON REVIEWS DATASET


Figure 5: Attention heatmap for Amazon reviews dataset. Each attention vector is computed by
averaging across the embedding dimension and across the 10 random seeds used to report our best
model. The horizontal axis includes a sample of size 128 (batch size of the model) reviews from the
test set, and the vertical axis includes the “main” modality from the attention score. The attention
scores Text (T) vs. others, Images (I) vs. others, and Tabular (Tb) vs. others. This figure is consistent
with the single-modality results from table 3.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since our model, OvO, performed well on the Amazon reviews task and could be used for future
sentiment analysis tasks reliably, we wanted to explore the attention scores on this task. Each attention
context vector shown in Figure 5 is computed by averaging across the embedding dimension and
across the 10 random seeds used to report our best model. The X-axis includes a sample of size 128
(batch size of the model) reviews from the test set and the y-axis includes the “main” modality from
the attention score. The attention weights are Text (T) vs. others, Images (I) vs. others, and Tabular
(Tb) vs. others. We observe that the text attention vector is the most highly scored, which is supported
by the single-modality results from Table 3, where text was the highest performing single modality.
Thus, we further demonstrate that OvO can be used to better understand modality importance, without
the need for ablation studies. This is significant because knowing which modality is most important
to decision-making can motivate future data collection efforts in diverse research environments and
help make deep learning models more transparent.


                                                  18
