Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ABEL P RIVACY S OURCE C ODING IN V ERTICAL F ED -
ERATED L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We study label privacy protection in vertical federated learning (VFL). VFL en-
         ables an active party who possesses labeled data to improve model performance
         (utility) by collaborating with passive parties who have auxiliary features. Re-
         cently, there has been a growing concern for protecting label privacy against semi-
         honest passive parties who may surreptitiously deduce private labels from the out-
         put of their bottom models. However, existing studies do not remove the prior
         label information in the active party’s features from labels in an offline phase, thus
         leaking unnecessary label privacy to passive parties. In contrast to existing meth-
         ods that focus on training-phase perturbation, we propose a novel offline-phase
         data cleansing approach to protect label privacy without compromising utility.
         Specifically, we first formulate a Label Privacy Source Coding (LPSC) problem
         to remove the redundant label information in the active party’s features from la-
         bels, by assigning each sample a new weight and label (i.e., residual) for federated
         training. We give a privacy guarantee and theoretically prove that gradient boost-
         ing efficiently optimizes the LPSC problem. Therefore, we propose the Vertical
         Federated Gradient Boosting (VFGBoost) framework to address the LPSC prob-
         lem. Moreover, given that LPSC only provides upper-bounded privacy enhance-
         ment, VFGBoost further enables a flexible privacy-utility trade-off by incorporat-
         ing adversarial training during federated training. Experimental results on four
         real-world datasets substantiate the efficacy of LPSC and the superiority of our
         VFGBoost framework.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Vertical federated learning (VFL) Yang et al. (2019) enables global model construction among or-
ganizations with datasets sharing overlapping sample spaces but differing feature spaces. Fig. 1(a)
presents an overview of the multi-party VFL problem, where an active party possesses labeled data
and has aligned samples with passive parties that own auxiliary features. The primary goal of VFL
is to build a well-performed federated model in a privacy-preserving and efficient manner.
Recently, label privacy protection has attracted increasing attention in VFL studies. Existing studies
in VFL label privacy protection Li et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2022); Sun et al. (2022) rely on a model-
splitting paradigm, as shown in Fig. 1(b), in which a DNN model is divided into a top model and
bottom models to protect label privacy and feature privacy, respectively. They protect label privacy
by training a complex-yet-deterministic top model with various perturbation techniques. However,
when a passive party steals the deterministic top model (e.g., via model completion attack Fu et al.
(2022)), the worst-case label privacy leakage risk occurs and approximates the federated model
performance, which is the utility Sun et al. (2022). More concerning, the high-dimensional forward
embeddings adopted for label protection exacerbate the feature privacy leakage to the active party Jin
et al. (2021); Ye et al. (2022). The fundamental cause of this dilemma is that existing studies Li
et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2022); Sun et al. (2022) directly optimize the forward embeddings for label
prediction, making forward embeddings highly correlated with and informative about private labels.
Our key insight is that label privacy protection in VFL should be decoupled into two independent
tasks: 1) offline-phase cleansing, which enhances privacy without compromising utility by remov-
ing the redundant label information from labels, and 2) training-phase perturbation, which further
balances privacy-utility trade-off via inadequately learning from perturbed labels or gradients.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Active party                   Passive parties
                                                                      Protection:                           Forward
                                                                                          Top model
                                                                  1    Our LPSC
                                                                                                            Backward
        0        0
        1
        2
                 1
                                                 ...
                 1
        3        0                                                2   Perturbation
        4        1                                                                                         Forward
        5        0                                                                                        embedding
        6        1
        7        0
        8        1
        9        0

     Private label information   Aligned data:                                       Bottom model 0   Bottom model 1
                                  Local data:                                          Active party       Passive party

            (a) Multi-party VFL problem setting                         (b) Vanilla VFL and label privacy threat
Figure 1: (a) The multi-party VFL problem setting. (b) Vanilla VFL trains model with uniformly-
weighted original labels pgt (i, y). A semi-honest passive party attacks label privacy from the for-
ward embedding. Our LPSC replaces pgt (i, y) with optimized re-weighted residuals plpsc (i, y).
As a remedy to the aforementioned loophole, we formulate a Label Privacy Source Coding (LPSC)
problem to encode minimum-sufficient label privacy in an offline phase. The idea is to remove the
label information present in the active party’s local features, which is redundant for VFL, from the
ground-truth label. By doing so, the risk of label leakage from forward embeddings is significantly
eliminated, without sacrificing utility. We theoretically analyze the privacy guarantee of LPSC.
LPSC is a constrained optimization problem of two mutual information. We prove that gradient
boosting Freund & Schapire (1997) is a simple and efficient approach to optimize the LPSC prob-
lem. Specifically, gradient boosting converts the uniformly-weighted original labels to re-weighted
residuals of the active party’s local predictions, thus eliminating the redundant label privacy.
Therefore, we propose Vertical Federated Gradient Boosting (VFGBoost) to shift the federated
learning target from the uniformly-weighted original labels pgt (i, y) to the LPSC-encoded re-
weighted residuals plpsc (i, y), which encodes minimum-sufficient label privacy for federated train-
ing. Our proposed VFGBoost follows the aforementioned two-phase paradigm: In the offline LPSC
phase (Fig. 2, phase 1), the active party trains a local model on its local data and computes the
LPSC-encoded re-weighted residuals plpsc (i, y) via gradient boosting as the learning target for VFL.
Subsequently, in the federated training phase (Fig. 2, phase 2), the passive parties train a federated
model to fit the re-weighted residuals. Hence, the federated prediction is the weighted sum of the
active party’s local prediction and the federated predicted residual.
Crucially, the inherent label privacy enhancement of LPSC is upper-bounded by the label infor-
mation present in the active party’s local features, potentially falling short in practical scenarios.
To circumvent this, perturbation methods can be subsequently employed to enhance label privacy
with a consequent reduction in utility. Specifically, VFGBoost utilizes adversarial training through
a max-min optimization, in the federated training phase (Fig. 2, phase 2). The active party trains
adversarial top models by simulating adversaries to attack labels, while also updating the passive
parties’ bottom models to thwart the attack. Consequently, VFGBoost consists of a utility objective
that learns to fit the LPSC-encoded label privacy (re-weighted residuals) plpsc (i, y), as well as an
adversarial privacy objective that further protects ground-truth label privacy pgt (i, y). We jointly op-
timize both objectives, utilizing a hyperparameter to enable flexible balancing of the privacy-utility
trade-off. Moreover, VFGBoost is model-agnostic and allows any gradient-based model.
Our comprehensive experiments conducted on four real-world datasets in the realms of recommen-
dation and healthcare demonstrate that the LPSC can enhance label privacy without compromising
utility, and the proposed VFGBoost framework achieves a superior privacy-utility trade-off com-
pared to seven baseline methods. In summary, our contributions are as follows:

        • We decouple label privacy protection in VFL into two independent tasks: offline-phase
          cleansing to inherently enhance privacy without compromising utility, and training-phase
          perturbation for nuanced privacy-utility trade-offs.
        • We formulate a Label Privacy Source Coding (LPSC) problem with privacy guarantee to
          encode minimum-sufficient label information for offline-phase cleansing.
        • We further propose VFGBoost that utilizes gradient boosting to optimize LPSC and incor-
          porates adversarial training to enable additional privacy enhancement.
        • We perform extensive experiments on four real-world datasets to demonstrate the efficacy
          of LPSC and the superiority of our proposed VFGBoost framework.


                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Label Privacy Protection in VFL. Existing label privacy protection techniques in VFL mainly in-
clude cryptographic methods and perturbation methods. Cryptographic methods Fu et al. (2021);
Cheng et al. (2021); Ren et al. (2022) incur significant overheads in computation and communica-
tion, which is typically unbearable in practice. Therefore, they are not investigated and compared in
this work. Perturbation methods introduce noise to labels or gradients to update the passive parties’
models. For instance, Li et al. Li et al. (2022) employ adapted Gaussian noise to perturb the gradi-
ents to defend against label attacks. Sun et al. Sun et al. (2022) minimize the distance correlation
between the forward embedding and the label to defend against the spectral attack Tran et al. (2018).
Ghazi et al. Ghazi et al. (2021) leverage randomized responses to use randomly flipped labels for
computing gradients. Yang et al. Yang et al. (2022) apply differential privacy Dwork et al. (2006)
to a gradient perturbation-based split learning framework. Overall, due to the forward embeddings
in existing works being optimized for label prediction Li et al. (2022); Zou et al. (2022); Sun et al.
(2022), the worst-case label privacy leakage approximates the VFL utility, which is unacceptable.
Mutual Information for Privacy Protection. MID Zou et al. (2023) uses mutual information (MI)
regularization to minimize the entropy of forward embedding during federated training. It adopts a
VAE-based MI estimator Alemi et al. (2016) to gauge MI between the embedding and label. Such
explicit MI estimation Alemi et al. (2016); Belghazi et al. (2018), however, is resource-intensive and
needs Gaussian noise, reducing utility. Conversely, our LPSC employs gradient boosting to enhance
privacy efficiently without added noise.
Privacy Protection via Offline Pre-processing. Recently, InstaHide Huang et al. (2020) and Fed-
Pass Gu et al. (2023) are proposed to pre-process features to safeguard feature privacy by merging
training samples or adding noise. Nevertheless, to our best knowledge, there are no existing pre-
processing approaches designed for label privacy protection.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Vertical Federated Learning Setting. In a typical VFL setting, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the
aligned training data D has sample identifiers (IDs) i and labels y. The feature matrix X =
[X0 , X1 , . . . , XK ] is vertically partitioned among K + 1 parties by feature. An active party P0
                                                                              K
has labeled local features {i, X0 , y}. Meanwhile, K passive parties {Pk }k=1 only have auxiliary
                    K                                                 loc
features {i, Xk }k=1 . Moreover, the active party has local data D        = {iloc , X0loc , y loc }, which
additionally includes unaligned labeled samples. In VFL, the active party aims to leverage the auxil-
iary features from passive parties to train a federated model while protecting privacy. For simplicity,
we use sample ID i to represent Pk ’s features xk,i in functions (e.g., hψk (i) denotes hψk (xk,i )).
A summary of notations and their corresponding descriptions is provided in the Appendix A.
                           Table 1: Threat model. (See details in Appendix B.)
    Threat model      Adversary       Attack objective       Attack method       Adversary’s capability
                    Passive parties    min Rpgt (i,y)    Norm, Spectral, PMC      A few labeled samples
    Semi-honest
                     Active party      min Rpgt (i,x)      Model inversion     A few samples with features

Threat Model. We focus on privacy leakage stemming from the forward embedding of passive
parties’ bottom models. We assume that both active and passive parties are semi-honest and non-
colluding, meaning that they follow the training protocol but attempt to extract private information.
To attack label privacy, an adversarial passive party Pk minimizes the following error Rpgt (i,y)
against the ground-truth ID-label joint distribution pgt (i, y), given DKL (·||·) as KL-divergence:
                   min Rpgt (i,y) (A ◦ hψk ) = min Ei∼pgt (i) [DKL (pgt (y|i)||A(hψk (i)))],              (1)
                   A∈A                          A∈A

where A ∈ A is any attack function that infers the raw label from Pk ’s forward embedding hψk (i).
Every attack method corresponds to a different attack function A(·). We assume the adversary Pk
has no prior knowledge of pgt (i, y), which is different from differential privacy’s assumption.
The feature attack objective can be formulated similarly. As shown in Table 1, in our threat model,
a passive party adversary uses norm attack Li et al. (2022), spectral attack Tran et al. (2018), or
passive model completion (PMC) attack Fu et al. (2022) to build the attack function A(·). Similarly,
an active adversary uses model inversion attack He et al. (2019) to attack features.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 Phase 1:                                       Phase 2:
                        Ofﬂine Label Privacy Source                         Federated Training
        Label privacy         Coding (LPSC)                                                                          Objective:

                                     2 Optimize                                                                         Utility
      1. Learn
                                                                                                                       Privacy

       2. Optimize

                                            1 Learn
      get
                                                                                                                     Aggregation
                                                                                                                      top model

            LPSC
                                                      Active party
                                                                                                                 Adversarial model

       Local model

                                                                                                                    Bottom model
                                                                                        ...


                             Active party                            Passive party               Passive party



Figure 2: The VFGBoost framework. Left: the offline Label Privacy Source Coding (LPSC) phase
(Section 4.2). Right: the federated training phase (Section 4.3).

Privacy Definition. According to Equation 1, the adversary’s objective is to minimize the expected
estimation error of the ground-truth conditional distribution pgt (y|i). Therefore, the private label
information is and only is the ID-label joint distribution pgt (i, y), see details in Appendix B.2.
Our goal is to design an offline-phase privacy mechanism M for the active party P0 that outputs a
new joint distribution pM (i, y) = M(pgt (i, y, X0 )). Subsequently, the bottom model hψk is trained
to fit pM (i, y) during federated training. Therefore, the optimal attack error given pM (i, y) is:
     Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)) = min Ei∼pgt (i) [DKL (pgt (y|i)||A(hψk∗ (i)))] (Attack label)
                                    A∈A
            where ψk∗ = arg min Ei∼pM (i) [DKL (pM (y|i)||g(hψk (i)))]                                (Train bottom model),
                             ψk
where g(·) is P0 ’s top model trained to map hψk (i) to the new label pM (y|i). We notice that,
maxpM (i,y) Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)) ⇐⇒ minpM (i,y) I(pgt (i, y); pM (i, y)). Thereby, our threat
model coincides with  -mutual information privacy ( -MIP), see more details in Appendix B.

4      P ROPOSED A PPROACH
In this section, we introduce our two-phase VFGBoost framework that consists of an offline LPSC
phase and a federated training phase, as depicted in Fig. 2. Specifically, we first formulate the
LPSC problem (Section 4.1) that encodes minimum-sufficient label privacy by removing redundant
label information from the active party’s features. Then, we prove that gradient boosting can effi-
ciently optimize the LPSC problem (Section 4.2). Thereby, we proposed our VFGBoost framework
that leverages gradient boosting to tackle LPSC. Moreover, to flexibly balance the privacy-utility
trade-off, VFGBoost incorporates adversarial training in the federated training phase (Section 4.3).
The active party mimics adversarial passive parties to attack labels and, in turn, solves a max-min
optimization problem to protect labels.

4.1         L ABEL P RIVACY S OURCE C ODING P ROBLEM

In the offline phase (Fig. 2, phase 1), we aim to encode minimum-
sufficient label privacy from the ground-truth label privacy pgt (i, y),
by removing the redundant label information pact (i, y) in the active
party’s local features X0 , as demonstrated in Fig. 3. To do so, we Figure 3:∗ Schematic graph of
formally define a label privacy source coding problem as follows:         LPSC. plpsc is optimal plpsc .
Problem 1 (Label Privacy Source Coding). Given ground-truth label privacy pgt (i, y) and the active
party P0 ’s learned label privacy pact (i, y) from its features X0 , the label privacy source coding
problem is to optimize a new ID-label joint distribution plpsc (i, y) as follows:
                            max I(pgt (i, y); plpsc (i, y))           (Sufficient)                   (2)
                              plpsc (i,y)

                              s.t. I(pact (i, y); plpsc (i, y)) = 0                    (Minimum),


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where I(·; ·) denotes mutual information.
The optimized ID-label joint distribution plpsc (i, y) assigns each sample a new weight through the
marginal plpsc (i) and/or label through the conditional plpsc (y|i). We will show that gradient boost-
ing, which is detailed in the Appendix C.1, efficiently solves the LPSC problem. The privacy leakage
inherent in LPSC is rigorously bounded as described in the following theorem:
Theorem 1 (Privacy Guarantee). LPSC satisfies  -mutual information privacy ( -MIP). The privacy
leakage is bounded by   = H(pgt (i, y)|pact (i, y)), the conditional entropy of the ground-truth label
distribution pgt (i, y) given the active party’s label distribution pact (i, y). Formally,
                                    I(pgt (i, y); p∗lpsc (i, y)) ≤   bits,
where p∗lpsc (i, y) represents the optimal solution of Equation 2 in the LPSC problem.

Proof. The proof of Theorem 1 is provided in the Appendix B.3. The intuition behind Theorem 1 is
that privacy leakage in LPSC is inversely related to the amount of label information the active party
can infer from its local features.

4.2   G RADIENT B OOSTING S OLVES LPSC P ROBLEM

A recent insight of mutual information (MI) regularization for privacy protection Zou et al. (2023)
relies on a notion of MI neural estimation Alemi et al. (2016); Belghazi et al. (2018), which explicitly
estimates MI via Gaussian noise. However, explicit MI estimation is inefficient, and the introduced
noises hinder model utility Belghazi et al. (2018). In contrast, we prove that gradient boosting is a
simple and efficient approach to solve the LPSC problem.
To solve problem 1, 1) the active party P0 first learns the label privacy pact (i, y) present in its
features X0loc . 2) Then, active party P0 optimizes the joint distribution plpsc (i, y) by solving Eq. 2.
We elaborate on each step as follows:
(1) Learning pact (i, y). To learn pact (i, y), which is the label privacy present in local features X0 ,
the active party P0 only needs to learn the conditional pact (y|i) as the marginal pact (i) = pgt (i) ∼ U
is uniform. To do so, P0 trains model fθ on its local data Dloc indexed by iloc as follows:
                                               X 1
                              θ∗ = arg min                   Lemp (yi , fθ (i)),                       (3)
                                        θ        loc
                                                     |iloc |
                                              i∈i
where Lemp denotes the empirical loss. fθ (i) denotes fθ (x0,i ) for simplicity and models the condi-
tional label distribution pact (y|i). Consequently, the active party learns pact (i, y) = pgt (i)·pact (y|i).
(2) Optimizing plpsc (i, y). We point out that the gradient boosting algorithm optimizes the LPSC
problem by taking AdaBoost Freund & Schapire (1997) as an example. As shown in Theorem 2 and
Theorem 3, we prove that the AdaBoost algorithm optimizes the LPSC problem by minimizing the
KL-divergence between plpsc (i) and the uniform distribution U (Eq. 4), while fixing the conditional
distribution plpsc (y|i) as the ground truth pgt (y|i).
Theorem 2. Assuming fixed conditional distribution plpsc (y|i) = pgt (y|i) and let U denote uniform
distribution, the LPSC problem 1 can be reduced to:
                                                        X
                       min DKL (plpsc (i) || U ) s.t.       plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) = 0,              (4)
                     plpsc (i)
                                                             i∈i
where i ∈ i is the sample index of aligned training data with IDs i.
Proof. The proof of Theorem 2 is provided in the Appendix D.1. Theorem 2 reduces the LPSC
problem to a convex optimization problem Eq. 4, which can be solved via Lagrangian. It projects
the ground-truth label privacy pgt (i, y) to an information plane that is orthogonal to pact (i, y), thus
eliminating the redundant label information in active party’s features X0 .
Theorem 3. Schapire & Freund (2013) The solution of the convex optimization problem Eq. 4 is
equivalent to AdaBoost Freund & Schapire (1997):
                                                     e−αyi fθ (i)
                                     plpsc (i) = P        −αyi fθ (i)
                                                                      ,
                                                    i∈i e
where α = 21 ln( 1−
                    ) and   is the classification error of fθ . plpsc (i) can be computed in O(|i|)
time-complexity.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thereby, AdaBoost efficiently optimizes the LPSC problem. Notably, LPSC can be reduced to dif-
ferent boosting algorithms under different assumptions. In Section 5.4, we evaluate the performance
of AdaBoost Freund & Schapire (1997), LogitBoost Friedman et al. (2000) and L2 -Boost Zheng &
Liu (2012) for LPSC. We denote the LPSC-encoded privacy plpsc (i, y) on aligned training data as
Dlpsc = (w, r), with sample weights w for plpsc (i) and residuals r for plpsc (y|i).

4.3     VFGB OOST F RAMEWORK

Based on our finding that gradient boosting solves the LPSC problem, we propose a novel Vertical
Federated Gradient Boosting framework, VFGBoost, to efficiently and flexibly protect label privacy
in VFL. VFGBoost leverages gradient boosting to solve the LPSC problem in an offline phase.
However, as shown in Fig. 3, LPSC only provides upper-bounded privacy protection without
compromising utility, which is upper-bounded by pact (i, y) and may not meet practical privacy
requirements. Therefore, VFGBoost further incorporates adversarial training to enable additional
and flexible privacy enhancement by sacrificing utility in the federated training phase. It should
be noted that the integration of LPSC with other perturbation methods is also a valid approach for
achieving additional privacy enhancement, as evaluated in Section 5.3.
To achieve offline LPSC (Fig. 2, phase 1), VFGBoost leverages gradient boosting to compute the
re-weight residuals Dlpsc . After LPSC, we shift the learning target from ground-truth labels to
residuals with re-weighted samples. In the federated training phase (Fig. 2, phase 2), all parties
collaboratively train a federated model hf ed to fit the re-weighted residuals Dlpsc as follows:
                                    hf ed (i) = gλ {hψk (i)}K

                                                              k=1 ,                               (5)
where gλ is the aggregation top model trained by the active party P0 , and hψk (i) denotes hψk (xk,i )
from Pk , for simplicity. The overall VFGBoost framework fV F GBoost can be expressed as:
                                fV F GBoost (i) = fθ (i) + α · hf ed (i),
where α > 0 represents the weight of the aggregated residuals.

4.3.1    L EARNING O BJECTIVES
The training procedure has two objectives: 1) utility objective Lutil to fit the LPSC-encoded results
Dlpsc , and 2) privacy objective Lpriv to further enhance label privacy via adversarial training.
LPSC utility objective. The utility objective trains the federated model hf ed in Eq. 5 to fit LPSC-
encoded re-weighted residuals Dlpsc = (w, r) as follows:
                                        X
                                 min         wi · Lutil (ri , hf ed (i)) ,
                                  λ,{ψk }K
                                         k=1     i∈i
where (wi , ri ) ∈ Dlpsc is the weight and residual of the i-th sample and Lutil denotes utility loss.
Adversarial privacy objective. Given LPSC only provides upper-bounded privacy enhancement,
we employ adversarial training to enable trading utility for additional privacy enhancement. Specif-
ically, the active party mimics adversaries by conducting the PMC attack Fu et al. (2022). The active
                                            K                                        K
party P0 trains adversarial models {aφk }k=1 to attack each bottom model {hψk }k=1 , and in turn,
trains the bottom models to defend against these attacks. Therefore, the adversarial training process
can be formulated as a max-min optimization problem as follows:

               max min Ei∼pgt (i) Lpriv(k) (yi , aφk ◦ hψk (i)) s.t. ∀k ∈ [1, . . . , K],
               ψk   φk
where Lpriv(k) denotes the privacy loss for passive party Pk .
In summary, the overall objective is to solve the following max-min optimization problem:
                                                                                                       
                      
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        
                      
                                                             K X
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                      X                                     X        1                                 
     min      max           wi · Lutil (ri , hf ed (i)) −β ·             · Lpriv(k) (yi , aφk ◦ hψk (i)) ,
  λ,{ψk }K        K
         k=1 {φk }k=1  i∈i
                                                                    |i|                                
                      
                                                            k=1 i∈i                                    
                                                                                                        
                      |            {z                }      |                   {z                    }
                                                                                                        
                              LPSC utility objective                 Adversarial privacy objective
                                                                                              (6)
where β ≥ 0 is a small hyperparameter to control privacy-utility trade-off. A non-zero β enables
the trade-off of utility for additional privacy enhancement, building on the inherent, yet upper-
bounded, privacy provided by LPSC. Algorithm 1 outlines the training process of VFGBoost.

                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 VFGBoost framework
Require: Local data Dloc = {iloc , X0loc , y loc }, and aligned data D = {i, X0 , . . . , XK , y}.
    . Phase 1: Label privacy source coding (LPSC)
 1: Active party P0 learns pact (i, y) by training fθ on D loc via Eq. 3.
 2: Active party P0 optimizes plpsc (i, y) by computing weight-residual Dlpsc = (w, r).
    . Phase 2: Federated training
                              K                            K                 K
 3: P0 initializes λ and {φk }k=1 . Passive parties {Pk }k=1 initialize {ψk }k=1 , respectively.
 4: for each batch of samples with IDs b ⊂ i do
       . Loss Computation
              K                              K
 5:      {Pk }k=1 compute {r̂k = hψk (b)}k=1 and send to P0 .
                                                                               K
 6:      P0 computes hf ed (b) via Eq. 5, then computes Lutil and {Lpriv(k) }k=1 , via Eq. 6.
       . Model Update
 7:      P0 updates the aggregation top model λ and adversarial models {φk }K   k=1 via gradients.
              K
 8:      {Pk }k=1 update bottom models {ψk }K    k=1  via gradients.
 9: end for
                                                               K
Ensure: Local model θ, top model λ, bottom models {ψk }k=1 .


5       E XPERIMENTS
5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
Datasets. We evaluate our proposed VFGBoost on four real-world datasets, including two widely
used recommendation click-through rate (CTR) prediction datasets: Criteo1 and Avazu2 , and two
healthcare datasets: MIMIC-III Johnson et al. (2016) and Cardio. Each dataset is partitioned into
five (Avazu) or seven (others) parties. We defer detailed descriptions of the datasets in Appendix F.1.
Implementation.3 Without specification, we use LogitBoost Friedman et al. (2000) for LPSC. Dlpsc
is computed following Table 6. We adopt DeepFM Guo et al. (2017) for both local and bottom mod-
els on Criteo and Avazu. We use MLP for both local and bottom models on MIMIC-III and Cardio
datasets. We defer details of hyperparameter choices and platform descriptions in Appendix F.2.
Compared Methods. For fair comparisons, we select a set of label privacy protection methods
applicable in VFL as baselines. Cryptographic approaches are not included due to their expensive
communication and computational cost. 1) FE-VFL Sun et al. (2022) trains a top model to directly
predict labels using forward embeddings, while simultaneously minimizing the distance correlation
between the forward embeddings and the labels. 2) CoAE Zou et al. (2022) trains a deterministic
mapping function that transforms original labels to surrogate labels. The bottom models are trained
to predict the surrogate labels. 3) MID Zou et al. (2023) employs a VAE-based MI estimator Alemi
et al. (2016) to explicitly estimate and minimize the entropy of the forward embedding during train-
ing. 4) LabelDP Ghazi et al. (2021) leverages a random response mechanism to randomly flip
labels to generate perturbed gradients. 5) Marvell Li et al. (2022) uses adapted Gaussian noise to
perturb the gradients, so that the distribution difference of positive and negative class’s gradients are
eliminated. 6) LPSC+LabelDP combines our gradient boosting-based offline LPSC with training-
phase LabelDP Ghazi et al. (2021). 7) LPSC+Marvell integrates our gradient boosting-based offline
LPSC with training-phase Marvell Li et al. (2022).
Metrics. We evaluate our method against baselines regarding utility and privacy. We use the AUC
(Area Under ROC curve) metric in our experiments. 1) Utility: To gauge the utility of the federated
models, we compute the AUC of the federated model (FL-AUC) on fully aligned test data. Higher
values of FL-AUC indicate superior model utility. 2) Privacy: We evaluate the effectiveness of
various defense approaches using three label privacy attacks: the Norm attack Li et al. (2022),
Spectral attack Tran et al. (2018), and Passive Model Completion (PMC) attack Fu et al. (2022).
For privacy evaluation, we calculate the average AUC of the label predictions made by the passive
parties, which we refer to as label leakage AUC (LL-AUC). A low LL-AUC value, close to 0.5,
signifies strong privacy protection.
    1
      https://labs.criteo.com/category/dataset/
    2
      https://www.kaggle.com/c/avazu-ctr-prediction
    3
      The code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/VFGBoost-D62D


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) P1                    (b) P2                    (c) P3                    (d) P4

Figure 4: Distributions of passive parties’ output logits by fitting original labels pgt v.s. LPSC-
encoded labels plpsc for the first four passive parties on the Criteo dataset. (Adversarial loss β = 0.)

5.2   LPSC P ROTECTS L ABEL P RIVACY W ITHOUT C OMPROMISING U TILITY
We first evaluate the protection qual- Table 2: The comparison of privacy and utility of VFL
ity of gradient boosting-based LPSC. fitting labels pgt v.s. LPSC plpsc against Norm, Spectral,
Specifically, in the federated training and PMC attacks. ↑ means desirable directions. β = 0.
phase, we train passive parties’ bot-      Dataset   Target     Privacy (LL-AUC) ↓      Utility ↑
tom models to fit the LPSC-encoded                            Norm Spectral PMC FL-AUC
labels plpsc (i, y) and original ground-
truth labels pgt (i, y), respectively.               Label 0.673       0.689    0.718    0.768
                                            Criteo
                                                         LPSC     0.533    0.538     0.571      0.766
Table 2 presents the LL-AUC against                     Label 0.647       0.668     0.695     0.749
Norm, Spectral, and PMC attacks and          Avazu
                                                        LPSC 0.541        0.555     0.577     0.751
the FL-AUC on four datasets. The
results reveal that the LL-AUC of                       Label    0.636    0.653     0.681     0.768
                                            MIMIC-III
LPSC against three attacks is signif-                   LPSC 0.528        0.535     0.558     0.768
icantly lower than that of the origi-                   Label    0.582    0.618     0.640     0.721
                                             Cardio
nal labels, indicating that LPSC pro-                   LPSC 0.533        0.542     0.567     0.720
vides strong label privacy protection.
Meanwhile, the FL-AUC of LPSC is comparable to that of the original labels, implying that LPSC
barely sacrifices model utility. This confirms that LPSC can effectively protect label privacy without
compromising utility. The PMC attack outperforms Norm and Spectral attacks in LL-AUC values,
indicating its heightened threat. This stems from PMC’s ability to utilize labeled samples for top
model reconstruction. Thus, we employ PMC for subsequent label privacy evaluations.
Fig. 4 visualizes the output logits distributions of four passive parties by training with or without
LPSC. The complete figures including all six passive parties can be found in the Appendix G.1.
The top-side distributions in each sub-figure show that, with LPSC, the logits distributions of the
two classes almost overlap and are hard to differentiate. In contrast, without LPSC, the right-side
distributions in each sub-figure reveal significant differences in the distributions of the two classes,
implying label privacy leakage. Our empirical findings are supported by the theoretical guarantee
in Theorem 1, which justifies our observation that it is more challenging to distinguish the output
distributions between classes when the bottom models are trained with LPSC-encoded labels.

5.3   P RIVACY-U TILITY T RADE - OFF C OMPARISON
Fig. 5 shows the privacy-utility trade-off curves on four datasets. The X-axis indicates the label
leakage AUC (LL-AUC), and the Y-axis indicates the AUC of the federated model prediction (FL-
AUC). An ideal trade-off should have a large FL-AUC and a small LL-AUC, thus residing in the
upper-left corner of Fig. 5. Our VFGBoost is the closest to the ideal trade-off on all four datasets.
We discuss how offline LPSC and training-phase adversarial training in VFGBoost improve the
privacy-utility trade-off in the following, respectively.
Label Privacy Source Coding. To explore the effectiveness of LPSC, we compare LPSC-enhanced
baselines (i.e., LPSC+LabelDP and LPSC+Marvell) with their counterparts without LPSC (i.e., La-
belDP and Marvell). As shown in Fig. 5, LPSC significantly improves the privacy-utility trade-off
of existing perturbation baselines by pushing the top-side of each curve leftwards on each dataset.
Without any training-phase perturbation (the top-right end of each curve), LPSC leads to signif-
icant LL-AUC decline with negligible FL-AUC decline on each dataset, implying that it protects


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                      75
                    76
                                                                                      74
                    75


                                                                         FL-AUC (%)
       FL-AUC (%)
                                                   CoAE                               73
                    74                             MID
                                                   FE-VFL
                                                   LabelDP                            72
                    73                             Marvell
                                                   Our LPSC+LabDP                     71
                    72                             Our LPSC+Marvl
                                                   Our VFGBoost                       70
                         50   55      60      65      70       75                          50    55        60      65   70
                                      LL-AUC (%)                                                      LL-AUC (%)
                                    (a) Criteo                                                     (b) Avazu


                   76                                                                 72
                                                                                      71
                   74
      FL-AUC (%)


                                                                         FL-AUC (%)
                                                                                      70
                   72                                                                 69
                   70                                                                 68
                                                                                      67
                   68
                         50    55          60       65          70                     50.0 52.5 55.0 57.5 60.0 62.5 65.0
                                      LL-AUC (%)                                                     LL-AUC (%)
                               (c) MIMIC-III                                                      (d) Cardio

Figure 5: Privacy-utility trade-off of different label protection methods against the PMC attack on
four datasets. All methods have the same dimension of forward embedding. Note that LPSC+LabDP
and LPSC+Marvl are our LPSC combined with LabelDP and Marvell, respectively.

label privacy without sacrificing utility. This empirical observation is also justified by the theoreti-
cal guarantee in Theorem 1. Therefore, LPSC can be easily integrated with different training-phase
perturbation methods for privacy-utility trade-off improvement.
Adversarial Training. To investigate the effectiveness of adversarial training, we compare VFG-
Boost with two LPSC-enhanced baselines (i.e., LPSC+Marvell and LPSC+LabelDP). As shown in
Fig. 5, we can observe that the trade-off curves of VFGBoost are closer to the upper-left corner
than those of two LPSC-enhanced baselines on each dataset, indicating that VFGBoost outperforms
them with big margins. This validates the effectiveness and superiority of adversarial training in
VFGBoost for privacy-utility trade-off.

5.4 I MPACT OF G RADIENT B OOSTING A LGORITHMS ON LPSC
We compare the impact of different gradient boost-
                                                           Table 3: The comparative AUC results of
ing algorithms on LPSC, including AdaBoost, Logit-
                                                           different gradient boosting algorithms. (No
Boost, and L2 -Boost. For each boosting algorithm,
                                                           adversarial training i.e., β = 0.)
plpsc (i, y) is computed following Table 6 in Ap-
                                                            Dataset AUC AdaBoost LogitBoost L2 -Boost
pendix C.1. AdaBoost updates the sample-weights
                                                                     FL ↑    0.765      0.766     0.760
wi = plpsc (i) based on the classification error of          Criteo
                                                                     LL ↓    0.584      0.571     0.603
the local model fθ . While, LogitBoost and L2 -Boost                 FL ↑    0.752      0.751     0.748
assign residuals ri = plpsc (y|i) based on the nega-         Avazu
                                                                     LL ↓    0.582      0.577     0.592
tive gradient of the log-likelihood loss and the mean-
square error loss, respectively. Table 3 shows the privacy-utility trade-off of different gradient boost-
ing algorithms on Criteo and Avazu datasets. We find that LogitBoost is more effective for LPSC
than the others in terms of the privacy-utility trade-off.
We defer additional experiments on label privacy protection during training, feature privacy
protection, and model-agnosticism in Appendix G.

6   C ONCLUSION
We focus on protecting label privacy in VFL without sacrificing utility and formulate the LPSC prob-
lem for offline-phase cleansing. Our analysis confirms that gradient boosting effectively tackles the
LPSC problem, leading to the proposed VFGBoost framework. Incorporating adversarial training,
VFGBoost further enables a nuanced privacy-utility trade-off. Experimental results on four datasets
demonstrate the efficacy of LPSC and the superiority of our VFGBoost framework.


                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alexander A Alemi, Ian Fischer, Joshua V Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
  bottleneck. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00410, 2016.

Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and Devon Hjelm. Mutual information neural estimation. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 531–540. PMLR, 2018.

Peter Bühlmann and Bin Yu. Boosting with the l 2 loss: regression and classification. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 98(462):324–339, 2003.

Bo Chen, Yichao Wang, Zhirong Liu, Ruiming Tang, Wei Guo, Hongkun Zheng, Weiwei Yao, Muyu
  Zhang, and Xiuqiang He. Enhancing explicit and implicit feature interactions via information
  sharing for parallel deep ctr models. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on
  information & knowledge management, pp. 3757–3766, 2021.

Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra, Hrishi Aradhye,
  Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, et al. Wide & deep learning for recom-
  mender systems. In Proceedings of the 1st workshop on deep learning for recommender systems,
  pp. 7–10, 2016.

Kewei Cheng, Tao Fan, Yilun Jin, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Dimitrios Papadopoulos, and Qiang
  Yang. Secureboost: A lossless federated learning framework. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 36(6):
  87–98, 2021.

Paul Cuff and Lanqing Yu. Differential privacy as a mutual information constraint. In Proceedings
  of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 43–54,
  2016.

Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.

Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. A Decision-Theoretic Generalization of On-Line Learning and
  an Application to Boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(1):119–139, 1997.
  ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/jcss.1997.1504.

Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. Additive logistic regression: a statistical
   view of boosting (with discussion and a rejoinder by the authors). The annals of statistics, 28(2):
   337–407, 2000.

Jerome H Friedman. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of
   statistics, pp. 1189–1232, 2001.

Chong Fu, Xuhong Zhang, Shouling Ji, Jinyin Chen, Jingzheng Wu, Shanqing Guo, Jun Zhou,
  Alex X Liu, and Ting Wang. Label inference attacks against vertical federated learning. In 31st
  USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), Boston, MA, 2022.

Fangcheng Fu, Yingxia Shao, Lele Yu, Jiawei Jiang, Huanran Xue, Yangyu Tao, and Bin Cui.
  Vf2boost: Very fast vertical federated gradient boosting for cross-enterprise learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 563–576, 2021.

Badih Ghazi, Noah Golowich, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, and Chiyuan Zhang. Deep learning
  with label differential privacy. NeurIPS, 34:27131–27145, 2021.

Hanlin Gu, Jiahuan Luo, Yan Kang, Lixin Fan, and Qiang Yang. FedPass: Privacy-preserving
  vertical federated deep learning with adaptive obfuscation. In Edith Elkind (ed.), Proceedings of
  the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23, pp. 3759–
  3767. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2023. doi: 10.
  24963/ijcai.2023/418. Main Track.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Huifeng Guo, Ruiming TANG, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He. DeepFM: A
  factorization-machine based neural network for ctr prediction. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
  Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17, pp. 1725–1731, 2017.
  doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2017/239.
Xiangnan He and Tat-Seng Chua. Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics. In
  ACM SIGIR, pp. 355–364. Association for Computing Machinery, 2017. ISBN 9781450350228.
Zecheng He, Tianwei Zhang, and Ruby B Lee. Model inversion attacks against collaborative in-
  ference. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, pp.
  148–162, 2019.
Yangsibo Huang, Zhao Song, Kai Li, and Sanjeev Arora. InstaHide: Instance-hiding schemes for
  private distributed learning. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 4507–4518. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Xiao Jin, Pin-Yu Chen, Chia-Yi Hsu, Chia-Mu Yu, and Tianyi Chen. Cafe: Catastrophic data leakage
  in vertical federated learning. NeurIPS, 34:994–1006, 2021.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Daniel Kifer and Bing-Rong Lin. An axiomatic view of statistical privacy and utility. Journal of
  Privacy and Confidentiality, 4(1), 2012.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Oscar Li, Jiankai Sun, Xin Yang, Weihao Gao, Hongyi Zhang, Junyuan Xie, Virginia Smith, and
  Chong Wang. Label leakage and protection in two-party split learning. International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Zhenghang Ren, Liu Yang, and Kai Chen. Improving availability of vertical federated learning:
  Relaxing inference on non-overlapping data. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Tech-
  nology (TIST), 13(4):1–20, 2022.
Robert E Schapire and Yoav Freund. Boosting: Foundations and algorithms. Kybernetes, 42(1):
  164–166, 2013.
Weichen Shen. Deepctr: Easy-to-use, modular and extendible package of deep-learning based ctr
 models, 2017.
Jiankai Sun, Xin Yang, et al. Label leakage and protection from forward embedding in vertical
   federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01451, 2022.
Brandon Tran, Jerry Li, and Aleksander Madry. Spectral signatures in backdoor attacks. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Weina Wang, Lei Ying, and Junshan Zhang. On the relation between identifiability, differential
 privacy, and mutual-information privacy. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(9):5018–
 5029, 2016.
Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. Federated machine learning: Concept
  and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 10(2):1–19,
  2019.
Xin Yang, Jiankai Sun, Yuanshun Yao, Junyuan Xie, and Chong Wang. Differentially private label
  protection in split learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02073, 2022.
Peng Ye, Zhifeng Jiang, Wei Wang, Bo Li, and Baochun Li. Feature reconstruction attacks and
  countermeasures of dnn training in vertical federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06771,
  2022.

                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Songfeng Zheng and Weixiang Liu. Functional gradient ascent for probit regression. Pattern recog-
  nition, 45(12):4428–4437, 2012.
Tianyuan Zou, Yang Liu, Yan Kang, Wenhan Liu, Yuanqin He, Zhihao Yi, Qiang Yang, and Ya-
  Qin Zhang. Defending batch-level label inference and replacement attacks in vertical federated
  learning. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, pp. 1–12, 2022.
Tianyuan Zou, Yang Liu, and Ya-Qin Zhang. Mutual information regularization for vertical feder-
  ated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01142, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     N OTATIONS
In our discussions and formulations throughout this paper, we use several notations for clarity and
brevity. A summary of these notations and their corresponding descriptions is provided in Table 4.


                                        Table 4: Table of notations
                Notation            Description
                pgt (i, y)          Ground-truth label privacy (ID-label joint distribution)
               pact (i, y)          Active party learned label privacy
               plpsc (i, y)         LPSC-encoded label privacy
             Dlpsc = (w, r)         LPSC-encoded results with weights w and residuals r
                     Xk             Aligned feature matrix of party Pk
                       y            Aligned vector of labels of active party P0
                       i            Aligned vector of sample IDs for aligned training data
             iloc , y loc , X0loc   Active party P0 ’s local IDs, labels and features
                     fθ             Active party’s local model
                    hfed            All passive parties’ federated model
                    hψk             Passive party Pk ’s bottom model
                    aφk             Adversarial top model for Pk
                     gλ             Top model
               fV F GBoost          Overall VFGBoost model
                      α             Weight of hf ed predicted residual
                      β             Weight of adversarial loss
                  Lutil             LPSC utility loss
                 Lpriv(k)           Adversarial privacy loss for Pk


B     T HREAT M ODEL AND P RIVACY A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a comprehensive analysis of privacy threats in Vertical Federated Learn-
ing (VFL), underscoring our commitment to safeguarding sensitive information. Our focus primarily
lies on the threat model for label privacy protection, pivotal to the integrity of VFL systems. We be-
gin by formally and rigorously defining the label privacy threat model (B.1). Subsequently, we delve
into the intricate relationship between attack error and mutual information privacy (MIP)(B.2), il-
lustrating how these concepts form the backbone of our privacy strategy. The subsection ”Mutual
Information Privacy Guarantee” (B.3) offers a rigorous validation of our approach, providing theo-
retical assurances of privacy preservation. Finally, we draw a parallel between MIP and Differential
Privacy (DP) in ”Comparison of MIP v.s. DP” (B.4,) highlighting the distinct advantages and con-
siderations of our chosen methodology in the context of VFL. This comprehensive approach not only
addresses label privacy from multiple angles but also situates our work within the broader landscape
of privacy research.

B.1   L ABEL P RIVACY T HREAT M ODEL

Adversary’s capabilities. A semi-honest non-colluding passive party Pk has a bottom model hψk (·)
which outputs forward embeddings hψk (i) = hψk (xk,i ) of the i-th sample in its features Xk .
However, Pk has no prior knowledge of the active party’s data {i, y, X0 }.
Adversary’s objective. The adversary’s objective is to minimize the expected error of label estima-
tion on a dataset by optimizing an attack function A(·) ∈ A as follows:
               min Rpgt (i,y) (A ◦ hψk ) = min Ei∼pgt (i) [DKL (pgt (y|i)||A(hψk (i)))].
               A∈A                            A∈A

We use norm attack Li et al. (2022), spectral attack Tran et al. (2018), or passive model completion
(PMC) attack Fu et al. (2022) to build the attack function A(·) in our paper.
Table 5 summarizes the threat model of label privacy protection in VFL.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Adversary              Passive party Pk
             Threat model            Semi-honest, non-colluding
         Adversary’s knowledge       Forward embeddings hψk (i) from bottom model hψk .
                                     No prior knowledge of pgt (i, y, X0 ), i.e., {i, y, X0 }.
          Adversary’s objective      Minimize the error Rpgt (i,y) (A ◦ hψk ) in Equation 1
                                     by optimizing attack function A(·).

                                  Table 5: Label privacy threat model


B.2   B RIDGING ATTACK E RROR AND M UTUAL I NFORMATION P RIVACY

As outlined in Section 3, our threat model aligns with the concept of mutual information privacy
(MIP). This subsection delves into how the threat model naturally leads to the adoption of MIP as
our privacy definition.
The adversary’s goal, as defined in Equation 1, is to minimize the expected estimation error regard-
ing the ground-truth joint distribution pgt (i, y). Given the adversary has no prior knowledge about
pgt (i, y) and access only to forward embeddings, the private label information to protect is and only
is the ID-label joint distribution pgt (i, y).
To understand how our approach fits within the broader landscape of privacy definitions and mech-
anisms, we first define what constitutes a privacy definition and a privacy mechanism in the context
of our work:
Definition 1 (Privacy Definition Kifer & Lin (2012)). Given an input space I, a privacy definition is
a set of randomized algorithms with common input space I. We say that these randomized algorithms
satisfy the privacy definition.
Definition 2 (Privacy Mechanism Kifer & Lin (2012)). A privacy mechanism M is a randomized
algorithm M that satisfies a privacy definition.

In our context, the privacy mechanism M inputs active party’s dataset distribution pgt (i, y, X0 ), as
defined by Dloc = {iloc , y loc , X0loc } and generates a new joint distribution:
                                    pM (i, y) = M(pgt (i, y, X0 )).
During federated training, the bottom model hψk is trained to align with pM (i, y). Consequently,
the optimal attack error can be expressed as:
                 Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)) = min Ei∼pgt (i) [DKL (pgt (y|i)||A(hψk∗ (i)))],
                                          A∈A
                    where ψk∗ = arg min Ei∼pM (i) [DKL (pM (y|i)||g(hψk (i)))].
                                     ψk


To enhance label privacy, M should be designed to maximize this attack error Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)).
We observe that maximizing Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)) is equivalent to minimizing the mutual information
between pgt (i, y) and pM (i, y), i.e.,
                   max Rpgt (i,y) (pM (i, y)) ⇐⇒         min I(pgt (i, y); pM (i, y)),
                  pM (i,y)                              pM (i,y)

where I(·; ·) denotes the mutual information. Thus, a privacy mechanism M minimizing mutual
information I(pgt (i, y); pM (i, y)) equivalently maximizes the attack error, protecting label privacy.
Accordingly, our approach aligns with the principle of  -mutual information privacy ( -MIP):
Definition 3 ( -Mutual Information Privacy). According to Wang et al. (2016), a mechanism M
satisfies  -MIP for some   ∈ R+ if, for any input X, the mutual information between X and the
output Y = M(X) is bounded by   bits, formally:
                                          I(X; Y ) ≤   bits.

B.3   M UTUAL I NFORMATION P RIVACY G UARANTEE

We prove that our proposed LPSC satisfies the  -MIP.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1 (Privacy Guarantee.) LPSC satisfies  -mutual information privacy ( -MIP). The privacy
leakage is bounded by   = H(pgt (i, y)|pact (i, y)), the conditional entropy of the ground-truth label
distribution pgt (i, y) given the active party’s label distribution pact (i, y). Formally,
                                   I(pgt (i, y); p∗lpsc (i, y)) ≤   bits,
where p∗lpsc (i, y) represents the optimal solution of the LPSC problem.

Proof. We approach the LPSC problem as defined in Equation 2, optimizing plpsc (i, y) with respect
to:
                            p∗lpsc (i, y) = arg max I(pgt (i, y); plpsc (i, y))
                                           plpsc (i,y)

                            s.t. I(pact (i, y); plpsc (i, y)) = 0.

The key constraint is that pact (i, y) and plpsc (i, y) must remain independent, which implies that mu-
tual information between pgt (i, y) and plpsc (i, y) excludes any shared information with pact (i, y).
Analytically, we express this as:
                                    I(pgt (i, y); p∗lpsc (i, y))
                                 =I(pgt (i, y); p∗lpsc (i, y)|pact (i, y))
                                 ≤H(pgt (i, y)|pact (i, y))
                                 =  bits,
where H(pgt (i, y)|pact (i, y)) represents the conditional entropy, or the remaining uncertainty in
pgt (i, y) after observing pact (i, y).
Therefore, the solution p∗lpsc (i, y) satisfies the  -MIP criterion, effectively bounding the mutual in-
formation and safeguarding label privacy in accordance with the  -MIP definition.

B.4   C OMPARISON OF MIP V. S . DP

Differential privacy (DP) Dwork et al. (2006), a well-established privacy definition in privacy-
preserving machine learning, offers robust privacy guarantees by ensuring that the output of a mech-
anism does not significantly change with the alteration of a single record in the dataset. In contrast,
mutual information privacy (MIP), which we adopt in this paper, focuses on limiting the mutual
information between the input and output of a privacy mechanism.
A related concept,  -mutual-information differential privacy (MI-DP) Cuff & Yu (2016), bridges
these two definitions. It is defined as follows:
Definition 4 ( -Mutual Information Differential Privacy Cuff & Yu (2016)). A mechanism M satis-
fies  -mutual-information differential privacy for some   ∈ R+ if for any neighboring inputs X, X 0 ,
the conditional mutual information between X and Y = M(X) conditioned on X 0 satisfies
                                         I(X; Y |X 0 ) ≤   bits.

 -MI-DP is shown to be weaker than  -DP but stronger than ( , δ)-DP, offering a middle ground in
terms of privacy strength Cuff & Yu (2016).
The fundamental difference between MIP and DP, including its variant MI-DP, lies in their under-
lying threat models. DP operates under a strong adversary assumption, considering adversaries that
have access to neighboring input databases. In contrast, MIP is designed under the assumption that
the adversary lacks prior knowledge of the database, which aligns more closely with the threat model
in our VFL setting.
Given the assumption in our VFL setting where an adversary has no prior knowledge of the active
party’s data {i, y, X0 }, MIP emerges as a more fitting choice. Our threat model, as elaborated in
Section 3, coincides with the principles of MIP, making it a natural fit for our research.
Wang et al. (2016) reveals a fundamental connection privacy between mutual information and dif-
ferential privacy bridged by the notion of identifiability. In future work, exploring the trade-offs
and potential synergies between these privacy models could further enhance the applicability of
privacy-preserving techniques in diverse machine learning scenarios.


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     BACKGROUND

C.1    G RADIENT B OOSTING

Gradient boosting Freund & Schapire (1997) is a classic algorithm in ensemble learning and is
known for reducing the bias of a weak learner. In VFL, the generalization error of the active party’s
local model primarily comes from bias instead of variance. This is because the active party’s model
complexity is restricted by insufficient features. Therefore, we can use boosting to reduce the bias
of the local model by training passive parties to fit weighted-residuals. The predicted residuals are
then added to active party’s local model to reduce the bias.
Boosting is a functional gradient descent method for function estimation Friedman (2001); Friedman
et al. (2000), which is a “stagewise, additive model.” Consider the problem of function estimation

                                  f ∗ (x) = arg min E(x,y)∼D [L (y, f (x))] ,                              (7)
                                               f

 where L(·, ·) is a differentiable and convex loss function. The generic gradient boosting algorithm
is shown in Algorithm 2. Notably, the base learners can be any gradient-based model such as
DNN Guo et al. (2017) and decision trees Freund & Schapire (1997).

Algorithm 2 Gradient Boosting Freund & Schapire (1997)
                           n
Require: Data {(xi , yi )}i=1 , loss function L(·, ·)
                                   Pn
 1: Train f (0)
                = arg minf (0) n1 i=1 L(yi , f (0) (xi )).
 2: for iteration m ∈ [1, . . . , M ] do
 3:     Update residuals ri = − ∂L(y      i ,ŷi )
                                                   | (m−1) (x ) of training data.

                (m)                    1
                                          Pn ŷi =f
                                       ∂ ŷi                 i

 4:     Train h      = arg minh(m) n i=1 L(ri , h(m) (xi ))
 5:     Update the model by f (m) (·) = f (m−1) (·) + αh(m) (·)
 6: end for
 7: return f (M ) (·)


As shown in Table 6, gradient boosting algorithms generate weight-residual distributions of the
dataset, given different loss functions. In Section 4.2, we will demonstrate that gradient boosting
solves our proposed LPSC problem and enhances label privacy without compromising utility.


Table 6: Gradient boosting generates weight-residual joint distributions for samples. Weight is not
normalized.
                       Methods                            Loss            Weight p(i)    Residual p(y|i)
         AdaBoost Freund & Schapire (1997)             exp(−y · ŷ)       exp(−y · ŷ)          y
                                                                                               y−ŷ
          LogitBoost Friedman et al. (2000)        ln(1 + exp(−y · ŷ))    ŷ(1 − ŷ)        ŷ(1−ŷ)
                                                                2
          L2 -Boost Bühlmann & Yu (2003)               (y − ŷ) /2            1             y − ŷ


D     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2. Assuming fixed conditional distribution plpsc (y|i) = pgt (y|i) and let U denote a
uniform distribution, the LPSC problem 1 can be reduced to:
                                                     X
                     min DKL (plpsc (i) || U ) s.t.      plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) = 0,
                      plpsc (i)
                                                                 i∈i

where i ∈ i is the sample index of aligned training data with IDs i.


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Given the assumption that the conditional distribution plpsc (y|i) = pgt (y|i), we first consider
Eq. 2.
                                         max I(pgt (i, y); plpsc (i, y))
                                       plpsc (i,y)

                            ⇐⇒           max I(pgt (i)pgt (y|i); plpsc (i)plpsc (y|i))
                                       plpsc (i,y)

                            ⇐⇒ max I(pgt (i); plpsc (i))
                                       plpsc (i)

                            ⇐⇒ max I(plpsc (i); U )
                                       plpsc (i)

                            ⇐⇒ min DKL (plpsc (i)||U ).                                                 (8)
                                       plpsc (i)

Eq. 8 minimizes a KL-divergence between plpsc (i) and a uniform distribution U .
Recall the constraint of zero mutual information in Problem 1:
                                              I(pact (i, y); plpsc (i, y)) = 0.                         (9)
Eq. 9 implies that pact (i, y) and plpsc (i, y) are independent. To construct an independent plpsc (i, y),
we constrain the correlation of the two joint distributions pact (i, y) and plpsc (i, y) as follows:
                            I(pact (i, y); plpsc (i, y)) = 0
                             X
                          =⇒    pact (i, y)plpsc (i, y) = 0
                                 i∈I
                                 X
                        ⇐⇒             pact (i)p(y = fθ (i)|i) · plpsc (i)p(y = yi |i) = 0
                                 i∈I
                                 X 1
                        ⇐⇒                    p(y = fθ (i)|i) · plpsc (i) · yi = 0
                                        |I|
                                 i∈I
                                 X
                        ⇐⇒             plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) = 0.
                                 i∈I

Therefore, the LPSC problem 1 can be reduced to:
                                                                       X
                        min      DKL (plpsc (i) || U )          s.t.         plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) = 0.
                     plpsc (i)
                                                                       i∈I


D.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Theorem 3. Schapire & Freund (2013) The solution of the convex optimization problem Eq. 4 is
equivalent to AdaBoost Freund & Schapire (1997):
                                                                e−αyi fθ (i)
                                              plpsc (i) = P          −αyi fθ (i)
                                                                                 ,
                                                               i∈i e

where α = 21 ln( 1−
                    ) and   is the classification error of fθ . plpsc (i) can be computed in O(|i|)
time-complexity.

Proof. Recall Eq. 4 in Theorem 2:
                                                                       X
                        min      DKL (plpsc (i) || U )          s.t.         plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) = 0,
                     plpsc (i)
                                                                       i∈i

According to Eq. 4, we can compute this minimization by forming the Lagrangian:
                  X                     plpsc (i)    X                        X
            L=          plpsc (i) ln              +α   plpsc (i)yi fθ (i) + µ(  plpsc (i) − 1).        (10)
                                        pact (i)
                  i∈I                                    i∈I                            i∈I


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, α and µ are the Lagrange multipliers, and we have explicitly taken into account the constraint
that
                                           X
                                                 plpsc (i) = 1.                                   (11)
                                           i∈I

By computing derivatives and equating them with zero, we get that

                             ∂L             plpsc (i)
                     0=              = ln               + 1 + αyi fθ (i) + µ.
                          ∂plpsc (i)        pact (i)

Given pact (i) = pgt (i) ∼ U is a uniform distribution, we have
                                                  1 −αyi fθ (i)−1−µ
                                   plpsc (i) =       e              .
                                                 |I|

Note that µ, an arbitrary constant, will be chosen to enforce Eq. 11, giving
                                                        e−αyi fθ (i)
                                        plpsc (i) =
                                                           Z
where                                            X
                                         Z=            e−αyi fθ (i)
                                                 i∈I
is a normalization factor. Plugging into Eq. 10 and simplifying gives
                                             L = − ln Z.
We optimize α to maximize L or, equivalently, to minimize Z. Thus, we get:
                                                 1     1−
                                           α=      ln(     ),
                                                 2
where   is the weighted error rate of the weak learner fθ (i).

E     D ETAILED E XPLANATIONS OF VFGB OOST A LGORITHM
Algorithm 1 outlines the full two-phase training process of VFGBoost. The first offline LPSC phase
involves using a gradient boosting algorithm to compute plpsc (i, y) that forms the learning target
for federated training. In the subsequent federated training phase, passive parties Pk compute for-
ward embeddings r̂k = hψk (b) for each batch, and them send to the active party. The active party
                                                                          K
P0 then computes the utility loss Lutil and privacy losses {Lpriv(k) }k=1 , and sends the residual
gradients {∇r̂k }Kk=1 to the passive parties for model updates, and concurrently updates the aggre-
gation top model aλ and the adversarial models {gφk }K k=1 . Specifically, the gradients of the forward
embeddings (residuals) r̂k = hψk (b) are computed as follows:
                                           ∂Lutil     ∂Lpriv(k)
                                  ∇r̂k =          −β·           ,
                                            ∂ r̂k       ∂ r̂k
where β ≥ 0 is a small hyperparameter to control privacy-utility trade-off. None-zero β allows
trading utility for further privacy enhancement, on the basis of the upper-bounded privacy
given by LPSC.

F     DATA S ET U P AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
F.1   DATASETS

We work with four datasets in our experiments: two recommendation datasets (Criteo and Avazu)
and two healthcare datasets (MIMIC-III and Cardio). Table 7 shows the statistics of each dataset.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Criteo4 . The Criteo dataset consists of ad click data over a week. For the Criteo dataset, each record
contains 26 categorical input features and 13 real-valued input features. To prepare the data for
our experiments, we first replace all missing categorical feature values with a single new category
represented by an empty string, and replace all missing real-valued feature values with 0. We then
convert each categorical feature value to a unique integer between 0 and the total number of unique
categories, and linearly normalize each real-valued feature into the range [0, 1]. We randomly
sample 10,000,000 records from the publicly provided Criteo training set and split the data into an
80%-20% train-test split for faster training and to generate privacy-utility trade-off comparisons. We
randomly and evenly partition the features into 7 parts, for one active party and 6 passive parties.
Avazu5 . Avazu contains 10 days of click logs. It has a total of 23 fields with categorical features
including app ID, app category, device ID, etc. The missing categorical features are processed in the
same way as the Criteo dataset. We use all available records in the dataset and randomly split the
data into an 80%-20% train-test split. We randomly and evenly partition the categorical fields into 5
parties.
MIMIC-III Johnson et al. (2016) is a dataset designed for the in-hospital mortality prediction task,
which involves predicting in-hospital mortality based on the first 48 hours of a patient’s ICU stay.
The dataset comprises 714 features and 20,000 records. To simulate multiple hospitals with shared
services (features), we evenly split the features among seven parties at random. We use all available
records in the dataset and randomly split the data into an 80%-20% train-test split. We randomly
and evenly partition the features into 7 parts.
Cardio. The Cardio dataset comprises 246 real-valued features such as age, gender, diabetes, blood
pressure, obesity, and more. These features were collected from 3,569 patients to predict whether a
patient has cardiovascular disease. To simulate multiple hospitals with shared services (features), we
evenly split the features among seven parties at random. We use all available records in the dataset
and randomly split the data into an 80%-20% train-test split. We randomly and evenly partition the
features into 7 parts.

              Dataset         # Train /Test       #Num. Feature     #Cate. Fields   #Num. Parties
             Criteo       8,000,000/ 2,000,000           13               26             7
             Avazu        8,000,000/ 2,000,000           0                21             5
            MIMIC-III         16,912/ 4228              714                0             7
             Cardio            2,856/ 713               246                0             7

                                   Table 7: Statistics for all four datasets.

F.2      M ODEL A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING D ETAILS

Model architecture details. [Criteo, Avazu] We use a popular deep learning model DeepFM Guo
et al. (2017) by default for online advertising. DeepFM is a hybrid model that combines factorization
machines and deep neural networks for recommendation tasks. It has two main components: a fac-
torization machine that captures pairwise feature interactions and a deep neural network that learns
higher-order interactions and non-linear dependencies. The model takes input features and passes
them through both components before concatenating the outputs and passing them to a final output
layer. We follow the default model architecture configurations in the DeepCTR framework Shen
(2017). All active and passive parties have the same deep model architecture. The embedding di-
mension is set as 4. The architectures of EDCN Chen et al. (2021), NFM He & Chua (2017) and
WDL Cheng et al. (2016) used in the experiments are also the default model architecture configura-
tions in the DeepCTR framework Shen (2017).
[MIMIC-III, Cardio] We use a 3-layer MLP model in each party to learn the mortality rate in
MIMIC-III and the cardiovascular disease in Cardio. The dimension of each layer are [128, 64, 1].
Model training details. The models are optimized by Adam Kingma & Ba (2014). Table 8 shows
the model training details on four datasets. We use the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014).
The boosting model weight α to 1, the privacy coefficient β to 0.05. We use 5-fold validation to
   4
       https://labs.criteo.com/category/dataset/
   5
       https://www.kaggle.com/c/avazu-ctr-prediction


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


determine early stopping. There are 50% samples aligned across all parties. All experiments were
conducted on a system equipped with an Nvidia GTX 3080 GPU and 32 GB of RAM, running
Ubuntu 22.04 as the operating system.

                      Dataset        Optimizer       Lr      Batch Size     Epoch
                      Criteo           Adam        1e − 4      2,048          5
                      Avazu            Adam        5e − 4      4,096          5
                      MIMIC-III        Adam        5e − 4      16,912        200
                      Cardio           Adam        5e − 4      2,856         200

                         Table 8: Experimental settings for different datasets.


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
G.1    LPSC P ROTECTS L ABEL P RIVACY


             (a) P1                              (b) P2                              (c) P3


             (d) P4                              (e) P5                              (f) P6

Figure 6: Distributions of passive parties’ output logits by fitting original labels pgt (i, y) v.s. LPSC-
encoded labels plpsc (i, y) for all six passive parties on the Criteo dataset. (No adversarial training,
i.e., β = 0.)

Fig. 6 demonstrates the distributions of all six passive parties’ output logits by fitting original labels
pgt (i, y) and LPSC-encoded labels plpsc (i, y), respectively, on the Criteo dataset.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2   L ABEL P RIVACY P ROTECTION D URING T RAINING

We study the label privacy protection from the for-
ward embeddings in VFGBoost during the federated        1000


                                                        rebmun dnuoR
training phase. Fig. 7 demonstrates the distribution
of LL-AUC values of all six passive parties’ bot-       2000
tom models during training on the Criteo dataset.
We observe that the LL-AUC values grow initially        3000
but gradually decrease towards 50% as the round
number increases. After training, the average AUC       4000
is 52.4%, which is close to the random guessing            46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
AUC 50%. Therefore, the forward embeddings in                          LL-AUC (%)
VFGBoost can protect label privacy during federated
training.                                            Figure 7: Distributions of the LL-AUC of all
                                                     passive parties’ bottom models during train-
                                                     ing. (From top to down.)
G.3 F EATURE P RIVACY P ROTECTION

Interestingly, LPSC leads to natural feature privacy enhancement, which is not the primary goal
of LPSC but a desirable side effect. The reason is that, by shifting the learning target from orig-
inal labels pgt (i, y) to LPSC-encoded labels plpsc (i, y), the active party no longer requires high-
dimensional forward embeddings to maintain a complex deterministic top model to protect labels.
Consequently, passive parties can send low-dimensional forward embeddings instead. This change
eliminates the feature information leaked to the active party and enhances feature privacy protection.
Fig. 8 shows that lower-dimensional forward embed-
dings as in VFGBoost can provide stronger feature     90
privacy protection against model inversion attack He
et al. (2019) on the Avazu dataset, by following the  80
                                                       AUC



settings of prior works Ye et al. (2022). The adver-
sarial active party conducts the model inversion at-  70
tack by training an MLP model to steal a private bi-
nary feature, “banner pos.” As shown in Fig. 8, we    60
observe that when the embedding dimension is low
                                                      50
(e.g., 1), the feature privacy leakage AUC is only        1       4      8      16     32
53.4%. However, when the embedding dimension                 Embedding dimension
is 32, the private feature can be accurately inferred
with AUC=92.8%. Therefore, high-dimensional em- Figure 8: Feature privacy leakage against
beddings may cause serious feature privacy leak- model inversion attack on the Avazu dataset.
age. However, due to offline LPSC, VFGBoost can Our VFGBoost embedding dimension = 1.
protect feature privacy by exposing low-dimensional
residuals.

G.4   I MPACT OF H ETEROGENEOUS M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

We study the impact of heterogeneous model architectures among parties in VFGBoost by replacing
the passive parties’ bottom models with EDCN Chen et al. (2021), NFM He & Chua (2017) and
WDL Cheng et al. (2016), respectively. The active party’s local model is fixed as a DeepFM. As
shown in Table 9, with different model architectures, our proposed VFGBoost can effectively learn
to fit plpsc (i, y) and consistently achieves high FL-AUC and low LL-AUC. Therefore, VFGBoost is
model-agnostic and applies to any gradient-based model.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: The comparative result of different model architectures of bottom models in VFGBoost.
                      Dataset         AUC         EDCN NFM WDL
                                   FL-AUC (%)          76.7    76.7     76.5
                         Criteo
                                   LL-AUC (%)          52.8    52.6     52.0
                                   FL-AUC (%)          75.2    75.1     74.9
                         Avazu
                                   LL-AUC (%)          53.6    53.4     53.3


G.5   I MPACT OF L OCAL F EATURE Q UALITY

To address concerns about our method’s dependency on local feature quality, we conducted addi-
tional experiments on the Criteo dataset, examining the variability of the active party’s feature set.
We maintain a consistent partitioning of the dataset’s 39 features across seven parties—one active
and six passive. The active party’s feature set is varied across experiments, with the number of fea-
tures ranging from 1 to 20. We assess the impact of these variations on the model’s performance by
analyzing the active party’s Local model AUC (Local-AUC), the Federated model AUC (FL-AUC),
and the Label Leakage AUC (LL-AUC). Note that when the active party has no local features, the
Local-AUC is 0.5, representing random guessing.
Table 10 illustrates that a minimal feature set in the active party correlates with lower Local-AUC
and higher LL-AUC. As the number of features increases, Local-AUC improves, reducing LL-AUC
and indicating enhanced privacy protection. The FL-AUC remains stable, affirming our method’s
robustness. This empirical observation validates the privacy guarantee in Theorem 1. This demon-
strates our method’s efficacy in balancing utility and privacy with different local feature settings.


          Table 10: Impact of local features on LPSC performance in the Criteo dataset.
           # Local Features Loc-AUC (±std) FL-AUC (±std) LL-AUC (±std)
                   0                   0.5             76.79 (±0.34)     72.07 (±0.33)
                   1              60.72 (±0.39)        76.86 (±0.28)     66.24 (±0.34)
                   2              64.68 (±0.47)        76.48 (±0.32)     63.34 (±0.47)
                   4              70.91 (±0.48)        76.79 (±0.38)     61.67 (±0.48)
                   5              71.31 (±0.34)        76.62 (±0.24)     58.73 (±0.42)
                   8              72.26 (±0.38)        76.39 (±0.27)     56.16 (±0.48)
                   10             74.37 (±0.35)        76.51 (±0.34)     54.83 (±0.51)
                   15             74.13 (±0.52)        76.38 (±0.43)     54.77 (±0.38)
                   20             75.04 (±0.38)        76.39 (±0.38)     54.75 (±0.44)

Figure 9 graphically illustrates the model’s performance as a function of the local features available
to the active party. An increase in local features positively influences Local-AUC, demonstrating im-
proved model accuracy, while inversely affecting LL-AUC, indicating enhanced privacy protection.
The FL-AUC curve remains stable, showcasing the federated learning model’s resilience against lo-
cal feature variability. This figure highlights our method’s capability to maintain a balance between
accuracy and privacy, aligning with our theoretical foundations.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         75

                         70
               AUC (%)


                         65                                          Local-AUC
                                                                     LL-AUC
                                                                     FL-AUC
                         60

                         55

                         50
                              0      5             10         15           20
                                     Number of Local Features

Figure 9: The impact of local features on Criteo dataset performance, emphasizing LPSC’s role in
enhancing Local-AUC for stronger privacy protection (lower LL-AUC) while maintaining a consis-
tent FL-AUC.


                                              23
