Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T RANSLATING   COGNITIVE MODELS INTO NEURAL
AND STATISTICAL DESCRIPTIONS OF REAL - WORLD
MULTI - AGENT FORAGING BEHAVIOR

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

        Foraging is a multi-agent social behavior that has been studied from many per-
        spectives, including cognitive science, neuroscience, and statistics. We start from
        a specific type of cognitive description – agents with internal preferences ex-
        pressed as value functions – and implement it as a biologically plausible neural
        network. We also present an equivalent statistical model where statistical predic-
        tors correspond to components of the value function. We use the neural network
        to simulate foraging agents in various environmental conditions and use the statis-
        tical model to discover which features in the environment best predict the agent’s
        behavior. Our intended primary application is the study of multi-species groups
        of birds foraging in real-world environments. To test the viability of the statistical
        approach, we simulate bird agents with different preferences, and use Bayesian
        inference to recover what each type of agent values. In the multi-agent context,
        we investigate how communication of information about reward location affects
        group foraging behavior. We also test our modeling technique on a previously
        published locust foraging dataset (Günzel et al., 2023). After evaluating the ef-
        fectiveness of our method on both synthetic and previously published data, we
        analyze new multi-agent foraging bird data we captured through high-resolution
        video recordings. Our method distinguishes between proximity preferences of
        ducks and sparrows within foraging groups. This analysis framework provides a
        principled, interpretable, and parametric approach for reasoning about how birds’
        preferences relate to their decisions about where to move in a complex multi-agent
        environment.


1     I NTRODUCTION
1.1   M ULTI - SPECIES FORAGING BEHAVIOR OF SMALL BIRDS IN WINTER

Small birds that spend winter in cold climates face extreme survival pressures and congregate in
multi-species flocks that help them survive. In order to stay warm overnight, birds burn through
about 10% of their body weight, which they must regain the next day through foraging for food
(Chaplin, 1974), all while avoiding predators. There is a rich literature of experimental and theo-
retical work on the energy management strategies that individual birds employ to survive the winter
(Pravosudov & Grubb Jr, 1997; Brodin, 2007), including remembering the locations of hidden food
caches, which relies on the hippocampus (Krushinskaya, 1966), a brain region also important for
memory in humans (Scoville & Milner, 1957). Birds that are part of a group eat more and spend
less time scanning for predators than birds that are separated from a group (Sullivan, 1984a), and
they listen to other birds to decide when to forage (Sullivan, 1984b). We are interested in under-
standing the winter foraging behavior of multi-agent groups of birds, from a quantitative cognitive
neuroscience perspective. Understanding this type of complex real-world cognitive behavior is an
important component of uncovering principles of how the brain and mind work (Gao & Ganguli,
2015; Krakauer et al., 2017; Mobbs et al., 2018; Hall-McMaster & Luyckx, 2019; Miller et al.,
2022; Dennis et al., 2021; Niv, 2021; Pravosudov, 2022).
Group foraging in birds involves communication of information across the group, and depends a lot
on specific environmental conditions. The two primary functions of communication in wintering


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bird flocks are finding food and avoiding predators. Birds are able to understand alarm and ‘all
clear’ calls across different species (Hidalgo, 2021). Communication about food depends a lot on
the environment. For example, chickadees that live in harsh high-altitude environments rely less
on social information than chickadees at lower altitudes (Heinen et al., 2021), and make use of
different cognitive strategies (Benedict et al., 2021). In general, social dynamics of multi-species
flocks change with habitat and environmental conditions (Course, 2021; Richardson et al., 2022).
Within a multi-species flock of birds, different species may play different roles (Goodale et al.,
2020). Some species lead, while ‘satellite species’ follow (Dolby & Grubb Jr, 1998). Similar
species often form flocks together, but competitive factors sometimes discourage similar species
from congregating (Sridhar et al., 2012; Marshall et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2020). In addition, some
birds may be ‘scroungers’, benefiting from the group, but contributing little (Barnard & Sibly, 1981;
Giraldeau & Dubois, 2008).
When we go from the single-agent to the multi-agent perspective, we can observe and quantify how a
group of individuals behave as a whole. Learning and memory abilities of individual birds contribute
to the behavior of the whole group (Falcón-Cortés et al., 2019; Nauta et al., 2020). Interestingly,
both groups and individual foragers appear to reduce complex decisions about where to forage to a
series of binary decisions (Sridhar et al., 2021). In order to predict the locations of foraging birds,
it can be useful to include both individual-level memory of food locations, as well as a tendency to
flock in groups (Kułakowska et al., 2014).


1.2   S TATISTICAL , COGNITIVE , AND NEURAL DESCRIPTIONS OF MULTI - AGENT FORAGING

Statistical models of groups of birds have successfully captured certain behaviors using a minimal
set of rules, though not foraging behaviors, to our knowledge. Three simple automaton rules are
sufficient to generate surprisingly realistic-looking flocks of birds (Reynolds, 1987). Flight patterns
of murmurations of starlings are well described by local neighbor interactions (Bialek et al., 2012).
Some statistical models of collective animal behavior, based off of GLMs, allow for the possibility
of switching between different hidden states (Bod’Ová et al., 2018; Coen et al., 2014). There has
also been a long-standing effort to quantify the distribution of step sizes when animals forage, since
there are statistical challenges in assessing whether or not a distribution is heavy-tailed (Edwards
et al., 2007). We borrowed several aspects of these statistical models to describe multi-agent bird
foraging, but we also developed Bayesian methods more appropriate for the contexts in which birds’
behavior depends both on the collective behavior, and on the location of food in the environment.
In a cognitive description, foraging decisions depend on what agents find rewarding, and what they
believe about the world. This has been formalized in reinforcement learning (RL) agents, which
learn an internal representation of which states are rewarding, and which states are adjacent to each
other. These agents make rational decisions, in the sense that they maximize the expected future
value of their actions. Reinforcement learning agents perform well in a variety of foraging-related
tasks (Mnih et al., 2013; Constantino & Daw, 2015; Wispinski et al., 2022).
The concept of value can be very useful for explaining foraging behavior. It offers precise calcula-
tions of what decisions are optimal in different environmental conditions (Kilpatrick et al., 2020).
Furthermore, it is possible to define additional quantities that agents may value in a multi-agent
setting, such as social information (Karpas et al., 2017), and to account for goals that change dy-
namically (Kaelbling, 1993; Todorov, 2009; Piray & Daw, 2021).
In the multi-agent foraging context, information can flow between agents. Different types of infor-
mation flow generate measurably different foraging behaviors (Bidari et al., 2022). In humans, there
is evidence that social network structure shapes collective cognition (Momennejad, 2022).
Social cognition has been formulated as the ability to do inverse reinforcement learning, that is, to
infer another agent’s internal representations from its behavior (Jara-Ettinger, 2019; Berke & Jara-
Ettinger, 2021). The difficulty of inverse RL depends on the complexity of the RL task, as well
as prior knowledge (Arora & Doshi, 2021). Inverse RL is achievable within the context of neural
network driven foraging behaviors (Wu et al., 2020). One might imagine that different species of
birds are able to infer different amounts of information from other birds. It can be possible to infer
information even from the behavior of non-optimal agents (Evans et al., 2016; Zhi-Xuan et al., 2020),
which is relevant in groups of birds that have different cognitive capacities and memory abilities.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Most of our understanding of the neuroscience of foraging is restricted to single agents, but there
is evidence that the brain may incorporate information from other agents. At the individual agent
level, there is compelling evidence across different species to suggest which neural circuits com-
pute which information. In nematodes, there are end-to-end circuit descriptions of how the ner-
vous system makes foraging decisions (López-Cruz et al., 2019), and basic principles from this
understanding shed light on representations in the primate brain, specifically the value of possible
decisions (Calhoun & Hayden, 2015). There is also evidence that the hippocampus computes the
successor representation (Stachenfeld et al., 2017), an efficient representation that is useful for com-
puting value. Interestingly, the hippocampus also generates precise representations of the locations
of other agents (Omer et al., 2018). Finally, there is evidence that certain brain circuits control the
decision-making part of foraging (Barack & Platt, 2017).

1.3   OVERVIEW

We argue that abstract cognitive descriptions of multi-agent foraging behavior can be mapped to a
neural network implementation and to a statistical model. In the cognitive description, each state is
assigned a value, which may be computed from a variety of features, such as the locations of food
or information about other agents. We identify which components of the neural network and of the
statistical model correspond to features that the agent values. Multi-agent foraging behavior varies
widely across different species and environments, as discussed above. The combined cognitive/neu-
ral/statistical framework provides a family of possible descriptions of foraging behavior that can be
adapted to capture different species and environments, since it is possible to add and combine many
different features that may govern behavior.
The statistical perspective allows us to infer which of the proposed features best explains the behav-
ior of a particular type of bird in a particular environment. To illustrate, we simulated different types
of multi-agent groups (random-walkers, followers, and hungry birds), and found that it was possible
to distinguish what different birds value by performing statistical inference that uses their simulated
foraging trajectories as data.
In the multi-agent context, communication of information between agents is an important feature
of group-level behavior, as is the impact of different environmental conditions. We investigated
whether the benefit of communicating information would be different for different environments,
using multiple simulations with a range of communication-related hyper-parameters. In environ-
ments where food was highly clustered, it took longer for birds to find food, but in all environments,
using information communicated from other birds improves foraging success. We also test this
communication analysis on previously published locust data (Günzel et al., 2023).
Finally, we recorded video data of multi-species multi-agent foraging birds in an outdoor winter en-
vironment. This data contains high-resolution information about birds’ foraging trajectories. From
these trajectories, we were are able to estimate coefficients that represent how much different species
of birds value being at different proximity to other birds. These proof-of-concept analyses demon-
strate that, with additional data, this analysis framework can be used to compare decision-making
parameters that govern foraging behavior across different species and environments.
The simulations, data, and analyses associated with this paper are in a github repository that will be
linked after the anonymous review process. This repository is designed with modular functionality
to allow the application of these analyses to new multi-agent datasets.

2     R ESULTS

2.1   T RANSLATING BETWEEN COGNITIVE , NEURAL , AND STATISTICAL DESCRIPTIONS OF
      FORAGING

We set out to translate an abstract cognitive description of foraging behavior into concrete empiri-
cally testable predictions about neural activity and statistics of movements. A cognitive policy can
be expressed as a function that takes in a state S and returns a prediction of what action A the bird
will do in that state. A combination of different factors may explain why an animal took a particular
action. Neural and statistical descriptions of foraging also predict actions based on states, but each
type of description can appear to have quite a different language and notation, so it can be difficult to


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


translate between them. Suppose a bird’s action is influenced by the location of the food. A cognitive
description might state that the bird values food. A neural description might state that hippocampal
representations activate downstream neurons in a way that drives the bird to navigate toward food
locations. A statistical description might state that food location is a good predictor of where the
bird will move. Starting from a certain formulation of the cognitive model in terms of reinforcement
learning agents, we will translate this notation into neuroscience and statistical formulations.

2.1.1   N OTATION
Cognitive descriptions have been formalized in reinforcement learning (RL) models. An RL agent
learns an expected reward r(S) for each state, as well as a ‘world model’ for predicting future states
St+1 = T (At , St ), where T is a state P transition function. The agent computes the expected future
                                             ∞
value of each possible state V (St′ ) = t=0 γ t r(St′ +t ), where γ is a temporal discounting rate. At
each step, the agent makes a rational decision to act in a way that maximizes expected future value.
Specifically, at state S, the rational policy is to choose action Acog = arg maxA (V (T (A, S))).
A neural description passes S through a neural network model of different brain areas, from per-
ceptual areas to intermediate areas to motor areas, with the activity of the output units determining
Aneuro . Specifically, Aneuro = N4 (N3 (N2 (N1 (S)))), where Ni are neural network layers repre-
senting sequentially connected brain areas ranging from perceptual to motor.
A statistical description employs predictors to probabilistically predict the next action. The predic-
tors could take arbitrary functional form, and in practice are related to observable variables, such as
the location of other birds in the environment or the location of food. A statistical model of this sort
might be formulated as a specification of P (Astat = A|S) = h(c1 f1 (A, S) + c2 f2 (A, S) + . . . +
cn fn (A, S)), where Astat is the position where the bird will move next, h is a monotonic non-linear
function, and fi are predictors with coefficients ci .
With this notation in mind, the goal of the next few sections is to specify biologically plausible neural
networks for which Aneuro = Acog , and define statistical models for which the most probable value
of Astat is Acog . Why is it useful to “translate” a cognitive description into a neural or statistical
description? Cognitive variables are more abstract than measurable quantities such as the firing rates
of neurons, or the statistics of animal movements. Once we translate abstract cognitive variables
into measurable quantities, we can use data from real-world multi-agent foraging behavior to inform
cognitive descriptions, which are more interpretable.


Figure 1: Neural network implementation of a RL agent in a grid world environment. Neural
population vectors are re-shaped to match the 2D environment. A) State representation, by a one-hot
vector of neural activity. Heatmap shows activity across the population of neurons in layer N1 at
state S. B) World model, in the form of a successor representation. Heatmap shows activity across
the population of neurons in layer N2 at state S. C) Value computation. Heatmap shows activity in
N3 as a function of the state. D) Action selection. Layer N4 samples possible actions, and selects
the action that maximizes value. E) Decomposition of value computation into multiple factors. This
function is also accessible within a simple neural network architecture.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1.2    A BIOLOGICALLY PLAUSIBLE NEURAL NETWORK THAT IMPLEMENTS AN RL POLICY

A common way that RL agents compute the value function is using the successor representation, a
predictive map that represents the temporally discounted expected occupancy of future states, from
any starting state.P In a world with N states, the successor representation is an N x N matrix,
                     ∞
defined as M = t=0 (γJ)t = (I − γJ)−1 , where J is the transition matrix between states and I
is the identity matrix. In the simplest formulations, the inputs are one-hot vectors, so we construct
N1 (S) to be a sparsifying network that returns a population vector ϕ   ⃗ S that is mostly zeros, with
a one at the bin corresponding to state S. A weight vector w    ⃗ stores the expected reward of each
                    ⃗ S = r(S). The value can be computed using the successor representation in the
                 ⃗ ⊤ϕ
state, such that w
following way V (S) = w   ⃗ ⊤M ϕ⃗ S . This can be computed using simple linear networks N2 = M , and
          ⊤
N3 = w   ⃗ . Interestingly, neural representations in the hippocampus, an intermediate area between
perceptual and motor areas, appear to match the successor representation (Stachenfeld et al., 2017).
Several mechanisms have been proposed for how this representation is computed and learned within
a biologically plausible neural network (Fang et al., 2023; Bono et al., 2023; George et al., 2023). It
is also possible to learn a vector of reward-related output weights using Hebbian plasticity (Zhang
et al., 2021). We are almost there, having constructed a biologically plausible neural network that
computes value N3 (N2 (N1 (S))) = V (S). What remains is using value to inform action in a
biologically plausible way.
When animals decide what action to take, they sample their local environment and evaluate their op-
tions. This process can be interpreted as an agent computing arg max. An agent at state S perceives
not only the current state ϕ⃗ S = N1 (S), but also adjacent states, N1 (T (A, S)), by actively looking
or sniffing in the direction of possible actions. Action-selection circuits in the brain are thought to
use winner-take-all network dynamics (Meegan, 1999) to compute the arg max, so we define N4 =
arg maxA N3 (N2 (N1 (T (A, S)))). This gives us Aneuro = arg maxA (V (T (A, S))) = Acog .
This gives us an end-to-end simple neural implementation of an RL agent. Using this implementa-
tion, we can generate neural representations in different areas of the brain (Figure 1).

2.1.3    A STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION OF AN RL POLICY

We found that it is also possible to relate descriptions of RL foraging agents to certain statistical
descriptions. The use of predictors in such descriptions may at first seem antithetical to RL meth-
ods, where predictions are based on a single quantity—‘reward’. However, RL descriptions often
decompose rewards into a collection of different factors. In the case of multi-agent groups of birds,
these factors could include not only food locations, but other quantities such as the caloric cost of
moving, the relative exposure to predators of different locations, and the potential benefit or cost of
being near other birds. This decomposition into factors makes RL descriptions appear more similar
to the statistical descriptions (Figure 1). For further detail of the statistical formulation, and relation
to cognitive and neural descriptions, see Appendix A.

2.2     S IMULATIONS OF MULTI - AGENT FORAGING BEHAVIOR

2.2.1    S TATISTICAL INFERENCE TO ESTIMATE WHAT FACTORS BIRDS VALUE

We first simulate three different types of foraging groups: hungry, follower and random birds. These
groups correspond to three types of things birds might value – food, proximity to other birds, and
nothing. Our goal was to test whether it is possible to infer what the agents value from observing
their movements and the rewards locations. We fit a Bayesian model in which possible components
of a value function (food and proximity to other birds) are expressed as statistical predictors. First,
we compute the predictors for a range of locations in space and time. Example proximity scores
and food traces are shown in Figure 2. These are then used to predict where each bird will go
next, by fitting a Bayesian model that predicts, for each frame, how close locations are to the birds’
locations at the next step. The mean prediction is modeled linearly as a function of a baseline and
the predictors, with the addition that, to handle heteroskedasticity, raw standard deviation is modeled
linearly in an analogous manner, and then passed through a softmax function. For further detail on
the construction of the derived predictors, see Appendix B. The coefficients estimated using this
model allow us to to clearly disambiguate random, hungry, and follower birds (Figure 2).


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Inferring the values of random, hungry, and follower birds (Top) Example trajectories
for random, hungry, and follower birds. (Bottom left) Proximity scores (gray) for points visible to
bird 2 at a single time frame. Yellow indicates food locations. (Bottom center) Food traces for the
same frame. (Bottom right) Coefficient values for proximity (p) and trace (t), sampled from the
posterior estimated using SVI on synthetic datasets of random, hungry, and follower birds.



2.2.2   M ODELING THE EFFECT OF INFORMATION - SHARING ON GROUP FORAGING SUCCESS ,
        ACROSS DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS


Next, we investigate the effect of information-sharing on foraging success under different envi-
ronmental conditions. In real-world environments, animals may use not only their own sensory
information but also communication with other animals to inform their decisions, for example vi-
sual observations, or listening to other birds’ calls. We simulated grid world environments with
food patches of varying degrees of spatial clustering, controlling for the total amount of food in the
environment. In each environment, there were 16 total food items, distributed randomly in patches
(1x1, 2x2, or 4x4).
We parameterized the extent to which agents share information about food locations. Agents follow
a policy A = arg maxA (V (T (A, S))), where the expected reward r(S) depends on the location
of visible food in the environment. Each bird is only able to see food within a radius of 5 steps.
Birds also update their expected reward vector w  ⃗ at the locations of other birds that are at food loca-
tions. In the real world, this could be achieved by observing other birds and listening to their calls.
The weighting of social information (reward locations communicated by other birds), compared to
individual information, is given by the communication parameter, which ranges from 0 (no commu-
nication) to 1 (full reliance on social information). Birds that communicate appear to navigate more
directly to food locations than birds that search independently (Figure 3, left). We analyzed these
simulated birds using a similar model as in the Random/Hungry/Follower bird case, but with an
additional communication term, which updates when other birds arrive at food locations (Appendix
C).
The model correctly assigns near-zero weight (c) to the communication term for simulations with
non-zero values for the communication parameter, but not for simulations with zero values of the
communication parameter (Figure 3, center). Note that the weight of the proximity score (p) is also
non-zero for communicator birds.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Modeling the effect of information-sharing on group foraging outcomes. (Left)
Trajectories of simulated birds that either search for food independently (top), or communicate food
locations (bottom, communication parameter = 0.06). Reward locations are in yellow, with patch
width 4. (Center) Posterior distributions of fit coefficients for proximity (p), food trace (t), and
communication (c), for non-communicators (top), and communicators (bottom, communication pa-
rameter 0.06). Medians shown as dashed lines. (Right, top) Average time to first find food, across
simulated groups of birds with different communication parameters. Colors indicate the size of the
food patches in the environment. Lines indicate linear fits obtained using regularized Bayesian mod-
els (see Appendix C). (Right, bottom) Posterior distribution of slopes of the linear model, estimated
using Stochastic Variational Inference (SVI). Across environments with different patch sizes, there
are negative estimated slope coefficients, that is, increased communication corresponds to decreased
time to first food.


In order to assess the role of communication across different environments, we simulated groups
of birds with different communication parameters, across a range of environments with different
degrees of food clustering. Foraging success was measured by the average time it took birds to reach
their first food item. Overall, finding food took longer in environments where food was clustered
into larger patches. In all environments tested, communication was negatively correlated with the
time it took to reach food (Figure 3, right).

2.3     R EAL MULTI - AGENT FORAGING DATASETS

2.3.1    L OCUST FORAGING IN CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENTS
Before testing this analysis framework on new real-world bird data, we test it on previously pub-
lished locust data from Günzel et al. (2023). A particularly interesting claim of that paper is that
locusts integrate socially derived information (observations of other locusts feeding) in their deci-
sions of where to forage. Gunzel et al. model the locust decision mechanisms using a drift diffusion
dynamical systems model. Our goal is to show that our method can replicate this general conclusion,
but achieving it using a much simpler strategy.
We asked whether our cognitive RL model and Bayesian inference procedure could identify the use
of social information in the same locust behavior data set. To model the locust behavior, we use
the same model as we used to analyze simulated bird communication (Figure 3), with parameters
set to mimic the assumptions of the paper (such as locust can see quite far, etc.), illustrating how
expert knowledge can be relatively easily integrated with our framework. The posterior distributions


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


obtained from Bayesian inference indicate that there is indeed social information used in the locusts’
decisions (Appendix D, Figure 5). This illustrates the point that while simple, our framework can
still capture a relatively rich real world behavior.

2.3.2   N EW DATASETS TRACKING GROUPS OF BIRDS FORAGING
Studying real-world cognitive behaviors such as avian cognition is essential for understanding cog-
nition and the brain, but it can be challenging to acquire this necessary data (Gao & Ganguli, 2015;
Krakauer et al., 2017; Mobbs et al., 2018; Hall-McMaster & Luyckx, 2019; Miller et al., 2022; Den-
nis et al., 2021; Niv, 2021; Pravosudov, 2022). In larger birds such as cormorants, GPS trackers
can continuously record foraging movements (Cook et al., 2017), but these devices weigh more than
many small wintering birds, so would be impossible for them to carry. Machine vision has emerged
as a revolutionary new technology for tracking animal behavior (Couzin & Heins, 2022; Naik et al.,
2023). These methods are limited by the field of view of the cameras, so large-scale movements
such as migration cannot be tracked, but within the field of view they track behavior at high spa-
tiotemporal resolution, with the added benefit of being non-invasive. Foraging behavior occurs on a
smaller scale than migration, so is amenable to these methods.
We acquired videos of multi-agent multi-species groups of birds performing foraging behavior in
the winter. Standard RGB videos were recorded simultaneously with thermal videos (FLIR E54
camera), which can be especially effective in detecting movements of birds (Matzner et al., 2020).
The RGB videos are used for identifying terrain and species, while the thermal videos are used for
tracking the movement of birds (Figure 4, top left). Even in a complex natural setting with a highly
varying background, the thermal videos give us low-background position information, since birds
stand out as warm objects against the cold ground. The RGB videos capture terrain information
about the environment that birds are foraging in, and enable the identification of different species,
using automated systems (Van Horn et al., 2015). It is possible to observe trajectories of foraging
birds by computing a simple maximum projection of thermal images (Figure 4, bottom left). In
addition, we adapted a deep-learning-based multi-agent tracking pipeline (Pereira et al., 2022) to
automatically track bird locations in these videos (Figure 4, center left).


Figure 4: Tracking of multi-species foraging behavior, using concurrent RGB and thermal
imaging. (Left, top) RGB videos are used for identifying terrain and bird species, and thermal
videos are used for tracking bird movements. (Left, bottom) Maximum projection of approximately
30 seconds of thermal video data, showing the trajectories of birds. (Center-left) Trajectories of
a group of ducks (Mallards), and a mixed-species group of White-Throated Sparrows and Tufted
Titmice. (Center-right) Histograms of inter-bird distances for the two groups. (Right) Inferred
posterior distributions of the proximity coefficient for different settings of the preferred proximity.

We wondered whether our analysis framework could recover differences in foraging preferences
between different groups of birds. We chose two short video recordings, one of a group of Mallard
ducks, and one of a multi-species group of small songbirds (White-Throated sparrows and Tufted
Titmice). First, we observed that the different groups exhibited different distributions of inter-bird
distances. We wondered whether this could be explained by different foraging preferences, specifi-
cally different preferred proximity (Figure 2 plots example proximity functions, detailed definition
Appendix B). We fit variations of the model described above, with different settings for the preferred


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


proximity distance (Ranging from 10 pixels to 80 pixels. An important future direction will be using
a multi-camera setup to convert these trajectories to 3D coordinates). In the duck data, proximity
preference of 40 pixels had the strongest weighting, while 30 pixels carried the strongest weighting
for the sparrow and titmouse dataset. Interestingly, both datasets showed a negative weighting for
large distances (i.e., birds preferred to avoid large separations). These results were consistent with
the empirical distributions of inter-bird distances, but with added explanatory power, as they are fit
on individual foraging decisions, and allow for the possibility that some common inter-bird distances
may not be strongly predictive of where birds will go. While more data is necessary to resolve how
well these preference profiles generalize to other settings, this framework offers a promising toolkit
for inferring what preferences drive behavior within real-world multi-agent behaviors.


3   D ISCUSSION

We have presented a strategy for bridging cognitive, statistical, and neural descriptions of multi-
agent foraging behavior. Starting from an abstract cognitive description of how each agent assesses
what is valuable and decides what to do, we implemented each agent as a biologically plausible
neural network. We simulated a group of these biologically plausible agents across different envi-
ronments. From the statistical perspective, each statistical predictor corresponds to a component of
the cognitive agent’s value function. Using the statistical model, we could infer properties of the
value functions of different agents. Finally, we collected high-resolution thermal and RGB videos
of multi-agent multi-species groups of birds foraging in an outdoor setting. These results pave the
way for a more integrated and comprehensive understanding of multi-agent foraging behavior by
offering a family of descriptions that can be adapted to capture different species and environments.
What foraging strategies do specific groups of birds actually use? The answer to this question will
differ for different species and environments. It depends on variables such as the birds’ diet, the
distribution of food in the environment, and the birds’ cognitive capacity. For example, different
species of overwintering birds have different spatial memory abilities and relative hippocampus
sizes and recruitment (Hampton & Shettleworth, 1996; Hoshooley & Sherry, 2007). Within the
unified framework outlined in this paper, it will be possible to combine information about relative
hippocampus size with information about movement statistics and food preferences. In the future, it
will also be important to relate the framework described here to evolutionary perspectives.
A key question in multi-agent foraging is what information birds communicate. Addressing this
question requires understanding not only the birds’ capacity for social cognition, but also under
what situations it is beneficial to share certain types of information. When assessing birds’ capacity
for social cognition, it may be necessary to observe them in environments where social cognition is
particularly beneficial.
Multi-species bird foraging, in particular, offers many interesting technical challenges. Building off
of recent progress in machine vision for animal tracking (Graving et al., 2019; Pereira et al., 2022;
Lauer et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022), we will need to extend machine vision tracking methods to
large 3D settings, at high enough resolution to identify particular species (Van Horn et al., 2015), or
even individuals (Ferreira et al., 2020).
Observing birds’ movements alone will in general not be sufficient to determine what cognitive
strategies they are using. In order to properly constrain our models, we need prior information about
distributions of food, movement statistics, metabolic rates, calorie consumption, and hippocampus
size. We need powerful inference algorithms to capture this rich information. Two particularly
promising strategies involve the ability to infer hidden states that drive behavior (Linderman et al.,
2017) and the ability to specify generative models programmatically (Cusumano-Towner et al.,
2017; Bingham et al., 2019; Das et al., 2023). With so many possible strategies for multi-agent
foraging behavior, we need to quantify the uncertainty in our models and find automatic ways to
bridge different types of models and descriptions. Our work presented in this paper is just a step in
this direction.
One of the oldest functions of the embodied nervous system is exchanging information within multi-
agent groups of animals, in particular about the location of food, predators, and mating compatibility.
Over evolutionary time, collaborative exchange of information becomes increasingly sophisticated
as ecosystems and societies expand. So, at least in principle, the key aspects of our modeling


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approach are not limited to avian or insect subjects. The simulations and analyses here involved
small or medium-sized groups of agents foraging in 2D grid-world environments, which could apply
to a variety of multi-agent groups across the animal kingdom. The value function can be adapted to
a particular animal clade by modifying the internal components based on features particular to that
animal’s environment and its particular neural and cognitive resources.
This framework could potentially be applied to studying foraging behaviors of groups of humans.
Studies of decision-making in humans use similar neural and cognitive models as the ones we use
here. For example, RL models of human planning based on the hippocampus also use successor
representations (Momennejad, 2020; De Cothi et al., 2022). Models of humans performing visual
information-foraging tasks may decompose the value function into different visual features each
given a different attention weight (Radulescu et al., 2019).
Many real-world multi-agent behaviors, such as migratory behaviors (Hanson et al., 2022), span
huge distances, sometimes at a global scale. One potential challenge lies in the sparsity of data,
even if we restrict our attention to information about subjects’ locations and availability of rewards.
Another challenge is computational complexity, which is bound to increase with the larger spa-
tiotemporal scale at play. Given their massive complexity and scale, these behaviors may need to be
understood using more abstract descriptions, perhaps a combination of different descriptions.

R EFERENCES
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.
David L Barack and Michael L Platt. Engaging and exploring: cortical circuits for adaptive foraging
  decisions. Impulsivity: How Time and Risk Influence Decision Making, pp. 163–199, 2017.
Chris J Barnard and Richard M Sibly. Producers and scroungers: a general model and its application
  to captive flocks of house sparrows. Animal behaviour, 29(2):543–550, 1981.
Lauren M Benedict, Angela M Pitera, Carrie L Branch, Benjamin R Sonnenberg, Virginia K Heinen,
  Eli S Bridge, and Vladimir V Pravosudov. Information maintenance of food sources is associated
  with environment, spatial cognition and age in a food-caching bird. Animal Behaviour, 182:
  153–172, 2021.
Marlene Berke and Julian Jara-Ettinger. Thinking about thinking through inverse reasoning. 2021.
William Bialek, Andrea Cavagna, Irene Giardina, Thierry Mora, Edmondo Silvestri, Massimiliano
 Viale, and Aleksandra M Walczak. Statistical mechanics for natural flocks of birds. Proceedings
 of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(13):4786–4791, 2012.
Subekshya Bidari, Ahmed El Hady, Jacob D Davidson, and Zachary P Kilpatrick. Stochastic dy-
  namics of social patch foraging decisions. Physical review research, 4(3):033128, 2022.
Eli Bingham, Jonathan P Chen, Martin Jankowiak, Fritz Obermeyer, Neeraj Pradhan, Theofanis
  Karaletsos, Rohit Singh, Paul Szerlip, Paul Horsfall, and Noah D Goodman. Pyro: Deep universal
  probabilistic programming. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):973–978, 2019.
Katarı́na Bod’Ová, Gabriel J Mitchell, Roy Harpaz, Elad Schneidman, and Gašper Tkačik. Proba-
  bilistic models of individual and collective animal behavior. PloS one, 13(3):e0193049, 2018.
Jacopo Bono, Sara Zannone, Victor Pedrosa, and Claudia Clopath. Learning predictive cognitive
  maps with spiking neurons during behavior and replays. Elife, 12:e80671, 2023.
Anders Brodin. Theoretical models of adaptive energy management in small wintering birds. Philo-
  sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1486):1857–1871, 2007.
Adam J Calhoun and Benjamin Y Hayden. The foraging brain. Current Opinion in Behavioral
  Sciences, 5:24–31, 2015.
Susan Budd Chaplin. Daily energetics of the black-capped chickadee, parus atricapillus, in winter.
  Journal of Comparative Physiology, 89(4):321–330, 1974.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Philip Coen, Jan Clemens, Andrew J Weinstein, Diego A Pacheco, Yi Deng, and Mala Murthy.
  Dynamic sensory cues shape song structure in drosophila. Nature, 507(7491):233–237, 2014.
Sara M. Constantino and Nathaniel D. Daw. Learning the opportunity cost of time in a patch-
  foraging task. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 15(4):837–853, December 2015.
  ISSN 1531-135X. doi: 10.3758/s13415-015-0350-y. URL https://doi.org/10.3758/
  s13415-015-0350-y.
Timothée R Cook, Rob Gubiani, Peter G Ryan, and Sabir B Muzaffar. Group foraging in socotra
  cormorants: A biologging approach to the study of a complex behavior. Ecology and evolution, 7
  (7):2025–2038, 2017.
Christopher J Course. Investigating social dynamics using automated radiotracking of winter flocks
  of Black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus). PhD thesis, The University of Western Ontario
  (Canada), 2021.
Iain D Couzin and Conor Heins. Emerging technologies for behavioral research in changing envi-
   ronments. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 2022.
Marco F Cusumano-Towner, Alexey Radul, David Wingate, and Vikash K Mansinghka. Proba-
 bilistic programs for inferring the goals of autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04977,
 2017.
Ria Das, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Zenna Tavares. Combining functional
  and automata synthesis to discover causal reactive programs. 2023.
William De Cothi, Nils Nyberg, Eva-Maria Griesbauer, Carole Ghanamé, Fiona Zisch, Julie M.
 Lefort, Lydia Fletcher, Coco Newton, Sophie Renaudineau, Daniel Bendor, Roddy Grieves,
 Éléonore Duvelle, Caswell Barry, and Hugo J. Spiers. Predictive maps in rats and humans
 for spatial navigation. Current Biology, 32(17), September 2022. ISSN 09609822. doi:
 10.1016/j.cub.2022.06.090. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
 pii/S0960982222010958.
Emily Jane Dennis, Ahmed El Hady, Angie Michaiel, Ann Clemens, Dougal R Gowan Tervo, Jakob
  Voigts, and Sandeep Robert Datta. Systems neuroscience of natural behaviors in rodents. Journal
  of Neuroscience, 41(5):911–919, 2021.
Andrew S Dolby and Thomas C Grubb Jr. Benefits to satellite members in mixed-species foraging
  groups: an experimental analysis. Animal behaviour, 56(2):501–509, 1998.
Andrew M Edwards, Richard A Phillips, Nicholas W Watkins, Mervyn P Freeman, Eugene J Mur-
  phy, Vsevolod Afanasyev, Sergey V Buldyrev, Marcos GE da Luz, Ernesto P Raposo, H Eugene
  Stanley, et al. Revisiting lévy flight search patterns of wandering albatrosses, bumblebees and
  deer. Nature, 449(7165):1044–1048, 2007.
Owain Evans, Andreas Stuhlmüller, and Noah Goodman. Learning the preferences of ignorant,
 inconsistent agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 30,
 2016.
Andrea Falcón-Cortés, Denis Boyer, and Gabriel Ramos-Fernández. Collective learning from indi-
  vidual experiences and information transfer during group foraging. Journal of the Royal Society
  Interface, 16(151):20180803, 2019.
Ching Fang, Dmitriy Aronov, LF Abbott, and Emily L Mackevicius. Neural learning rules for
  generating flexible predictions and computing the successor representation. eLife, 12:e80680, mar
  2023. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.80680. URL https://doi.org/10.7554/
  eLife.80680.
André C Ferreira, Liliana R Silva, Francesco Renna, Hanja B Brandl, Julien P Renoult, Damien R
  Farine, Rita Covas, and Claire Doutrelant. Deep learning-based methods for individual recogni-
  tion in small birds. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 11(9):1072–1085, 2020.
Peiran Gao and Surya Ganguli. On simplicity and complexity in the brave new world of large-scale
  neuroscience. Current opinion in neurobiology, 32:148–155, 2015.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tom M George, William de Cothi, Kimberly L Stachenfeld, and Caswell Barry. Rapid learning of
  predictive maps with stdp and theta phase precession. Elife, 12:e80663, 2023.

Luc-Alain Giraldeau and Frédérique Dubois. Social foraging and the study of exploitative behavior.
  Advances in the Study of Behavior, 38:59–104, 2008.

Eben Goodale, Hari Sridhar, Kathryn E Sieving, Priti Bangal, Gabriel J Colorado Z, Damien R
  Farine, Eckhard W Heymann, Harrison H Jones, Indrikis Krams, Ari E Martı́nez, et al. Mixed
  company: a framework for understanding the composition and organization of mixed-species
  animal groups. Biological Reviews, 95(4):889–910, 2020.

Jacob M Graving, Daniel Chae, Hemal Naik, Liang Li, Benjamin Koger, Blair R Costelloe, and
  Iain D Couzin. Deepposekit, a software toolkit for fast and robust animal pose estimation using
  deep learning. Elife, 8:e47994, 2019.

Yannick Günzel, Felix B. Oberhauser, and Einat Couzin-Fuchs. Information integration for decision-
  making in desert locusts. iScience, 26(4):106388, April 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106388.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.106388.

Sam Hall-McMaster and Fabrice Luyckx. Revisiting foraging approaches in neuroscience. Cogni-
  tive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 19:225–230, 2019.

Robert R Hampton and Sara J Shettleworth. Hippocampus and memory in a food-storing and in a
  nonstoring bird species. Behavioral neuroscience, 110(5):946, 1996.

Nora Hanson, James Ounsley, Stuart J. Middlemas, John Gilbey, and Christopher D. Todd. Infer-
  ring individual marine migration from otolith ecogeochemical signatures of a wide-ranging fish.
  Frontiers in Marine Science, 9, 2022. ISSN 2296-7745.

Virginia K Heinen, Angela M Pitera, Benjamin R Sonnenberg, Lauren M Benedict, Eli S Bridge,
  Damien R Farine, and Vladimir V Pravosudov. Food discovery is associated with different re-
  liance on social learning and lower cognitive flexibility across environments in a food-caching
  bird. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 288(1951):20202843, 2021.

Graydon William Prosser Hidalgo. Distant early warning in alarm responses in chickadees and
  nuthatches–do birds use their avian neighbors as sentinels? 2021.

Jennifer S Hoshooley and David F Sherry. Greater hippocampal neuronal recruitment in food-storing
  than in non-food-storing birds. Developmental neurobiology, 67(4):406–414, 2007.

Julian Jara-Ettinger. Theory of mind as inverse reinforcement learning. Current Opinion in Behav-
  ioral Sciences, 29:105–110, 2019.

Harrison H Jones, Mitchell J Walters, and Scott K Robinson. Do similar foragers flock together?
  nonbreeding foraging behavior and its impact on mixed-species flocking associations in a sub-
  tropical region. The Auk, 137(2):ukz079, 2020.

Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, volume 2, pp. 1094–8. Citeseer, 1993.

Ehud D Karpas, Adi Shklarsh, and Elad Schneidman. Information socialtaxis and efficient collective
  behavior emerging in groups of information-seeking agents. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 114(22):5589–5594, 2017.

Zachary P Kilpatrick, Jacob D Davidson, and Ahmed El Hady. Normative theory of patch foraging
  decisions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10671, 2020.

John W Krakauer, Asif A Ghazanfar, Alex Gomez-Marin, Malcolm A MacIver, and David Poeppel.
  Neuroscience needs behavior: correcting a reductionist bias. Neuron, 93(3):480–490, 2017.

NL Krushinskaya. Some complex forms of feeding behaviour of nutcracker nucifraga caryocatactes,
 after removal of old cortex. Zh Evol Biokhim Fisiol, 11:563–568, 1966.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


KA Kułakowska, TM Kułakowski, IR Inglis, GC Smith, PJ Haynes, P Prosser, P Thorbek, and
 RM Sibly. Using an individual-based model to select among alternative foraging strategies of
 woodpigeons: Data support a memory-based model with a flocking mechanism. Ecological mod-
 elling, 280:89–101, 2014.
Jessy Lauer, Mu Zhou, Shaokai Ye, William Menegas, Steffen Schneider, Tanmay Nath, Mo-
  hammed Mostafizur Rahman, Valentina Di Santo, Daniel Soberanes, Guoping Feng, et al. Multi-
  animal pose estimation, identification and tracking with deeplabcut. Nature Methods, 19(4):496–
  504, 2022.
Scott Linderman, Matthew Johnson, Andrew Miller, Ryan Adams, David Blei, and Liam Paninski.
  Bayesian learning and inference in recurrent switching linear dynamical systems. In Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 914–922. PMLR, 2017.
Alejandro López-Cruz, Aylesse Sordillo, Navin Pokala, Qiang Liu, Patrick T McGrath, and Cor-
  nelia I Bargmann. Parallel multimodal circuits control an innate foraging behavior. Neuron, 102
  (2):407–419, 2019.
Harry H Marshall, Alecia J Carter, J Marcus Rowcliffe, and Guy Cowlishaw. Linking social foraging
  behaviour with individual time budgets and emergent group-level phenomena. Animal Behaviour,
  84(6):1295–1305, 2012.
Shari Matzner, Thomas Warfel, and Ryan Hull. Thermaltracker-3d: A thermal stereo vision system
  for quantifying bird and bat activity at offshore wind energy sites. Ecological Informatics, 57:
  101069, 2020.
Daniel V Meegan. Winner-takes-all and action selection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(4):
  692–693, 1999.
Cory T Miller, David Gire, Kim Hoke, Alexander C Huk, Darcy Kelley, David A Leopold,
  Matthew C Smear, Frederic Theunissen, Michael Yartsev, and Cristopher M Niell. Natural be-
  havior is the language of the brain. Current Biology, 32(10):R482–R493, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Dean Mobbs, Pete C Trimmer, Daniel T Blumstein, and Peter Dayan. Foraging for foundations
  in decision neuroscience: insights from ethology. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 19(7):419–427,
  2018.
Ida Momennejad. Learning Structures: Predictive Representations, Replay, and Generalization.
  Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 32:155–166, April 2020. ISSN 2352-1546. doi:
  10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.02.017. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S2352154620300371.
Ida Momennejad. Collective minds: social network topology shapes collective cognition. Philo-
  sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 377(1843):20200315, 2022.
Hemal Naik, Alex Hoi Hang Chan, Junran Yang, Mathilde Delacoux, Iain D Couzin, Fumi-
  hiro Kano, and Máté Nagy. 3d-pop–an automated annotation approach to facilitate marker-
  less 2d-3d tracking of freely moving birds with marker-based motion capture. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.13174, 2023.
Johannes Nauta, Pieter Simoens, and Yara Khaluf. Memory induced aggregation in collective for-
  aging. In Swarm Intelligence: 12th International Conference, ANTS 2020, Barcelona, Spain,
  October 26–28, 2020, Proceedings 12, pp. 176–189. Springer, 2020.
Yael Niv. The primacy of behavioral research for understanding the brain. Behavioral Neuroscience,
  135(5):601, 2021.
David B Omer, Shir R Maimon, Liora Las, and Nachum Ulanovsky. Social place-cells in the bat
  hippocampus. Science, 359(6372):218–224, 2018.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Talmo D Pereira, Nathaniel Tabris, Arie Matsliah, David M Turner, Junyu Li, Shruthi Ravindranath,
  Eleni S Papadoyannis, Edna Normand, David S Deutsch, Z Yan Wang, et al. Sleap: A deep
  learning system for multi-animal pose tracking. Nature methods, 19(4):486–495, 2022.

Payam Piray and Nathaniel D Daw. Linear reinforcement learning in planning, grid fields, and
  cognitive control. Nature communications, 12(1):4942, 2021.

Vladimir V Pravosudov. Cognitive ecology in the wild—advances and challenges in avian cognition
  research. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 45:101138, 2022.

Vladimir V Pravosudov and Thomas C Grubb Jr. Energy management in passerine birds during the
  nonbreeding season: a review. Current ornithology, pp. 189–234, 1997.

Angela Radulescu, Yael Niv, and Ian Ballard. Holistic Reinforcement Learning: The Role of Struc-
  ture and Attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(4):278–292, April 2019. ISSN 1364-6613.
  doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.01.010. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S1364661319300361.

Craig W Reynolds. Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral model. In Proceedings of
  the 14th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 25–34, 1987.

Katherine E Richardson, Daniel P Roche, Stephen G Mugel, Nolan D Lancaster, Kathryn E Sieving,
  Todd M Freeberg, and Jeffrey R Lucas. Social dynamics of core members in mixed-species bird
  flocks change across a gradient of foraging habitat quality. Plos one, 17(2):e0262385, 2022.

William Beecher Scoville and Brenda Milner. Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal
 lesions. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry, 20(1):11, 1957.

Hari Sridhar, Umesh Srinivasan, Robert A Askins, Julio Cesar Canales-Delgadillo, Chao-Chieh
  Chen, David N Ewert, George A Gale, Eben Goodale, Wendy K Gram, Patrick J Hart, et al.
  Positive relationships between association strength and phenotypic similarity characterize the as-
  sembly of mixed-species bird flocks worldwide. The American Naturalist, 180(6):777–790, 2012.

Vivek H Sridhar, Liang Li, Dan Gorbonos, Máté Nagy, Bianca R Schell, Timothy Sorochkin, Nir S
  Gov, and Iain D Couzin. The geometry of decision-making in individuals and collectives. Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(50):e2102157118, 2021.

Kimberly L Stachenfeld, Matthew M Botvinick, and Samuel J Gershman. The hippocampus as a
  predictive map. Nature neuroscience, 20(11):1643–1653, 2017.

Kimberly A Sullivan. The advantages of social foraging in downy woodpeckers. Animal Behaviour,
  32(1):16–22, 1984a.

Kimberly A Sullivan. Information exploitation by downy woodpeckers in mixed-species flocks.
  Behaviour, 91(4):294–311, 1984b.

Jennifer J Sun, Pierre Karashchuk, Amil Dravid, Serim Ryou, Sonia Fereidooni, John Tuthill, Agge-
  los Katsaggelos, Bingni W Brunton, Georgia Gkioxari, Ann Kennedy, et al. Bkind-3d: Self-
  supervised 3d keypoint discovery from multi-view videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07401,
  2022.

Emanuel Todorov. Efficient computation of optimal actions. Proceedings of the national academy
  of sciences, 106(28):11478–11483, 2009.

Grant Van Horn, Steve Branson, Ryan Farrell, Scott Haber, Jessie Barry, Panos Ipeirotis, Pietro
  Perona, and Serge Belongie. Building a bird recognition app and large scale dataset with citizen
  scientists: The fine print in fine-grained dataset collection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 595–604, 2015.

Nathan J Wispinski, Andrew Butcher, Kory W Mathewson, Craig S Chapman, Matthew M
  Botvinick, and Patrick M Pilarski. Adaptive patch foraging in deep reinforcement learning agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08085, 2022.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengwei Wu, Minhae Kwon, Saurabh Daptardar, Paul Schrater, and Xaq Pitkow. Rational thoughts
  in neural codes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(47):29311–29320, 2020.
Tony Zhang, Matthew Rosenberg, Pietro Perona, and Markus Meister. Endotaxis: A neuromorphic
  algorithm for mapping, goal-learning, navigation, and patrolling. bioRxiv, pp. 2021–09, 2021.
Tan Zhi-Xuan, Jordyn Mann, Tom Silver, Josh Tenenbaum, and Vikash Mansinghka. Online
  bayesian goal inference for boundedly rational planning agents. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:19238–19250, 2020.


A     A PPENDIX : D ERIVING CORRESPONDENCES WITH THE STATISTICAL
      INTERPRETATION

A.1    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATISTICAL AND COGNITIVE DESCRIPTIONS

We will express an RL policy in terms of predictors that can be derived from empirical data. As in
the neural network formulation, we will focus on the successor representation formulation of an RL
agent, but here we only consider the case when the agent has already learned the environment and
is executing a rational policy. The expected reward of each state is stored in a vector w          ⃗ = a1 w
                                                                                                          ⃗1 +
a2 w
   ⃗ 2 +. . .+an w⃗ n , where ai are scalar coefficients, and w ⃗ i are vectors representing different factors
that contribute to the overall reward of a foraging bird, such as the quantity of food, conspecifics, or
predators at each state. We can re-write the value function using the matrices and vectors defined
in the successor representation as follows V (S) = w     ⃗ ⊤M ϕ   ⃗ S = P ai w        ⃗ S , recall that M is the
                                                                               ⃗ i⊤ M ϕ
                                                                           i
successor representation matrix, and ϕS is a one-hot vector representation of state S. Now, we are
able to get that the most likely value of Astat (which we call As ) is Acog , when we set the statistical
predictors fi (A, S) = wi⊤ M ϕ  ⃗ T (A,S) and let ci = ai (the first step is by the monotonicity of h).1
                                                      X
                                   As = arg max h(         ci fi (A, S))                                     (1)
                                                A
                                                          i
                                                    X
                                       = arg max(             ci fi (A, S))                                 (2)
                                                A
                                                      i
                                                    X
                                       = arg max(                      ⃗ T (A,S) )
                                                              ai wi⊤ M ϕ                                    (3)
                                                A
                                                      i
                                                      ⃗ T (A,S) )
                                       = arg max(w⊤ M ϕ                                                     (4)
                                                A
                                       = arg max(V (T (A, S))) = Acog                                       (5)
                                                A

We can interpret the different statistical predictors as different components of the value function of
an RL agent. For example, we can switch between describing a bird as valuing food and describing
food as a good predictor of where the bird will go. This correspondence allows us to use statistical
inference techniques within the context of abstract cognitive models.

A.2    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATISTICAL AND NEURAL DESCRIPTIONS

Our focus here is is how the brain may decompose value computations into different factors, sim-
ilar to how statistical descriptions make use of multiple different predictors. We know now that
Aneuro = Acog = Astat   s     . In the previous section, we decomposed the expected reward into factors
w
⃗ = a1 w ⃗ 1 + a2 w
                  ⃗ 2 + . . . + an w
                                   ⃗ n . This could be implemented in neural network output weights, onto
n output neurons instead of one, with each output neuron computing a different component of value
(Figure 1E). This type of output from a hippocampus-like structure was recently proposed as part of
the Endotaxis model (Zhang et al., 2021). A benefit of this architecture is that the brain could flexi-
bly learn each of the different output associations (through Hebbian plasticity), and flexibly modify
    1
      One proviso: this identification works if the statistical model uses maximum a posteriori estimates with
fairly wide priors; otherwise, the most likely value recommended by the statistical model might be slightly
different from the one recommended by an RL model that does not incorporate whatever information that was
used to shape the priors.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which output units should influence behavior, so that the animal might sometimes value food (af ood
is high), and at other times value shelter (ashelter is high). By bridging between the neural and
statistical perspectives, we can relate this neural description of outputs from the hippocampus to
statistical descriptions - neural representations in the hippocampus correspond to hidden states that
can influence the coefficients of different predictors.

B     A PPENDIX : R ANDOM , HUNGRY AND FOLLOWER BIRD SIMULATION AND
      INFERENCE METHODS

B.1    T HE THREE GROUPS

The three different types of foraging groups in our simulation are as follows:

       • Random birds. The birds just perform random walks.
       • Follower birds. Bird 1 does a random walk as in the previous simulation, the other birds at
         each step move to a location close to where Bird 1 was one step before (that is, they follow
         her with lag 1).
       • Hungry birds. Birds ignore each other and pursue rewards as fast as possible (with some
         stochastic element, at each step randomly picking their next step from five top efficient
         paths available to them).

We start with simulating synthetic data that includes only locations of three or four birds (in the
follower birds’ case) and the positions of multiple rewards across time (rewards disappear when
approached by a bird). Each simulation is on a 100x100 grid with 150 time-frames.

B.2    D ERIVED PREDICTOR SCORES

Given each dataset, for each bird, we assign three scores for each location in the environment -
visibility, trace (based on distance from rewards), and proximity to other birds.
We first use an external visibility range hyper-parameter, which determines how far the birds can
“see” to assign non-zero visibility scores to points in birds’ vicinity. We employ a cosine decay
function so that birds can better see things that are closer. Each visible location is assigned a trace
score: 1 if it contains a reward, with exponential decay for distances farther away from rewards
(length constant 6 units). To capture birds’ preferences for proximity to other birds, we construct a
proximity score function as a piece-wise function built from two sine functions and one exponential
function, which assigns a negative value to being too close to another bird, but a positive value to
being not too far from here (Figure 2). The proximity score is parameterized by three numbers: the
x-intercept, what the optimal distance is, and an exponential decay rate for larger distances. Scores
assigned to points accumulate additively across sources (e.g. being close to two rewards results in
higher trace score).

B.3    INFERENCE TASK

The prediction task is as follows: Each bird b and each time frame t, given her range, uniquely
determines the points available to b at t, {pi = ⟨xi , yi ⟩|pi ∈ Range(b, t)}. Each such pi gets a trace
score, trace(pi ), and a proximity score, proximity(pi ). At time t+1 the bird moves to a new position
p⟨b,t+1⟩ . What we ideally want to be able to predict using trace(pi ) and proximity(pi ) is a trans-
formed distance of pi from where the bird will go next, p⟨b,t+1⟩  , for all points pi in Range(b, t). More
                                                                    (xi −x⟨b,t+1⟩ )2 +(yi −y⟨b,t+1⟩ )2
formally, as the output variable we take accuracy(pi ) = −        max[(xi −x⟨b,t+1⟩ )2 +(yi −y⟨b,t+1⟩ )2 ]
                                                                                                             + 1,
so that score 1 is assigned to the point to which the bird will go next, and score 0 is assigned to the
available points that are the furthest to where she will go next.
Given the scale of the grid, we fixed the hyper-parameters at fairly sensible values.2 For each dataset
the model was first fed the raw data, then used the hyper-parameters to assign trace and proximity
    2
      Such as: rewards decay = .5, visibility range = 9, maxStepSize = 4, negative proximity score starts at
1.5, optimal proximity = 3, proximity decay = 1. Note that proximity score was not used in the simulation


                                                    16
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     scores to points in birds’ ranges, which were subsequently normalized by dividing by their maximal
     values to ensure equal coefficient interpretability.

     C     A PPENDIX : BAYESIAN MODELS
     Here we provide the model code for models used in the paper. All the models other than the one
     described in in Listing 3 were trained on derived predictors.

     C.1    R ANDOM - HUNGRY- FOLLOWERS

     Listing 1: Model used to distinguish the predictive role of trace and proximity in the behavior of
     simulated birds: p, t, v, b are the coefficients for proximity, trace, visibility, and the intercept, ps, ts,
     vs, bs are analogous coefficients, but they contribute to the variance, which is not assumed to remain
     fixed.
 1   def model_sigmavar(proximity, trace, visibility, how_far_score):
 2       p = pyro.sample("p", dist.Normal(0, .8))
 3       t = pyro.sample("t", dist.Normal(0, .8))
 4       v = pyro.sample("v", dist.Normal(0, .8))
 5       b = pyro.sample("b", dist.Normal(.5, .7))
 6
 7         ps = pyro.sample("ps", dist.Normal(0, .8))
 8         ts = pyro.sample("ts", dist.Normal(0, .8))
 9         vs = pyro.sample("vs", dist.Normal(0, .8))
10         bs = pyro.sample("bs", dist.Normal(.2, .6))
11
12         sigmaRaw = bs + ps * proximity + ts * trace + vs * visibility
13         sigma = pyro.deterministic("sigma", F.softplus(sigmaRaw))
14         mean = b + p * proximity + t * trace + v * visibility
15
16         with pyro.plate("data", len(how_far_score)):
17             pyro.sample("obs", dist.Normal(mean, sigma), obs=how_far_score)



     C.2    C OMMUNICATING BIRDS

     Listing 2: Model used to distinguish the predictive role of communication, trace and proximity in the
     behavior of simulated birds. Coefficients as above, with the addition of c and cs as communication-
     related coefficients.
 1   def model_sigmavar_com(proximity, trace, visibility,
 2               communicate, how_far_score):
 3
 4         p = pyro.sample("p", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 5         t = pyro.sample("t", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 6         v = pyro.sample("v", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 7         c = pyro.sample("c", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 8         b = pyro.sample("b", dist.Normal(.5, .6))
 9
10         ps = pyro.sample("ps", dist.Normal(0, .6))
11         ts = pyro.sample("ts", dist.Normal(0, .6))
12         vs = pyro.sample("vs", dist.Normal(0, .6))
13         cs = pyro.sample("cs", dist.Normal(0, .6))
14         bs = pyro.sample("bs", dist.Normal(.2, .6))
15
16         sigmaRaw = bs + ps * proximity + ts * trace +
17                         vs * visibility + cs * communicate
18
19         sigma = pyro.deterministic("sigma", F.softplus(sigmaRaw))

     of follower birds. Sanity checks can be performed by running animations visualizing the predictors using the
     notebooks on github.


                                                          17
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


20         mean = b + p * proximity + t * trace +
21                     v * visibility + c * communicate
22
23         with pyro.plate("data", len(how_far_score)):
24             pyro.sample("obs", dist.Normal(mean, sigma), obs=how_far_score)


     Listing 3: A simple linear model used to evaluate the impact of communication levels on a success
     measure (average time to first reward).
 1   def model(trust, time, patch):
 2
 3         with pyro.plate("coefs", 3):
 4             base = pyro.sample("base", dist.Normal(base_m, base_s))
 5             slope = pyro.sample("slope", dist.Normal(slope_m, slope_s))
 6
 7         sig = pyro.sample("sig", dist.LogNormal(4, 0.7))
 8
 9         with pyro.plate("obs", len(time)):
10             pyro.sample("time", dist.Normal(base[patch] +
11                     slope[patch] * trust, sig), obs=time)



     C.3   C ENTRAL PARK BIRDS

     Listing 4: A model used to evaluate the impact of proximity (with various different hyperparameter
     settings) together with information about distance of a location from the birds’ position on how far
     that location was at the next step from where the birds actually went. Trained on predictors derived
     from the real-life data we collected.
 1   def model_sigmavar_proximity(distance, proximity, how_far):
 2       d = pyro.sample("d", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 3       p = pyro.sample("p", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 4       b = pyro.sample("b", dist.Normal(.5, .6))
 5
 6         ds = pyro.sample("ds", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 7         ps = pyro.sample("ps", dist.Normal(0, .6))
 8         bs = pyro.sample("bs", dist.Normal(.2, .6))
 9
10         sigmaRaw = bs + ds * distance + ps * proximity
11         sigma = pyro.deterministic("sigma", F.softplus(sigmaRaw))
12         mean = b + d * distance + p * proximity
13
14         with pyro.plate("data", len(how_far)):
15             pyro.sample("obs", dist.Normal(mean, sigma), obs=how_far)



     C.4   L OCUST

     Listing 5: A sequence of models used to evaluate the impact of proximity, trace and communication
     on where the locust move at the next step. This real-world dataset is highly irregular with multi-
     colinearity. So we dropped the linearity assumption, paritioned the dataset at regular intervals of
     predictor values and run a version of kernel density estimation to separately estimate means and
     standard deviations at the cells. We did so using three independend models, as colinearity was too
     prohibitive to use all the predictors in the same model. Next, we passed on the resulting mean
     estimates to standard weighted linear regression models, whose weights were inverses of standard
     deviations at given cells (the less variance in a cell, the more it contributes to the slope).
 1
 2   def discretized_p(proximity_id, how_far):
 3           p = numpyro.sample("p", dist.Normal(0, 0.5).expand(
 4                   [len(set(proximity_id))]))
 5           sigma = numpyro.sample("sigma", dist.Exponential(1))


                                                     18
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 6             mu = p[proximity_id]
 7             numpyro.sample("how_far", dist.Normal(mu, sigma), obs=how_far)
 8
 9        def discretized_t(trace_id, how_far):
10            t = numpyro.sample("t", dist.Normal(0, 0.5).expand(
11                    [len(set(trace_id))]))
12            sigma = numpyro.sample("sigma", dist.Exponential(1))
13            mu = t[trace_id]
14            numpyro.sample("how_far", dist.Normal(mu, sigma), obs=how_far)
15
16        def discretized_c(communicate_id, how_far):
17            c = numpyro.sample("c", dist.Normal(0, 0.5).expand(
18                    [len(set(communicate_id))]))
19            sigma = numpyro.sample("sigma", dist.Exponential(1))
20            mu = c[communicate_id]
21            numpyro.sample("how_far", dist.Normal(mu, sigma), obs=how_far)
22
23        guide_p = AutoLaplaceApproximation(discretized_p)
24        guide_t = AutoLaplaceApproximation(discretized_t)
25        guide_c = AutoLaplaceApproximation(discretized_c)
26
27   #second layer, used mostly for interpretability
28
29   lr_p, lr_t, lr_c = [LinearRegression() for _ in range(3)]
30
31   X_p = np.array(summary["id_p"]).reshape(-1, 1)
32   X_t = np.array(summary["id_t"]).reshape(-1, 1)
33   X_c = np.array(summary["id_c"]).reshape(-1, 1)
34
35   lr_p.fit(X_p, summary["params_p"], sample_weight=1/summary["std_p"])
36   lr_t.fit(X_t, summary["params_t"], sample_weight=1/summary["std_t"])
37   lr_c.fit(X_c, summary["params_c"], sample_weight=1/summary["std_c"])
38
39   # resampling to gauge the uncertainty involved
40   # repeated for all coefficients
41
42   coef_samples = []
43       for _ in range(1000):
44           X_resampled, y_resampled = resample(
45               input, summary[f"params_{coef}"],
46               random_state=np.random.randint(1000)
47           )
48
49             model.fit(X_resampled, y_resampled)
50             coef_samples.append(model.coef_[0])



     D    A PPENDIX : L OCUST DATA
     The communication inference analysis in Figure 3 was performed on multi-agent locust foraging
     data from Günzel et al. (2023). Consistent with the original results, this analysis recovers that
     locusts use both individually and socially derived information to guide foraging decisions.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Posterior distributions of derived coefficients of food trace (t), proximity score (p), and
communication (c) for locust data.


                                                 20
