Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V ISUALIZING THE E MERGENCE OF P RIMITIVE I NTER -
ACTIONS D URING THE T RAINING OF DNN S

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT
             Although the learning of deep neural networks (DNNs) is widely believed to be
             a fitting process without an explicit symbolic structure, previous studies have dis-
             covered (Ren et al., 2023a; Li & Zhang, 2023b) and proven (Ren et al., 2023c) that
             well-trained DNNs usually encode sparse interactions, which can be considered as
             primitives of the inference. In this study, we redefine the interaction on principal
             feature components in intermediate-layer features, which significantly simplifies
             the interaction and enables us to explore the dynamics of interactions through-
             out the learning of the DNN. Specifically, we visualize how new interactions are
             gradually learned and how previously learned interactions are gradually forgotten
             during the training process. We categorize all interactions into five distinct groups
             (reliable, withdrawing, forgetting, betraying, and fluctuating interactions), which
             provides a novel perspective for understanding the learning process of DNNs.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has received increasing attention in recent years. A funda-
mental challenge in the realm of XAI is to identify primitives that reflect the inference logic behind
the output score of deep neural networks (DNNs). Analogous to taking semantic concepts as prim-
itives in human cognition, previous researchers hoped to examine whether a DNN also encoded
some kind of concepts (Zhou et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2018). However, up to now, there is still no
universally accepted formulation of semantic concepts in DNNs, because it involves joint issues in
cognitive science and mathematics. In recent research, Ren et al. (2023c) proved that under some
common conditions,1 a well-trained DNN usually encoded a relatively small number of interactions
among input variables (e.g. pixels and words). Thus, they claimed these interactions could be con-
sidered as concepts encoded by the DNN. For example, Figure 1(a) shows a DNN may encode an
interaction between two eye patches and a mouth patch, and this interaction makes a numerical util-
ity on the classification score of the cat category. Masking any of the three patches will invalidate
this interaction and remove its utility from the output.
Although we still doubt whether the interactions in (Ren et al., 2023c) can precisely represent con-
cepts in human cognition, a series of studies have indicated that interactions can still serve as primi-
tive inference patterns used by a DNN, to some extent. (1) Ren et al. (2023c) proved that even when
input variables in an input sample were arbitrarily masked, it was always possible to use a small
number of interactions to replicate the output score of the DNN. (2) Li & Zhang (2023b) demon-
strated the generalization ability of interactions in classification tasks. (3) Besides, (Cheng et al.,
2021) discovered that in image classification, each interaction between image patches potentially
corresponded to a specific visual concept.
Therefore, in this study, we adopt the above interactions as the primitives for the output score of a
DNN. In this way, the learning dynamics of a DNN can be roughly explained as the gradual emer-
gence of discriminative interactions and the progressive forgetting of incorrect interactions through-
out the training process.
Thus, our goal is to visualize the changes in primitive interactions during the learning process. How-
ever, previous research defined interactions on raw input variables, and the high dimension of inputs
boosted the computational complexity. Besides, some interactions between raw input variables are
    1
        Please see Appendix A for details.


                                                      1
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Figure 1



                                                                                           Principal directions
                                                𝑓 (1)        …                             𝑞3                𝑞1
                             𝑥1
                                                𝑓 (2)        …       features in 𝐾
                             𝑥2     Face                             checkpoints     PCA           𝑞4 Upper layers in the DNN


                                                         …
                                                             …                                          encode interactions between
                                             𝑓 (𝐾−1)                 of the DNN
                                                                                                        feature components along
                             𝑥3                 𝑓 (𝐾)        …                                 𝑞2       specific principal directions.
   (a) Interaction on raw input variables.              (b) Interaction on principal feature components.
   Figure 1: In this study, we extend the interaction based on (a) raw input variables to interactions
   based on (b) principal feature components.

   noisy patterns without a clear relation with the classification task. In order to provide a more concise
   explanation of the DNN, we redefine the interaction on top-ranked principal feature components in
   intermediate layers. As Figure 1 (b) shows, we consider the top-ranked principal feature components
   as basic “input variables” for interactions. We empirically verify that the proposed interactions on
   feature components are much sparser and more informative for classification than interactions be-
   tween raw input variables (see Figure 3). The sparsity of the interaction-based explanation suggests
   a high likelihood of representing the essential inference logic of a DNN, considering Occam’s Razor.
   In this way, the entire learning process of a DNN can be explained by the emergence of new in-
   teractions between feature components and the forgetting of old interactions. Thus, we visualize
   the emergence and forgetting of these interactions to analyze the learning dynamics of DNNs. We
   find that interactions encoded in a DNN can be categorized into five groups, namely reliable, with-
   drawing, forgetting, betraying, and fluctuating interactions. We further analyze the complexity and
   number of interactions in each group, which provides new insights into our understanding of the
   learning of different DNNs.


   2       R ELATED WORKS

   Explaining the inference of a DNN. Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Simonyan & Zisserman (2014); Doso-
   vitskiy & Brox (2016) directly visualized the receptive fields of intermediate-layer features in the
   DNN. On the other hand, Ribeiro et al. (2016); Zhou et al. (2016); Selvaraju et al. (2017); Sun-
   dararajan et al. (2017); Lundberg & Lee (2017) estimated the attributions or importance of input
   variables for inference. To explain a DNN as a symbolic system, Che et al. (2016); Frosst & Hinton
   (2017); Wu et al. (2018); Shih et al. (2019) distilled knowledge from a DNN to symbolic models to
   explain the inference logic of a DNN. However, these studies lacked sufficient mathematical support
   to guarantee their explanations really reflect true primitives encoded by a DNN.
   Quantifying interactions in a DNN. Compared with the above distillation-based symbolic expla-
   nation, defining and quantifying interactions within a DNN has emerged as a more straightforward
   approach to explaining primitives encoded by a model (Murdoch et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019;
   Jin et al., 2020; Sundararajan et al., 2020; Janizek et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2022). Recent works by
   Ren et al. (2023c); Li & Zhang (2023b) have demonstrated that, under some common conditions,1
   a well-trained DNN tended to encode a small number of interactions for inference. In this con-
   text, we propose to define interactions based on principal feature components, and we find that such
   interactions yield a much simpler explanation for a DNN.


   3       P RIMITIVE INTERACTIONS IN DNN S

   3.1     P RELIMINARY: INTERACTIONS

   Exploring the primitives of the inference logic constitutes a central concern in explaining a black-box
   system, just like explaining a set of cognitive concepts in the human brain. To this end, there is not
   any solid proof of whether a DNN encodes concepts that align with human cognition. Despite issues
   in cognitive science, Ren et al. (2023c); Li & Zhang (2023b) have provided sufficient mathematical
   evidence for us to consider interactions as some kind of inference primitives behind the output score
   of the DNN. Given a trained DNN v, let x ∈ Rn denote an input sample with n input variables (e.g.,
   an image with n image patches, a sentence with n words, and an intermediate-layer feature with n
   principal components). Let N = {1, 2, . . . , n} denote the set of indices for these input variables.


                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The DNN’s output is denoted by v(x) ∈ R.2 Li & Zhang (2023a) have defined the following two
types of interactions, i.e., the AND interaction and the OR interaction.
Definition 1-α (AND interaction). Let us use AND interactions to explain a function vand (x). For
a specific subset S ⊆ N of input variables, the utility Iand (S|x) of the AND interaction within S is
defined as follows. In particular, Iand (∅|x) = vand (x∅ ).
                                            X
                              Iand (S|x) =           (−1)|S|−|L| vand (xL )                       (1)
                                                    L⊆S

where | · | denotes the cardinality of a set. For each subset L ⊆ S, xL denotes a masked input
sample, in which the variables in N \ L are masked.3 Then, vand (xL ) ∈ R denotes the output on the
masked input. vand (x∅ ) denotes the output when we mask all input variables in N . Accordingly, we
obtain vand (xN ) ≡ vand (x).
Definition 1-β (OR interaction). Let us use OR interactions to explain a function vor (x). For a
specific subset S ⊆ N of input variables, the utility Ior (S|x) of the OR interaction within S is defined
as follows. In particular, Ior (∅|x) = vor (x∅ ).
                                             X
                             Ior (S|x) = −           (−1)|S|−|L| vor (xN \L )                          (2)
                                                    L⊆S

The AND interaction was first proposed by Harsanyi (1959) as the Harsanyi dividend. The OR
interaction can essentially be regarded as a specialized form of the AND interaction. This is achieved
by considering original variable values as masked states and taking the masked states (baseline
values) as conventional values of variables (please refer to Appendix B for details).
Figure 1 shows an interaction in an image of a cat’s face, where a function vand may encode the
AND interaction within S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }. The co-appearance of these three patches triggers the
AND interaction, thus contributing a numerical utility Iand (S|x) to the output vand (x). Conversely,
if any patch in S is masked, this AND interaction will be invalidated, and its utility Iand (S|x) will
be removed from the output, i.e., resulting in Iand (S|x) = 0. The positive (or negative) utility of
the interaction indicates the AND interaction among variables in S will increase (or decrease) the
output vand (x). Similarly, the OR interaction represents the OR relationship between variables, e.g.,
the existence of any patch in {x1 , x2 } indicates the eye of the cat. Thus, another function vor may
encode an OR interaction in {x1 , x2 }, and it has a utility Ior ({x1 , x2 }|x) to the output vor (x).
Li & Zhang (2023a) have proposed a method to extract both AND interactions and OR interactions
from a DNN. They disentangled the output score v(xL ) of the DNN into two components vand (xL ) =
0.5v(xL ) + γL and vor (xL ) = 0.5v(xL ) − γL with learnable parameters {γL }. In this way, it is further
proven that the DNN output v(x) can be decomposed as the sum of utilities of all interactions.
                                                    X                       X
                      v(x) = vand (x) + vor (x) =            Iand (S|x) +          Ior (S|x)                  (3)
                                                       S⊆N                   S⊆N

where the overall DNN output v(x) is disentangled into the output score vand (x) for AND interac-
tions Iand (S|x) and the output
                            P score vor (x) for OR interactions Ior (S|x). The parameters {γL } are
determined by minimizing S⊆N [|Iand (S|x)| + |Ior (S|x)|].
Considering interactions as primitives of the inference. The above interactions can be considered
as primitives of the inference logic of the model, because of the following three properties:
• Sparsity. Ren et al. (2023c) have proved that under three common conditions,1 a DNN usually
encodes very sparse interactions. Although there can be up to 2n different subsets S ⊆ N , they
prove that only a few subsets of variables exhibit considerable interaction utility (i.e., |Iand (S|x)| or
|Ior (S|x)| is large) for the DNN output. All other subsets have almost zero interaction utility. Let
Ωsalient denote the set of subsets S that have a large utility (large value of |Iand (S|x)| or |Ior (S|x)|).
• Universal approximating. Li & Zhang (2023a) have proved that a small number of interactions in
Ωsalient are already powerful enough to approximate model outputs on 2n randomly masked inputs.
   2
      There are various settings for v(x) when the DNN has multiple output dimensions. For example, in multi-
                                                                         p(y=y ∗ |x)
category classification tasks, v(x) is usually defined as v(x) = log 1−p(y=y     ∗ |x) by following (Deng et al.,
                 ∗
2022), where y denotes the ground-truth label of the input x.
    3
      In practice, people usually mask input variables in N \ L using baseline values {bi } (also called reference
values) (Ancona et al., 2019; Covert et al., 2020) to replace the original values in these input variables, i.e.,
setting xi = bi if i ∈ N \ L.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Given an input sample x, when we arbitrarily mask the variables in x to obtain the
masked inputs xS w.r.t. a randomly subset S ⊆ N , the DNN output on the P                  input v(xS ) can be
accurately
P           mimicked  by  the sum
                              P    of interactions,    i.e., ∀S ⊆
                                                                P N, v(x S ) = v(x∅ ) +      ∅̸=L⊆S Iand (L|x) +
  L∩S̸=∅ Ior (L|x) ≈ v(x∅ ) +   ∅̸=L⊆S,L∈Ωsalient Iand (L|x) +    L∩S̸=∅,L∈Ωsalient Ior (L|x).

• Generalization power. Li & Zhang (2023b) have discovered the generalization ability of interac-
tions. That is, people can extract a common set of interactions from different (but similar) inputs or
different models, and these interactions are discriminative for classification.

3.2    P RIMITIVE INTERACTIONS ON FEATURES

Previous studies commonly regarded raw pixels/words/3D points in an input image/sentence/3D
point cloud as the basic input variables of interactions. However, this approach face s challenges
when the input is high-dimensional, because it leads to a large number of interactions4 and also
boosts the computational cost. To circumvent these issues, we introduce a new perspective: we
redefine interactions on the top-ranked principal feature components in an intermediate layer of a
DNN. We discover that compared to interactions defined on raw input variables, defining interactions
on feature components can further enhance the sparsity of interactions.
Let us train a DNN, and collect the DNN trained after K different checkpoints (epochs). Given
an input sample, we extract the feature from a certain intermediate layer of the DNNs at these
K checkpoints, denoted by f (1) , f (2) , . . . , f (K) ∈ Rm . Subsequently, we conduct principal com-
ponent analysis (PCA) on the K features to compute the top r principal directions (eigenvectors)
q1 , q2 , . . . , qr ∈ Rm corresponding to the largest r eigenvalues. In this way, we extract feature com-
ponents along the top r principal directions, so as to use these feature components as basic “input
variables” to define the interaction. Specifically, for the feature f (k) extracted after k epochs, we can
decompose the intermediate-layer feature f (k) into the following (r + 2) feature components.
                                                    X
                                          f (k) =                  fi + f¯ + ϵ                                  (4)
                                                      i∈Nfeature

where Nfeature = {1, 2, . . . , r} denotes the indices of the top r principal feature components. fi =
qi qiT (f (k) − f¯) ∈ Rm represents the i-th principal feature component. f¯ = K      f (k) /K denotes the
                                                                               P
                                                                                  k=1
average feature during the learning process. ϵ = f (k) − f¯ − i∈Nfeature fi is referred to as the overall
                                                                 P

effect of all the remaining m − r feature components in f (k) .
In this way, if we consider f¯ + ϵ as a constant background, we can regard the r feature components
in f (k) as the variables involved in interactions. I.e., each interaction S ⊆ Nfeature represents the col-
laborative relationship between feature components in S. Here, because f (k) can be extracted from
any epoch, we ignore the superscript (k). Then, for a subset L ⊆ NP       feature , fL represents the masked
feature when we mask feature components in Nfeature \ L,5 i.e.,fL = i∈L fi + i∈Nfeature ,i∈L
                                                                                         P                 ¯
                                                                                                    / bi + f .
           def
We use bi = qi qiT (f |E[x] − f¯) to represent the masked state (or namely the baseline value) of the i-th
feature component. f |E[x] denotes the feature when the average value E[x] of all input samples in
the training set is fed to the model. bi represents the i-th feature component in the feature f |E[x] .
The DNN output v(x) can be also regarded as a function of the feature f , i.e., v(x) = g(f ), where
g(·) denotes the subsequent layers built upon the feature f . g(fL ) denotes the DNN output on the
masked feature. Thus, we can directly use Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) to compute the utility of interactions
Iand (S|f ) and Ior (S|f ) on feature components by replacing v(xL ) with g(fL ).
How many principal feature components are needed as input variables? To ensure the reliability
of the extracted interactions, it is crucial to examine whether the top r feature components are
sufficiently significant to represent most signals in f . Therefore, we conducted experiments to
visualize the significance of feature components along all directions (eigenvectors) in the DNN. For
each DNN, we fed an input sample x to the DNNs trained after K different epochs, and extracted
K feature vectors f (1) , . . . , f (K) from these DNNs. Figure 2 shows the eigenvalues obtained by
applying PCA to K feature vectors. We found that in most DNNs, the top 10 eigenvalues were
significantly larger than the rest. This observation suggested that the feature components along the
top 10 directions could well represent most signals within the features.
    4
      Nevertheless, the number of salient interactions with considerable utilities is still significantly lower than
the exponential number of all potential 2n+1 interactions.
    5
      Given that the components in ϵ in Eq. (4) are usually very small (see Figure 2), we ignore these components.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                income               TV news              bike                 SST-2             MNIST           CIFAR-10      ShapeNet
                                                                                    CNN               VGG-11         VGG-11         PointNet


eigenvalue 𝜆𝑖
                    MLP-5                MLP-5               MLP-5
                                         MLP-8               MLP-8                  LSTM              RN-20          RN-20
                    MLP-8


                                                                     index of eigenvalues
                Figure 2: Significance (eigenvalue λi ) of feature components in a descending order.
                            income             TV news           bike                  SST-2          MNIST       CIFAR-10     ShapeNet
          Using                MLP-5              MLP-5              MLP-5               CNN            VGG-11        VGG-11      PointNet
        raw input
        variables              MLP-8              MLP-8              MLP-8               LSTM           RN-20         RN-20

    Using
  principal
   feature
components
                                                                             different interactions
Figure 3: Comparison of sparsity of interactions. Relative strength of interactions on raw input
variables and that of interactions on principal feature components. For clarity, AND and OR inter-
actions were put together and sorted in descending order of relative strength. Using principal feature
components significantly enhanced the sparsity of interactions.

Experimental settings. We trained a 5-layer MLP (Ren et al., 2023b) (namely MLP-5) and an 8-
layer MLP (Ren et al., 2023b) (namely MLP-8) on three UCI tabular datasets (Dua & Graff, 2017),
including the census income (namely income), TV News channel commercial detection (namely
TV news), and bike sharing (namely bike) datasets. We also followed (Li & Zhang, 2023b) to
train a CNN and a three-layer unidirectional LSTM model on the SST-2 dataset (Socher et al.,
2013). Besides, we trained VGG-11 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) and ResNet-20 (He et al., 2016)
(namely RN-20) on the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2012) datasets, and
trained PointNet (Charles et al., 2017) on the ShapeNet (Yi et al., 2016) dataset. For the MLPs, CNN,
and LSTM models, we selected output features of the second fully-connected/convolutional/LSTM
layer for PCA. For VGG-11, we selected output features of the conv2 1 layer, and for RN-20, we
selected output features of the conv3 6 layer. For the PointNet, we selected the output features of
the input transform layer. We generated different masked samples on each training sample in tabular
datasets to generate features on different masked samples to perform PCA. Given each input sample,
all of its features collected from different epochs were used for PCA.
Cost of computing interactions between feature components. Compared to interactions on raw
input variables, interactions defined on feature components present a much smaller computational
cost. For the input x ∈ Rn , the computational cost of interactions on the n input variables in x is 2n .
When we define interactions on top r feature components (r ≪ m in most cases), the computational
cost of interactions is reduced to 2r , which is much less than 2n .

3.2.1            S PARSITY OF INTERACTIONS
If the network output on an input sample can always be explained by a small set of interactions, no
matter how we randomly mask the input, then the principle of Occam’s Razor suggests that we can
consider such interactions as primitive inference patterns encoded by the DNN. Otherwise, if a large
number of interactions are required to explain the DNN, then these interactions are less likely to re-
flect the essence of the inference logic used by the DNN. To this end, Ren et al. (2023c) have proven
the sparsity of AND interactions on raw input variables under simplifying assumptions, but these
assumptions are difficult to examine in real DNNs. Besides, we also extend AND interactions to OR
interactions. Therefore, we still need to verify the sparsity of interactions on feature components.
We conducted experiments to compare the sparsity of interactions on feature components with the
sparsity of interactions on raw input variables. In order to extract interactions on raw input variables,
we followed the experimental settings in (Ren et al., 2023b) to divide each input image in the MNIST
and CIFAR-10 datasets into 7 × 7 and 8 × 8 image regions, respectively. We randomly sampled
twelve image regions as twelve input variables to compute interactions. For the ShapeNet dataset,
we computed interactions using the manually annotated parts provided by (Li & Zhang, 2023b)
as input variables. To compute interactions on the top-ranked principal feature components, we
followed the “Experimental setting” paragraph to compute principal feature components. Then,
we used the top r = 10 principal feature components to compute interactions. For simplicity,


                                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 income             TV news            bike               SST-2             MNIST              CIFAR-10           ShapeNet


Average error
                                      MLP-5                  MLP-5        MLP-5                CNN                 VGG-11           VGG-11             PointNet



  E Δ𝑔 𝑓
                                      (3.0%)                 (3.8%)       (6.7%)               (0.4%)              (3.0%)           (6.3%)             (1.7%)
                                      MLP-8                  MLP-8        MLP-8                LSTM                RN-20            RN-20
                                      (7.7%)                 (30.9%)      (19.6%)              (0.3%)              (0.5%)           (0.9%)

                                                                        Number 𝛼 of the used salient interactions
Figure 4: Average error when we use different numbers of interactions to approximate the DNN
output. The bracket shows the minimum ratio α̂/2r+1 of the most salient interactions (i.e., the top α̂
interactions) among all
         income         2(r+1) interactions
                     TV news          bike that satisfy
                                                  SST-2 |g(f ) − MNIST              ≤ 0.1.
                                                                 ĝα (f )|/|g(f )|CIFAR-10 ShapeNet
               𝑔(𝑓𝑆 )error
            E𝑓 E𝑆 Δ𝑔 𝑓𝑆


                                       MLP-5                 MLP-5        MLP-5               CNN             VGG-11             VGG-11           ShapeNet
                                       MLP-8                 MLP-8        MLP-8               LSTM            RN-20              RN-20
            Average
network output


                                                                       Number 𝛼 of the used salient interactions

                                        Index of subsets 𝑆                          Index of subsets 𝑆                            Index of subsets 𝑆
                             (a) A sample in MLP-5 trained on          (b) An sentence in CNN trained on               (c) An image in RN-20 trained on the
                                    the census dataset.                        the SST-2 dataset.                               CIFAR-10 dataset.
Figure 5: Average error of using salient interaction to approximate network outputs g(fS ) on differ-
ent masked features. Outputs g(fS ) w.r.t. different subsets S were sorted in an ascending order. The
shaded area represents the approximation error when using the sum of interactions to match the real
network output g(fS ). We averaged the error over neighboring 50 subsets S.

we concatenated the strength |Iand (S|x)| of 2r AND interactions and the strength |Ior (S|x)| of 2r
OR interactions to construct a 2r+1 -dimensional vector I. The strength of all interactions was
normalized by I ← I/ maxi Ii to compute their relative strength. Then, we drew the curve of the
relative strength of interactions by sorting them in descending order. Figure 3 shows the average
curve over different input samples. We found that using the principal feature components could
significantly enhance the sparsity of interactions. Explanations based on such sparser interactions
were more likely to represent the primitives for the inference logic of a DNN.

3.2.2                            U NIVERSAL APPROXIMATION PROPERTY
In this section, we aim to verify that interactions defined on feature components can accurately
mimic the entire model output g(f ). We also followed the settings in the “Experimental setting”
paragraph to extract AND-OR interactions. Let Ωα denote the set of the most salient α interactions
with the largestP values of |Iand/or (S|f
                                       P)|. Then, we used the metric Ex |∆g(f )| = Ef [|g(f )− ĝα (f )|], w.r.t.
ĝα (f ) = g(f∅ )+ S∈Ωα Iand (S|f )+ S∈Ωα Ior (S|f ), to measure the approximation error of using differ-
ent numbers α of interactions. Given each input, we computed the least number of interactions α̂ that
were required to cover 90% of the network output g(f ), i.e., α̂ = min α s.t. (|g(f ) − ĝα (f )|)/|g(f )| ≤
0.1. Figure 4 reports the average approximation error over different samples and the average ratio of
the minimum interaction number (Ef [α̂/2r+1 ]), which shows that the network outputs were usually
well approximated by only using less than 10% most salient interactions.
We also conducted experiments to demonstrate that the sum of a few interactions could well approx-
imate various network outputs on an exponential number of randomly masked features {g(fS )}S .
Specifically, we measured the approximation error when we used the most salient α ∈ {20, 40, 60}
interactions, respectively. Then, we
                                  P computed ∆gα (fS ) = g(f PS ) − ĝα (fS ) as the approximation error
on fS , where ĝα (fS ) = g(f∅ ) + L∈Ωα ,∅̸=L⊆S Iand (L|f ) + L∈Ωα ,L∩S̸=∅ Ior (L|f ). Figure 5 shows
network outputs on all 2n masked features in an ascending order, and the shaded area represents
the approximation error. For visualization, we averaged the approximation error over 50 neighbor-
ing masked features for smoothing. The results show that a small number (usually less than 60) of
interactions could well approximate the varying network outputs on different masked features.


4                            V ISUALIZATION OF THE EMERGENCE OF PRIMITIVE INTERACTIONS

4.1                            V ISUALIZATION OF INTERACTIONS ON FEATURES

Visualization of principal feature components in the interaction. As the first step of visualizing
the interaction, we visualize each principal feature component fi involved in the interaction. We
draw a heatmap on raw input variables of the sample x that corresponds to each feature component
fi . Different types of data require different visualization methods, which are as follows.


                                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Input     Principal feature components       Input        Principal feature components      Input      Principal feature components
  image      1st      2nd      3rd    4th      image         1st      2nd      3rd    4th      object     1st      2nd       3rd   4th


           (a) RN-20 on CIFAR-10                           (b) VGG-11 on MNIST                         (c) PointNet on ShapeNet
 Figure 6: The top-ranked principal feature components. Please see Appendix D for more results.
   Input           Salient interactions         Input              Salient interactions       Input            Salient interactions
  image      1st       2nd      3rd     4th    image         1st       2nd      3rd     4th   object     1st       2nd       3rd    4th


           (a) RN-20 on CIFAR-10                        (b) VGG-11 on MNIST                        (c) PointNet on ShapeNet
           Figure 7: Visualization of salient interactions. Please see Appendix D for more results.

For Resnet   data. For an input image, let f ∈ RH×W ×C denote its intermediate-layer feature, where
      imagesign
H, W,   and C denotes the height, width, and channel number of the feature map, respectively. Let qi ∈
     normed
RH×W ×C denote the i-th principal feature direction of the feature tensor. We consider f to be a map
with H ×W positions, and the feature at each position is denoted by pj ∈ RC (j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , H ×W }).
Correspondingly, each feature direction vector qi can also be divided into H ×W vectors for H ×W
positions, i.e., qi,j ∈ RC (j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , H × W }). Then, we compute qi,j    T
                                                                                    (pj − p̄j ) ∈ R to represent
the significance of the feature component along the i-th feature direction at the j-th position, where
p̄j is computed by averaging the positional features pj extracted after different epochs. In addition,
si = qiT (f − f¯) represents the overall influence of the feature f along the i-th principal direction qi .
Thus, we use the metric Mj(i) = sign(si ) · qi,j  T
                                                    (pj − p̄j ) to represent the influence of the j-th position
in the feature map on strengthening the overall influence |si | of the i-th feature component.
In this way, we obtain a heatmap M(i) ∈ RH×W for each feature component, and we further rescale
the heatmap to the input size for visualization. Figure 6 (a,b) shows the resulting heatmaps, where
the highlighted regions represent patches that significantly influence the i-th feature component fi .
For point cloud data. Just like (Simonyan et al., 2014), we visualize the gradient of the significance
of feature components w.r.t. 3D points in the input. Given a point cloud x ∈ Rn×3 , let xj ∈ R3 denote
a 3D point, and let f ∈ Rm denote the intermediate-layer feature. For each feature direction qi , we
use |si | to represent the significance of the i-th feature component in f , i.e., si = qiT (f − f¯). Then,
we compute the gradient of |si | w.r.t. the 3D coordinates of each 3D point, M(i)  j = ∂|si |/∂xj ∈ R to
                                                                                                        3

represent the influence of the j-th 3D point on the i-th feature component. To visualize the influence
of different 3D points on the i-th feature component, we use the RGB color channels to represent
the three-dimensional gradient M(i) . We also normalize the gradients over different 3D points to the
range [0, 1] for visualization (please refer to the Appendix D for more details). Figure 6 (c) shows
the heatmaps of the top-4 feature components in PointNet trained on the ShapeNet dataset.
For language data. We use the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) to measure the attribution of each
word in the input sentence to the principal feature component. Given the feature f of the input
sentence x, we compute si = qiT (f − f¯) to represent the influence of the i-th feature component.
Then, we compute the following Shapley value to measure the contribution of each word in the
input to the influence si of the i-th feature component. Let Nword = {1, 2, . . . , n} denote indices of
all words in the input sentence. The Shapley value M(i) j of each word xj (j ∈ Nword ) measures the
numerical contribution of the word xj to the influence si of the i-th feature component, as follows.
                           (i)
                                  X
                       Mj =                                |T |!(n − |T | − 1)!/n! · si (xT ∪{j} ) − si (xT )                             (5)
                                       T ⊆Nword \{j}

where si (xT ) = qiT (f|xT − f¯) denotes the influence of the i-th principal feature component when we
input a masked sentence xT to the DNN. f|xT denotes the intermediate-layer feature extracted from


                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             A sentence with positive sentiment.                                                                A sentence with negative sentiment.
(1) equals the original and in some ways even betters it                                          (1) that ’s far too tragic to merit such superficial treatment
(2) equals the original and in some ways even betters it                                          (2) that ’s far too tragic to merit such superficial treatment
(3) equals the original and in some ways even betters it                                          (3) that ’s far too tragic to merit such superficial treatment
𝐼𝑎𝑛𝑑/𝑜𝑟 (𝑆|𝑥)


                                                                                                  𝐼𝑎𝑛𝑑/𝑜𝑟 (𝑆|𝑥)
                                  (1)                      (2)                            (3)                                            (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                0       200        400   0        200       400       0         200       400                     0           200         400     0       200       400       0      200       400
                       epoch                     epoch                        epoch                                          epoch                       epoch                     epoch
                (reliable interaction)   (betraying interaction)      (fluctuating interaction)                       (reliable interaction)    (withdrawing interaction) (fluctuating interaction)

Figure 8: Visualization of three salient interactions in training samples of the SST-2 dataset, and
how they are learned during the training process.

(a) reliable
    interactions

(b) withdrawing
    interactions

(c) forgetting
    interactions

(d) betraying
    interactions

(e) fluctuating
    interactions
                                                     0           50          100                                       0            50          100                       0         50         100
                                                             epoch                                                               epoch                                             epoch
Figure 9: Curves of the utility of interactions during the learning of DNNs. These interactions can
be categorized into five groups. Please refer to Appendix E for results on more samples.

the masked sentence xT . In this way, the Shapley values of different words serve as an attribution
map of different words to the i-th principal feature component fi . Please refer to Appendix D for
the visualization on the language data.
Visualization of interactions. Then, we visualize the interaction, which is composed of multiple
feature components. For each interaction S ⊆ Nfeature with a considerable utility Iand/or (S|x), we
accumulate the heatmaps {M(i) |i ∈ S} of all the principal feature components involved in S to
visualize the interaction. Specifically, for each principal feature component i ∈ S, we first normalize
its heatmap M(i) by M′ (i) = M(i) / maxj (|M(i)  j |). Then, we sum up the heatmaps of all the feature
components involved in interaction S to visualize interaction S, i.e., M(S) = i∈S M′ (i) .
                                                                                 P

Figure 7 visualizes interactions with the largest utility |Iand/or (S|x)| in RN-20 and PointNet trained
on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ShapeNet datasets. Figure 8 (b) visualizes interactions on the SST-
2 dataset. The red color indicates that the word has a positive attribution to the principal feature
component, while the blue color indicates a negative attribution.

4.2                 E MERGENCE OF PRIMITIVE INTERACTIONS DURING THE TRAINING PROCESS

In this section, we visualize the dynamics of interactions during the learning process. Then, we
find that the salient interactions encoded in the DNN usually can be categorized into five groups,
i.e., reliable interactions, withdrawing interactions, forgetting interactions, betraying interactions,
and fluctuating interactions. The number and complexity of interactions in each group provide new
insights into the learning of the DNN.
Specifically, let θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θT denote parameters of DNNs trained after different epochs t =
0, 1, . . . , T . We use Iand/or (S|x, θt ) to denote the interaction in the DNN after t epochs. In order
to visualize the dynamics of the interactions during training, we draw the curve of Iand/or (S|x) for
each salient interaction S across different epochs. For each DNN, we compute the interaction utility
based on the top r = 10 principal feature components after every five epochs. Figure 9 illustrates
the curves of Iand/or (S|x) for each salient interaction throughout the learning process.
Five groups of interactions. Figure 9 (a,b) shows the interactions belonging to the first and sec-
ond groups, respectively. In the first group, the strength of the utility of these interactions increases
throughout the learning process in a relatively stable manner. Thus, we can consider such interac-


                                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      RN-20 on CIFAR-10        VGG on CIFAR-10        RN-20 on MNIST                VGG on MNIST             CNN on SST-2
               reliable
               withdrawing
               forgetting
               betraying
               fluctuating


                     Figure 10: The number of interactions of each order in each group.
Table 1: Average number of interactions belonging to each group in the most salient interactions.
                                        Reliable   Withdrawing         Forgetting     Betraying    Fluctuating
            VGG-11 on CIFAR-10            28.4        26.4               6.0             26.6         12.6
             RN-20 on CIFAR-10            33.4        26.2               16.6            17.8          6.0
              VGG-11 on MNIST             44.2        21.4               5.8             20.8         7.8
               RN-20 on MNIST             49.6        18.2               18.0            12.6         1.6
                 CNN on SST-2             33.6        14.4                0.4            12.8         38.8


tions are stably learned by the DNN, and we call them reliable interactions. In the second group, the
utility of interactions is usually close to zero in the beginning. Then, the strength of their utility first
increases and then decreases, sometimes decreasing to almost zero. These interactions are referred
to as withdrawing interactions.
As Figure 9 (c) shows, the initial utility of interactions in the third group is non-ignorable. In
the third group, the interaction strength keeps decreasing to zero. These interactions are gradually
forgotten by the DNN. We call them forgetting interactions.
Figure 9 (d,e) show interactions in the fourth and fifth groups. In the fourth group, interactions
experience a gradual shift towards an interaction utility that is opposite to their initial utility. These
interactions are called betraying interactions. The interactions in the fifth group have fluctuating
interactive utilities throughout the learning process, being called fluctuating interactions.
The number and order (complexity) of interactions in each group. For each DNN, we selected
100 interactions whose maximum interactions strength (maxt |Iand (S|x, θt )| and maxt |Ior (S|x, θt )|)
throughout the training process were ranked in top 100 among all interactions. Then, we computed
the number of interactions belonging to each group among these 100 salient interactions. Table 1
reports the average number of interactions in each group over different samples. We found that
compared to VGG-11, RN-20 learned more reliable and forgetting interactions, while having less
betraying and fluctuating interactions. This might be because the residual connections in ResNet-
20 made the features more stable. Besides, we also noticed that the DNNs trained on the MNIST
dataset usually encoded more reliable interactions and less betraying and fluctuating interactions
than DNNs trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. This result indicated that the dynamics of interactions
provided us with a new perspective to analyze the difficulty of training a DNN on a dataset.
We further studied the complexity (order) of interactions in each group. Figure 10 reports the num-
ber of interactions of each order in different groups. We found that the distribution of interactions
over different orders were similar in different models. Besides, we found that high-order interac-
tions were usually fluctuating and withdrawing interactions, because high-order interactions usually
represented complex unstable features.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed a method for visualizing the changes in interactions encoded in
a DNN during the learning process. We have extended the interaction defined on raw input vari-
ables by (Li & Zhang, 2023a), and have newly defined interactions on principal feature components.
This extension greatly boosts the sparsity/simplicity of the interaction-based explanation of a DNN,
which enables us to visualize how different interactions gradually emerge during the learning pro-
cess. Based on the visualization of interactions throughout the entire learning process, we have
found that all interactions could be categorized into five groups, i.e., reliable, withdrawing, forget-
ting, betraying, and fluctuating interaction. The visualization of how a DNN learns different types
of interactions offers a novel perspective for understanding the DNN.



                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THIC S TATEMENT

In this study, we propose a method to define and visualize the emergence of primitive interactions
throughout the learning of a DNN, which can help us understand how a DNN learns features from
the dataset during the training process. The proposed interactions can be considered as primitive
inference patterns encoded by the DNN, and can faithfully explain the output scores of the DNN.
There are no ethical issues with this paper.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have provided proofs for the theoretical results of this study in Appendix B and Appendix C.
We have also provided experimental details in the “Experimental settings” paragraph in Section 3.2
and Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Marco Ancona, Cengiz Öztireli, and Markus H. Gross. Explaining deep neural networks with a
 polynomial time algorithm for shapley value approximation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
 Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 272–281. PMLR, 2019.

R. Qi Charles, Hao Su, Mo Kaichun, and Leonidas J. Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 77–85, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.16.

Zhengping Che, Sanjay Purushotham, Robinder G. Khemani, and Yan Liu. Interpretable deep mod-
  els for ICU outcome prediction. In AMIA 2016, American Medical Informatics Association An-
  nual Symposium, Chicago, IL, USA, November 12-16, 2016. AMIA, 2016.

Xu Cheng, Chuntung Chu, Yi Zheng, Jie Ren, and Quanshi Zhang. A game-theoretic taxonomy of
  visual concepts in dnns. ArXiv, abs/2106.10938, 2021.

Ian Covert, Scott M. Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Understanding global feature contributions through
  additive importance measures. CoRR, abs/2004.00668, 2020.

Huiqi Deng, Qihan Ren, Hao Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Discovering and explaining the represen-
  tation bottleneck of DNNS. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022.

Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox. Inverting visual representations with convolutional networks.
  In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas,
  NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 4829–4837. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.

Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.

Nicholas Frosst and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. In
  Tarek R. Besold and Oliver Kutz (eds.), Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Com-
  prehensibility and Explanation in AI and ML 2017 co-located with 16th International Conference
  of the Italian Association for Artificial Intelligence (AI*IA 2017), Bari, Italy, November 16th and
  17th, 2017, volume 2071 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2017.

John C. Harsanyi. 17. A Bargaining Model for the Cooperative n-Person Game, pp. 325–356.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1959. ISBN 9781400882168.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.

                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joseph D. Janizek, Pascal Sturmfels, and Su-In Lee. Explaining explanations: Axiomatic feature
  interactions for deep networks. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22:104:1–104:54, 2021.
Xisen Jin, Zhongyu Wei, Junyi Du, Xiangyang Xue, and Xiang Ren. Towards hierarchical im-
  portance attribution: Explaining compositional semantics for neural sequence models. In 8th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April
  26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie J. Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda B. Viégas,
  and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept
  activation vectors (TCAV). In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the
  35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm,
  Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2673–
  2682. PMLR, 2018.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. University of Toronto, 05
  2012.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
Mingjie Li and Quanshi Zhang. Technical note: Defining and quantifying and-or interactions for
 faithful and concise explanation of dnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13312, 2023a.
Mingjie Li and Quanshi Zhang. Does a neural network really encode symbolic concept? In Proceed-
 ings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023,,
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2023b.
Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Is-
  abelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N.
  Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017,
  Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 4765–4774, 2017.
W. James Murdoch, Peter J. Liu, and Bin Yu. Beyond word importance: Contextual decomposition
  to extract interactions from lstms. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings.
  OpenReview.net, 2018.
Jie Ren, Mingjie Li, Qirui Chen, Huiqi Deng, and Quanshi Zhang. Defining and quantifying the
   emergence of sparse concepts in dnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 20280–20289, June 2023a.
Qihan Ren, Huiqi Deng, Yunuo Chen, Siyu Lou, and Quanshi Zhang. Bayesian neural networks tend
  to ignore complex and sensitive concepts. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023,, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
  PMLR, 2023b.
Qihan Ren, Jiayang Gao, Wen Shen, and Quanshi Zhang. Where we have arrived in proving the
  emergence of sparse symbolic concepts in ai models. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.01939, 2023c.
Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should I trust you?”: Explaining
 the predictions of any classifier. In Balaji Krishnapuram, Mohak Shah, Alexander J. Smola,
 Charu C. Aggarwal, Dou Shen, and Rajeev Rastogi (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA,
 August 13-17, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. ACM, 2016.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
  tion. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice, Italy, October
  22-29, 2017, pp. 618–626. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
L. S. Shapley. 17. A Value for n-Person Games, pp. 307–318. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
   1953. ISBN 9781400881970.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andy Shih, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche. Compiling bayesian network classifiers into decision
  graphs. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-
  First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI
  Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii,
  USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019, pp. 7966–7974. AAAI Press, 2019.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image
  Recognition. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann Le-
  Cun (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB,
  Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2014.
Chandan Singh, W. James Murdoch, and Bin Yu. Hierarchical interpretations for neural network
  predictions. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Or-
  leans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Doina
 Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Mukund Sundararajan, Kedar Dhamdhere, and Ashish Agarwal. The shapley taylor interaction
 index. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020,
 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 9259–9268. PMLR, 2020.
Che-Ping Tsai, Chih-Kuan Yeh, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Faith-shap: The faithful shapley interac-
  tion index. CoRR, abs/2203.00870, 2022.
Robert James Weber. Probabilistic values for games, pp. 101–120. Cambridge University Press,
  1988.
Mike Wu, Michael C. Hughes, Sonali Parbhoo, Maurizio Zazzi, Volker Roth, and Finale Doshi-
 Velez. Beyond sparsity: Tree regularization of deep models for interpretability. In Sheila A.
 McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-
 18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18),
 New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018, pp. 1670–1678. AAAI Press, 2018.
Li Yi, Vladimir G. Kim, Duygu Ceylan, I-Chao Shen, Mengyan Yan, Hao Su, Cewu Lu, Qixing
  Huang, Alla Sheffer, and Leonidas Guibas. A scalable active framework for region annotation in
  3d shape collections. SIGGRAPH Asia, 2016.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 David J. Fleet, Tomás Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV
 2014 - 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part
 I, volume 8689 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.

Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Àgata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep
  features for discriminative localization. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 2921–2929. IEEE Computer
  Society, 2016.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMMON CONDITIONS FOR SPARSE INTERACTIONS

Ren et al. (2023c) have proven that under three common conditions, a trained DNN usually encodes
very sparse interactions. The three conditions are as follows. (1) The high-order derivatives of the
network output w.r.t. the input are all zero; (2) When we randomly mask some input variables, the
average confidence of the network inference over different masked samples monotonically decreases
along with the number of masked input variables. (3) The decreasing speed of the average inference
confidence is not faster than a polynomial function along with the ratio of masked input variables.

B    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AND INTERACTIONS AND OR INTERACTIONS

In this section, we provide a further discussion on understanding the relationship between AND and
OR interactions.
Given a DNN v(·) and an input sample x ∈ Rn , let b ∈ Rn denote the baseline values input
variables, which represent the masked states of variables in the input. Then, if the variables in
L ⊆ N are preserved and other variables are masked, the masked input xL is defined as follows.

                                                xi , i ∈ L
                                     (xL )i =                                                  (6)
                                                bi , i ∈
                                                       /L
Based on the P above definition of masked inputs, the AND interaction can be computed as
Iand (S|x) = L⊆S (−1)|S|−|L| vand (xL ). The OR interaction between variables in x is computed as
Ior (S|x) = − L⊆S (−1)|S|−|L| vor (xN \L ). To simplify the analysis, we assume vand (·) = vor (·) =
             P

0.5v(·).
Conversely, if we consider b as the input sample and take x as baseline values of input variables in
b, the masked input bL is defined as follows.

                                                  b, i∈L
                                        (bL )i = i                                               (7)
                                                  xi , i ∈
                                                         /L
According to Eq. (6) and Eq. (7), we have xN \L = bL . Therefore, we can rewrite the OR interaction
as follows.                                X
                             Ior (S|x) = −     (−1)|S|−|L| vor (xN \L )
                                                L⊆S
                                                 X
                                           =−         (−1)|S|−|L| vor (bL )
                                                L⊆S                                                         (8)
                                                 X
                                                             |S|−|L|
                                           =−         (−1)             vand (bL )
                                                L⊆S
                                           = −Iand (S|b)
Therefore, the OR interaction can be viewed as a special AND interaction by considering original
variable values x as masked states and taking the masked states b as normal values of the variables.

C    E XPLAINING ATTRIBUTIONS OF PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS

In this section, we prove that we can directly use the AND and OR interactions to estimate Shapley
values (Shapley, 1953) of principal feature components, which also demonstrates the reliability of
the extracted interactions.
The Shapley value is one of the most classic metrics for measuring the numerical contribution
(or attribution) of each input variable, i.e., the attribution of each principal feature component to
the DNN output g(f ). In the scenario of Shapely values, we consider the r feature components
f1 , f2 , . . . , fr (fi = qi qiT (f − f¯)) as r players. The inference score g(f ) is considered as the overall
reward obtained by all players (feature components). The Shapley value is proposed to allocate the
overall reward g(f ) to each player (feature component). Thus, we can consider the Shapley value


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the feature component fi as the attribution of fi to the DNN output. The Shapley value of the
feature component fi is given as follows.
                        X
              ϕ(i|f ) =                 |S|!(r − |S| − 1)!/r! · g(fS∪{i} ) − g(fS )          (9)
                                         S⊆Nfeature \{i}

The Shapley value has been proven (Weber, 1988) to satisfy the linearity, nullity, symmetry, and
efficiency axioms, thus being regarded as a fair metric for allocating the reward (i.e., the network
output g(f )) to different feature components.
Theorem 2 (proven in the supplementary material). The Shapley               value ϕ(i|f ) of each
                                                                                        1
                                                                     P
feature component fi can be reformulated as ϕ(i|f ) =                  S⊆Nfeature ,i∈S |S| Iand (S|f ) +
                    1
P
   S⊆Nfeature ,i∈S |S| Ior (S|f ).


C.1       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof: According to the definition of Shapley values, ϕ(i|f ) = ES⊆Nfeature \{i} [g(fS∪{i} ) − g(fS )].
For simplicity, we use g(S) to represent the output g(fS ) on the masked feature fS . Similarly,
we use Iand (S) and Ior (S) to represent Iand (S|f ) and Ior (S|f ), respectively. Besides, we use N to
represent Nfeature .
                                                                                   P
Then, according to Theorem 1 in the paper, we have ∀S ⊆ N, g(S) = g(∅) + L⊆S,L̸=∅ Iand (L) +
P
   L∩S̸=∅ Ior (L). Thus,

 g(S ∪ {i}) − g(S)
                                                                                                                                          
               X                                                 X                                   X                         X
= g(∅) +                               Iand (L) +                         Ior (L) − g(∅) +                 Iand (L) +               Ior (L)
                  L⊆(S∪{i}),L̸=∅                            L∩(S∪{i})̸=∅                           L⊆S,L̸=∅                   L∩S̸=∅
                                                                                                                      
                 X                                    X                            X                       X
=                            Iand (L) −                      Iand (L) +                    Ior (L) −            Ior (L)
        L⊆(S∪{i}),L̸=∅                           L⊆S,L̸=∅                      L∩(S∪{i})̸=∅               L∩S̸=∅
    X                                   X
=         Iand (L ∪ {i}) +                       Ior (L ∪ {i})
    L⊆S                             L∩S=∅
    |            {z           }     |                 {z          }
                 A                                    B

In this way, the Shapley value can be decomposed into ϕ(i|f ) = ES⊆N \{i} [A + B]. In the following
proof, we first analyze the sum of AND interactions ES⊆N \{i} [A], and then analyze the sum of OR
interactions ES⊆N \{i} [B].
          ES⊆N \{i} [A]
                     X
         =ES⊆N \{i}     Iand (L ∪ {i})
                          L⊆S
                 n−1
             1   X        1             X             X
         =               n−1
                                                            Iand (L ∪ {i})
             n m=0        m        S⊆N \{i}, L⊆S
                                    |S|=m
                              n−1
             1       X        X          1             X
         =                              n−1
                                                                Iand (L ∪ {i})
             n                           m
                 L⊆N \{i} m=0                       S⊇L,
                                                  S⊆N \{i},
                                                   |S|=m
                               n−1
             1       X         X             1             X
         =                               n−1
                                                                  Iand (L ∪ {i}) // since S ⊇ L, |S| = m ≥ |L|.
             n                            m
                 L⊆N \{i} m=|L|                         S⊇L,
                                                      S⊆N \{i},
                                                       |S|=m
                               n−1
             1       X         X             1            n − 1 − |L|
         =                               n−1
                                                                       Iand (L ∪ {i})
             n                               m
                                                            m − |L|
                 L⊆N \{i} m=|L|


                                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          n−1−|L|
           1     X             X                1   n − 1 − |L|
         =                                  n−1
                                                                  Iand (L ∪ {i}) // Let k = m − |L|.
           n                               |L|+k
                                                         k
               L⊆N \{i}        k=0
                          |                     {z              }
                                                     αL
               X            1                                                                  n
         =                       Iand (L ∪ {i}) // Ren et al. (2023a) have proven that αL =         .
                         |L| + 1                                                            |L| + 1
             L⊆N \{i}
               X          1
         =                   Iand (S) // Let S = L ∪ {i}.
                         |S|
             S⊆N,i∈S

Then, for the sum of OR interactions, we have
 ES⊆N \{i} [B]
              X
=ES⊆N \{i}         Ior (L ∪ {i})
                 L∩S̸=∅
        n−1
    1   X       1         X                X
=              n−1
                                                    Ior (L ∪ {i})
    n m=0       m       S⊆N \{i}, L∩S̸=∅
                         |S|=m
                    n−1
    1     X         X          1           X
=                             n−1
                                                     Ior (L ∪ {i})
    n                         m
        L⊆N \{i} m=0                    S∩L̸=∅,
                                       S⊆N \{i},
                                         |S|=m
                    n−1
    1     X         X          1               X
=                             n−1
                                                          Ior (L ∪ {i})
    n                          m
        L⊆N \{i} m=0                   S⊆N \{i}\L,
                                         |S|=m
                    n−1−|L|
  1       X             X           1               X
=                                  n−1
                                                             Ior (L ∪ {i}) // Since S ⊆ N \ {i} \ L, |S| ≤ n − 1 − |L|.
  n                     m=0         m
        L⊆N \{i}                           S⊆N \{i}\L,
                                             |S|=m
                    n−1−|L|
    1     X             X           1       n − 1 − |L|
=                                  n−1
                                                         Ior (L ∪ {i})
    n                   m=0         m
                                                m
        L⊆N \{i}
                    n−1−|L|
  1       X             X                  1     n − 1 − |L|
=                                     n−1
                                                                 Ior (L ∪ {i}) // Let k = n − 1 − |L| − m.
  n                                n−1−|L|−k
                                               n − 1 − |L| − k
        L⊆N \{i}        k=0
                    n−1−|L|
  1       X             X              1   n − 1 − |L|
=                                   n−1
                                                         Ior (L ∪ {i})
  n                                |L|+k
                                                k
        L⊆N \{i}        k=0
                    |                   {z             }
                                           αL
  1       X            n
=                           Ior (L ∪ {i})
  n                 |L| + 1
        L⊆N \{i}
        X          1
=                       Ior (L ∪ {i})
                |L| + 1
    L⊆N \{i}
        X        1
=                   Ior (S) // Let S = L ∪ {i}.
                |S|
    S⊆N,i∈S

                                                                                                             1
                                               P                        P                       P
Therefore,   ϕ(i|f )     =                         S⊆N \{i} [A]     +        S⊆N \{i} [B]   =       S⊆N,i∈S |S| Iand (S)   +
             1
P
    S⊆N,i∈S |S| Ior (S).


C.2      E XPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION


                                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additionally, we conducted experiments to examine the above
mathematical connection, i.e., using the utility of all AND                                            income – MLP-5


                                                                                 cos(𝜙, 𝜙)
                                                                                                       income – MLP-8


                                                                                        ෠
interactions and OR interactions to estimate Shapley val-                                              TV news – MLP-5
ues of principal feature components. Let Ωα denote the                                                 TV news – MLP-8
                                                                                                       bike – MLP-5
most salient α interactions with the largest |Iand/or (S|f )|.                                         bike – MLP-8
Then, we used all AND/OR interactions in Ωα to es-
timate the Shapley value P               of the i-th feature component,                   The ratio of the used concepts
                                                                 1
as follows. ϕ̂α (i|f ) =                   S⊆Nfeature ,i∈S,S∈Ωα |S| Iand (S|f ) +
                               1
                                               Figure 11 shows the co- Figure 11: The cosine similarity
P
   S⊆Nfeature ,i∈S,S∈Ωα |S| Ior (S|f ).
                                                                                  between the accurate Shapley val-
sine similarity between the accurate Shapley values ϕ =
                                                                                  ues and the Shapley values esti-
[ϕ(1|f ), ϕ(2|f ), . . . , ϕ(r|f )] and the Shapley values ϕ̂ =
                                                                                  mated using interactions.
[ϕ̂(1|f ), ϕ̂(2|f ), . . . , ϕ̂(r|f )] estimated using the top α salient in-
teractions. The results in Figure 11 indicate that the top-ranked
10% interactions had provided sufficient information to well explain the Shapley values.

D     M ORE VISUALIZATION RESULTS OF PRINCIPAL FEATURE COMPONENTS
      AND SALIENT INTERACTIONS

This section provides additional results of the visualization of principal feature components and
salient interactions.
For image data, Figures 12 and 13 show the visualization of principal feature components extracted
from the ResNet-20 and VGG-11 models trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset, respectively. Using these
feature components, Figures 14 and 15 visualize the salient interactions encoded in the two models.
Similarly, Figures 16 and 17 show the visualization of principal feature components obtained from
the ResNet-20 and VGG-11 trained on the MNIST dataset, respectively, and Figures 18 and 19
visualize the salient interactions encoded in these models.
For language data, we trained a three-layer unidirectional LSTM and a CNN on the SST-2 dataset,
respectively. Figure 20 shows both visualizations of feature components and salient interactions
in the LSTM network. Figure 21 shows both visualizations of feature components and salient in-
teractions in the CNN network. We found that most salient interactions in language data usually
only consisted of only a few top-ranked feature components. As a result, the visualization of salient
interactions was sometimes similar to the visualization of feature components.
For point cloud data, we visualize the gradient of the significance of feature components w.r.t. 3D
points in the input. Given a point cloud x ∈ Rn×3 , let xj ∈ R3 denote a 3D point, and let f ∈ Rm
denote the intermediate-layer feature. For each feature direction qi , we use |si | to represent the
significance of the feature component in f along the feature direction qi , where si = qiT (f − f¯).
In order to compute the gradient of |si | w.r.t. the 3D coordinates of each 3D point, We first add a
random noise δ ∼ N (0, 0.52 I) ∈ Rn×3 to the point cloud x, i.e., x(0) ← x + δ . Then, we compute
                                                                            (0)
                                                                      i |(x
the gradient of |si | on the perturbed input, i.e., ∇(i) (x(0) ) = ∂|s∂x  (0)
                                                                                )
                                                                                  . The gradient is added to
the input to further strengthen the feature component by x(1) ← x(0) + η · ∇(i) (x(0) ), where η is a
small constant. We iteratively compute the gradient ∇(i) (x(t) ) of the component significance w.r.t.
the modified input x(t) , and modify the input by x(t+1) ← x(t) + η · ∇(i) (x(t) ). We use the change
in the input point cloud M(i) = x(T ) − x ∈ Rn×3 to represent the heatmap of the principal feature
component.
In experiments, we repeatedly sampled 10 different random noises δ for each input, we computed
the gradients of points in the perturbed input for T = 20 iterations to obtain the heatmap M(i) . To
obtain a representative heatmap, we averaged the heatmaps M(i) obtained from the 10 randomly
perturbed inputs. For visualization, we took the three dimensions corresponding to each point in
M(i) as the RGB number to draw the heatmap. However, the RGB number must be in the range of
[0, 1]. Therefore, we used two methods to normalize the values in M(i) to the range of [0, 1].
                                                                     (i)
The first normalization method is to scale the value M̃j,c at each point j ∈ N in each channel
                                           (i)         (i)                 (i)
c ∈ {1, 2, 3} of the heatmap as M̃j,c = |Mj,c |/maxj {Mj,c } for visualization. Figure 22 shows
more visualization results of principal feature components in the PointNet learned on the ShapeNet
dataset, and Figure 23 shows visualizations of salient interactions.


                                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Input         Principal feature components             Input         Principal feature components
             image    1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th        image    1st       2nd       3rd     4th    5th


Figure 12: Visualization of principal feature components in ResNet-20 learned on the CIFAR-10
dataset.

Alternatively, the heatmap M(i) can be normalized in another way for visualization. We computed
   (i)       (i)           (i)
M̃j,c = |Mj,c |/maxc {Mj,c } for each point j ∈ N . Figure 24 and Figure 25 show the correspond-
ing heatmaps of feature components and salient interactions.

E    M ORE RESULTS OF FIVE GROUPS OF INTERACTIONS
This section demonstrates more examples of interactions, which are categorized into five groups,
i.e., reliable, withdrawing, forgetting, betraying, and fluctuating interactions.
In order to analyze the behavior of interactions, we first computed the interaction utility Iand/or (S|θt )
of each interaction S at different epochs t. Then, all interactions were sorted based on their maxi-
mum interaction strength maxt |Iand/or (S|θt )| throughout the learning process. We selected the top
3% interactions with the largest strength maxt |Iand/or (S|θt )| as salient interactions in the learning.
These salient interactions were further categorized into five groups, as shown in Figure 27 and Fig-
ure 26. Note that not all samples exhibited all five types of interactions, because we only considered
the top 3% salient interactions here. Other interactions with small strengths were regarded as noisy
patterns and were not discussed.


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Input         Principal feature components             Input         Principal feature components
           image    1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th        image    1st       2nd       3rd     4th    5th


Figure 13: Visualization of principal feature components in VGG-11 learned on the CIFAR-10
dataset.
           Input          Salient interactive concepts             Input         Salient interactive concepts
          image     1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th        image    1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th


  Figure 14: Visualization of salient interactions in ResNet-20 learned on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
            Input         Salient interactive concepts             Input          Salient interactive concepts
           image    1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th        image    1st        2nd      3rd      4th    5th


   Figure 15: Visualization of salient interactions in VGG-11 learned on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Input         Principal feature components             Input         Principal feature components
           image    1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th        image    1st       2nd       3rd     4th    5th


Figure 16: Visualization of principal feature components in ResNet-20 learned on the MNIST
dataset.
            Input         Principal feature components             Input         Principal feature components
           image    1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th        image    1st       2nd       3rd     4th    5th


Figure 17: Visualization of principal feature components in VGG-11 learned on the MNIST dataset.
           Input          Salient interactive concepts             Input         Salient interactive concepts
          image     1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th        image    1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th


   Figure 18: Visualization of salient interactions in ResNet-20 learned on the MNIST dataset.

                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Input               Salient interactive concepts                  Input              Salient interactive concepts
                 image          1st       2nd      3rd      4th    5th             image        1st        2nd      3rd      4th    5th


      Figure 19: Visualization of salient interactions in VGG-11 learned on the MNIST dataset.


                  Principal feature components                                              Salient interactive concept
 1st equals the original and in some ways even betters it                   equals the original and in some ways even betters it

2nd equals the original and in some ways even betters it                    equals the original and in some ways even betters it

 3rd equals the original and in some ways even betters it                   equals the original and in some ways even betters it

 4th equals the original and in some ways even betters it                   equals the original and in some ways even betters it

 5th equals the original and in some ways even betters it                   equals the original and in some ways even betters it

(a) The input sentence is “equals the original and in some ways even betters it”, with a positive
sentiment.

                   Principal feature components                                             Salient interactive concept
 1st like   to    skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know   like    to   skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know

 2nd like   to    skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know   like    to   skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know

 3rd like   to    skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know   like    to   skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know

 4th like   to    skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know   like    to   skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know

 5th like   to    skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know   like    to   skip    but     film   buffs   should   get   to   know

(b) The input sentence is “like to skip but film buffers should get to know”, with a positive sentiment.
                   Principal feature components                                             Salient interactive concept
 1st muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .              muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .

 2nd muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .              muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .

 3rd muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .              muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .

 4th muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .              muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .

 5th muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .              muddled , simplistic and more than a little pretentious .

(c) The input sentence is “muddled, simplistic and more than a little pretentious.”, with a negative
sentiment.
Figure 20: Visualization of principal feature components and salient interactions of three examples
in the LSTM trained on the SST-2 dataset.


                                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Principal feature components                             Salient interactive concepts
 1st has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive    has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive

 2nd has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive    has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive

 3rd has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive    has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive

 4th has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive    has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive

 5th has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive    has finally made a movie that is n’t just offensive

(a) The input sentence is “has finally made a movie that isn’t just offensive”, with a positive sentiment.

               Principal feature components                             Salient interactive concepts
 1st does n’t work because there is no foundation for it    does n’t work because there is no foundation for it

 2nd does n’t work because there is no foundation for it    does n’t work because there is no foundation for it

 3rd does n’t work because there is no foundation for it    does n’t work because there is no foundation for it

 4th does n’t work because there is no foundation for it    does n’t work because there is no foundation for it

 5th does n’t work because there is no foundation for it    does n’t work because there is no foundation for it

(b) The input sentence is “doesn’t work because there is no foundation for it”, with a negative senti-
ment.
               Principal feature components                              Salient interactive concepts
  1st many of the things that made the first one charming   many of the things that made the first one charming

 2nd many of the things that made the first one charming    many of the things that made the first one charming

 3rd many of the things that made the first one charming    many of the things that made the first one charming

 4th many of the things that made the first one charming    many of the things that made the first one charming

 5th many of the things that made the first one charming    many of the things that made the first one charming

(c) The input sentence is “many of the things that made the first one charming”, with a positive
sentiment.
Figure 21: Visualization of principal feature components and salient interactions of three examples
in the CNN trained on the SST-2 dataset.


            Input        Principal feature components               Input            Principal feature components
         point cloud 1st     2nd       3rd    4th     5th        point cloud   1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th


Figure 22: Visualization of principal feature components in PointNet learned on the ShapeNet
dataset. Heatmaps were normalized using the first approach in Section D.


                                                            21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Input        Salient interactive concepts               Input              Salient interactive concepts
       point cloud 1st     2nd      3rd      4th    5th        point cloud   1st         2nd      3rd      4th    5th


Figure 23: Visualization of salient interactions in PointNet learned on the ShapeNet dataset.
Heatmaps were normalized using the first approach in Section D.

          Input        Principal feature components               Input             Principal feature components
       point cloud 1st     2nd       3rd    4th     5th        point cloud    1st       2nd       3rd    4th     5th


Figure 24: Visualization of principal feature components in PointNet learned on the ShapeNet
dataset. Heatmaps were normalized using the second approach in Section D.
          Input        Salient interactive concepts           Input                 Salient interactive concepts
       point cloud 1st     2nd      3rd      4th    5th    point cloud       1st        2nd      3rd      4th    5th


Figure 25: Visualization of salient interactions in PointNet learned on the ShapeNet dataset.
Heatmaps were normalized using the second approach in Section D.


                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) reliable concepts


(b) withdrawing concepts

                           This sample has no forgetting
(c) forgetting concepts    concepts during the learning process.


(d) betraying concepts

                                                                                                     0         50          100
                                                                                                              epoch
(e) fluctuating concepts                                                                  This sample has no fluctuating
                                                                                          concepts during the learning process.
                                       0         50          100        0    50     100
                                                epoch                       epoch

             Figure 26: Curves of interactions in PointNet trained on the ShapeNet dataset.


                                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) reliable
    concepts

(b) withdrawing
    concepts

(c) forgetting
    concepts

(d) betraying
    concepts
                                                                                                                 0         200         400
(e) fluctuating                                                                                                           epoch
    concepts                                                                                        This sample has no fluctuating
                                                                                                    concepts during the learning process.
                                0         200        400                0         200        400
                                        epoch                                   epoch

                   (a) Curves of interactions in ResNet-20 trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

(a) reliable
    concepts

(b) withdrawing
    concepts

(c) forgetting                                                                                      This sample has no forgetting
    concepts                                                                                        concepts during the learning process.

(d) betraying
    concepts

(e) fluctuating
    concepts
                                0         50          100               0         50         100                 0         50         100
                                         epoch                                   epoch                                    epoch

                   (b) Curves of interactions in VGG-11 trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

(a) reliable
    concepts

(b) withdrawing
    concepts

(c) forgetting
    concepts

(d) betraying
    concepts
                                0         50         100                0         50         100                 0         50          100
(e) fluctuating                          epoch                                   epoch                                    epoch
                    This sample has no fluctuating          This sample has no fluctuating           This sample has no fluctuating
    concepts        concepts during the learning process.   concepts during the learning process.    concepts during the learning process.

                    (c) Curves of interactions in ResNet-20 trained on the MNIST dataset.

 (a) reliable
     concepts

 (b) withdrawing
     concepts

 (c) forgetting     This sample has no forgetting
     concepts       concepts during the learning process.


 (d) betraying
     concepts
                                                                        0         50          100                0         50          100
 (e) fluctuating                                                                 epoch                                    epoch
                                                            This sample has no fluctuating           This sample has no fluctuating
     concepts
                                                            concepts during the learning process.    concepts during the learning process.
                                0         50          100
                                         epoch

                     (d) Curves of interactions in VGG-11 trained on the MNIST dataset.

Figure 27: interactions can be categorized into five groups according to their curves during the
learning process.



                                                            24
