Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FTA: S TEALTHY AND A DAPTIVE BACKDOOR ATTACK
WITH F LEXIBLE T RIGGERS ON F EDERATED L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Current backdoor attacks against federated learning (FL) strongly rely on universal
             triggers or semantic patterns, which can be easily detected and filtered by certain
             defense mechanisms such as norm clipping, trigger inversion and etc. In this
             work, we propose a novel generator-assisted backdoor attack, FTA, against FL
             defenses. We for the first time consider the natural stealthiness of triggers during
             global inference. In this method, we build a generative trigger function that
             can learn to manipulate the benign samples with naturally imperceptible trigger
             patterns (stealthy) and simultaneously make poisoned samples include similar
             hidden features of the attacker-chosen label. Moreover, our trigger generator
             repeatedly produces triggers for each sample (flexibility) in each FL iteration
             (adaptivity), allowing it to adjust to changes of hidden features between global
             models of different rounds. Instead of using universal and predefined triggers of
             existing works, we break this wall by providing three desiderate (i.e., stealthy,
             flexibility and adaptivity), which helps our attack avoid the presence of backdoor-
             related feature representations. Extensive experiments confirmed the effectiveness
             (above 98% attack success rate) and stealthiness of our attack compared to prior
             attacks on decentralized learning frameworks with eight well-studied defenses.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL) has recently provided practical performance in various real-world applications
and tasks, such as prediction of oxygen requirements of symptomatic patients with COVID-19 (Dayan
et al., 2021), autonomous driving (Nguyen et al., 2022a), Gboard (Yang et al., 2018) and Siri (Paulik
et al., 2021). It supports collaborative training of an accurate global model by allowing multiple
agents to upload local updates, such as gradients or weights, to a server without compromising local
datasets. However, this decentralized paradigm unfortunately exposes FL to a security threat —
backdoor attacks (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b; Li
et al., 2023). Existing backdoor defenses on FL possess the capability to scrutinize the anomaly of
malicious model updates. Prior attacks fail to achieve adequate stealthiness under those robust FL
systems due to malicious parameter perturbations introduced by the backdoor task.
We summarize the following open problems from the existing backdoor attacks against FL1 :
P1: The abnormality of feature extraction in convolutional layers. Existing attacks use patch-
based triggers (“squares", “stripe" and etc.) (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2022b; Li et al., 2023) on a fixed position or semantic backdoor triggers (shared attributes within
the same class) (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). Consequently, the poisoned samples
are misclassified by the victim model towards the target label after backdoor training. However, we
found that prior attacks manipulate the samples with universal patterns along the whole training
iterations, which fails to provide enough “stealthiness" of the hidden features of the poisoned samples.
The backdoor training with such triggers attaches extra hidden features to the backdoor patterns or
revises current hidden features from the feature space in benign classes domain. This makes the
latent representations of poisoned samples extracted from filters standalone compared to the benign
counterparts. Figure 5 (a) intuitively illustrates the statement. Therefore, unrestricted trigger patterns
can cause aberrant weight changes in the filters for backdoor patterns. This abnormality induces
    1
        Due to space limit, we review prior backdoor attacks and defenses on FL in Appendix A.1


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of FTA. (I) Learn the optimal trigger generator gξ . (II) Train malicious model fθ .
Inference/Backdoor Attack: The global model performs well on benign tasks while misclassifying
the poisoned samples to the target label.

weight outliers which makes the backdoor attacks vulnerable to filter-wise adversarial pruning (Wu &
Wang, 2021; Liu et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020a).
P2: The abnormality of backdoor routing in fully connected layers. Compared with the benign
model, the malicious model needs to be trained on one more task, i.e. backdoor task. Specifically,
in fully connected (FC) layers, the backdoor task is to establish a new routing (Wang et al., 2018;
Carnerero-Cano et al., 2023), separated from benign ones, between the independent hidden features
of attacker’s universal pattern and its corresponding target label, which yields an anomaly at the
parameter level. The cause of this anomaly is natural, since the output neurons for the target label must
contribute to both benign and backdoor routing, which requires significant weight/bias adjustments
to the neurons involved. We note that last FC layer in the current mainstream neural networks are
always with a large fraction of the total number of parameters (e.g., 98% for Classic CNN, 62%
in ResNet18). As mentioned in (Rieger et al., 2022), the final FC layer of the malicious classifier
presents significantly greater abnormality than other FC layers, with backdoor routing being seen
as the secondary source of these abnormalities. Note that these abnormalities (P1-2) would arise in
existing universal trigger designs under FL.
P3: The perceptible trigger for inference. Perhaps, it is not necessary to guarantee natural
stealthiness of triggers on training data against FL, since its accessibility is limited to each client
exclusively due to the privacy issue. However, we pay attention to the trigger stealthiness during
the inference stage, in which a poisoned sample with a naturally stealthy trigger can mislead human
inspection. The test input with perceptible perturbation in FL (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Xie et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2023) can be easily identified by an evaluator or a user who can
distinguish the difference between ‘just’ an incorrect classification/prediction of the model and the
purposeful wrong decision due to a backdoor in the test/use stage.
P1-3 can fatally harm the stealthiness and effectiveness of prior attacks under robust FL systems.
The stealthiness issue can be seen in two aspects (trigger/routing). For P3, the visible fixed triggers
contain independent hidden features, and these hidden features lead to a new backdoor routing as
discussed in P1-2. Meanwhile, the backdoor inference stage cannot perform properly because those
triggers are not sufficiently hidden. For example, we recall that DBA (Xie et al., 2019), Neurotoxin
(Zhang et al., 2022b) and 3DFed (Li et al., 2023) use universal patterns that can be clearly filtered out
by trigger inversion method such as FLIP (Zhang et al., 2023). Moreover, P1-2 can cause weight
dissimilarity between benign and backdoor routing. And this dissimilarity can be easily detected by
cluster-based filtering, such as FLAME (Nguyen et al., 2022b). Efficiency problem is also striking
for P1-2 since extra computational budget is required to learn the new features of the poisoned data
and to form the correspondent backdoor routing. In this work, we regard the problems P1-3 as the
stealthiness of backdoor attacks in the context of FL.
A natural question then arises: could we eliminate the anomalies introduced by new backdoor
features and routing (i.e., tackling P1-2) while making the trigger sufficiently stealthy for inference
on decentralized scenario (i.e., addressing P3)?


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Visualization of backdoored images. Top: the original image; backdoored samples
generated by baseline/Neurotoxin, DBA, Edge-case, and FTA; Bottom: the residual maps. Our
flexible triggers appear as imperceptible noise.


To provide a concrete answer, we propose a stealthy generator-assisted backdoor attack, FTA, to
adaptively (per FL iteration) provide triggers in a flexible manner (per sample) on decentralized setup.
FTA achieves a satisfied stealthiness by producing imperceptible triggers with a generative neural
network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017) in a flexible way for each sample and
in an adaptive manner during entire FL iterations. To address P3, our triggers should provide natural
stealthiness to avoid inspection during inference. To solve P1, the difference of hidden features
between poisoned data and benign counterparts should be minimized. Due to the imperceptibility
between poisoned and benign data in latent representation, the correspondent backdoor routing will
not be formed and thus P2 is effectively addressed.
Specifically, the generator is learnt to produce triggers for each sample, which can ensure similar
latent features of poisoned samples to benign ones with target label (P1). This idea can reduce
the abnormality of creating an extra routing for backdoor in P2 since the latent features make
poisoned data “look like" benign ones with target label. Thus our trigger is less perceptible and
more flexible than predefined patch-based ones in prior attacks (P3). Further, to make the flexible
trigger robust and adaptive to the changes in global model, the generator is continuously trained
across FL iterations. Compared with existing works using fixed and universal trigger patterns, we
break this wall and for the first time make the generated trigger to be stealthy, flexible and adaptive
in FL setups. Compared to universal trigger-based attacks, e.g., 3DFed, our trigger-assisted attack
can effectively evade (universal) trigger inversion defense such as FLIP. Since our trigger generation
method forces poisoned samples to share similar hidden feature as benign one, the benign routing
can be mostly reused by poisoned data and thus the backdoor task is not purely learned from scratch.
Our trigger generation ensures that poisoned samples have similar hidden features to benign ones,
allowing poisoned data to reuse the benign routing. As a result, the backdoor task does not need
to be learned entirely from scratch, thereby achieving high attack efficiency, as shown in Figure 3.
Finally, we formulate the process of finding optimal trigger generator and training malicious model
in a bi-level, non-convex and constrained optimization problem, and achieve optimum by proposing a
simple but practical optimization process. We illustrate learning the trigger generator, training the
malicious model and testing the backdoor in Figure 1, and showcase various backdoor images in
Figure 2 to demonstrate the imperceptible perturbation by our generator.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a stealthy generator-assisted backdoor attack (FTA) against robust FL. Instead of
utilizing an universal trigger pattern, we design a novel trigger generator that produces naturally
imperceptible triggers during inference stage. Our flexible triggers provide hidden feature similarity
of benign data and successfully lead poisoned data to reuse benign routing of target label. Hereby
FTA can avoid anomaly in parameter space and improve attack effectiveness.
• We design a new learnable and adaptive generator that can learn the flexible triggers for global
model at current FL iteration to achieve the best attack effectiveness. We propose a bi-level and
constrained optimization problem to find our optimal generator each iteration efficiently. We then
formulate a customized learning process and solve it with reasonable complexity, making it applicable
to the FL scenario.
• Finally, we present intensive experiments to empirically demonstrate that the proposed attack
provides state-of-the-art effectiveness and stealthiness against existing eight well-study defense
mechanisms under four benchmark datasets.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     T HREAT M ODEL AND I NTUITION

2.1   T HREAT M ODEL

Attacker’s Knowledge & Capabilities: We consider the same threat model as in prior works
(Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Bhagoji et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b; Shejwalkar
et al., 2021; Panda et al., 2022), where the attacker can have full access to malicious agent device(s),
local training processes and training datasets. Furthermore, we do not require the attacker to know
the FL aggregation rules applied in the server.
Attacker’s Goal: Unlike untargeted poisoning attacks (Jagielski et al., 2018) preventing the conver-
gence of the global model, the goal of our attack is to manipulate malicious agents’ local training
processes to achieve high accuracy in the backdoor task without undermining benign accuracy.

2.2   O UR I NTUITION

Recall that prior attacks use universal predefined patterns (see Figure 2) which cannot guarantee
stealthiness (P1-3) since the poisoned samples are visually inconsistent with natural inputs. These
universal triggers (including tail data) used in whole FL iterations with noticeable modification can
introduce new hidden features during extraction and further influence the process of backdoor routing.
Consequently, this makes prior attacks be easily detected by current robust defenses due to P1-2.
Also, the inconsistency between benign and poisoned samples tends to be detected by defenders
during the global inference (P3) and the triggers can be inversed in decentralized setup.
Compared to prior attacks that focus on manipulating parameters, we bridge the gap and focus on
designing stealty triggers. To address P1-3, a well-designed trigger should provide 4 superiorities:
i) the poisoned sample is naturally stealthy to the original benign sample; ii) the trigger is able to
achieve hidden feature similarity between poisoned and benign samples of target label; iii) the trigger
can eliminate the anomaly between backdoor and benign routing during learning; iv) the trigger
design framework can evade robust FL defenses. A practical and effective solution that provides these
advantages over prior works simultaneously is the design of flexible triggers. The optimal flexible
triggers are learnt to make latent representations of poisoned samples similar to benign ones, thereby
making the reuse of benign routing possible, which can naturally diminish the presence of outlier
at parameter level. We propose a learnable and adaptive trigger generator to produce flexible and
stealthy triggers.
v.s. Trigger generators in centralized setting. One may argue that the attacker can simply apply a
similar (trigger) generator in centralized setup (Doan et al., 2021b;a; Zhao et al., 2022b; Li et al.,
2021b; Zhong et al., 2022) on FL to achieve imperceptible trigger and stealthy model update.
• Stealthiness. For example, the attacker can use a generator to produce imperceptible triggers for
poisoned samples and make their hidden features similar to original benign samples’ as in (Zhao
et al., 2022b; Zhong et al., 2022). This, however, cannot ensure the indistinguishable perturbation of
model parameters (caused by backdoor routing) during malicious training and fail to capture the
stealthiness (in P1-2) in FL setup. This is so because it only constrains the distinction of the input
domain and the hidden features between poisoned and benign samples other than the hidden features
between poisoned and benign samples of target label. In other words, a centralized generator masks
triggers in the input domain and feature space of benign samples, conceals the poisoned sample for
visibility and feature representation, whereas this cannot ensure the absence of backdoor routing
for poisoned data. A stealthy backdoor attack on FL should mitigate the routing introduced by
backdoor task and guarantee the stealthiness of model parameters instead of just the hidden features
of poisoned samples compared to their original inputs.
Learning. The centralized learning process of existing trigger generators cannot directly apply to
decentralized setups due to the continuously changing of global model and time consumption of
training trigger generator. As an example, IBA (Zhong et al., 2022) directly constrains the distance
of feature representation between benign and poisoned samples. This approach cannot achieve
satisfied attack effectiveness due to inaccurate hidden features of benign samples before global model
convergence. In contrast, we propose a customized optimization method for FL scenarios that can
learn the optimal trigger generator for global model of current iteration to achieve the best attack
effectiveness and practical computational cost as depicted in Section 3.3 and Appendix A.10.
• Defenses. We note that the robust FL aggregator can only access local updates of all agents other


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


than local training datasets. The centralized backdoor attack does not require consideration of the
magnitude of the malicious parameters. However, in reality, the magnitude of malicious updates
is usually larger than that of benign updates under FL setups. In that regard, norm clipping can
effectively weaken and even eliminate the impact of the backdoor (Sun et al., 2019; Shejwalkar
et al., 2021). Based on the flexibility of our triggers, we advance the state-of-the-art by enhancing
the stealthiness and effectiveness of the backdoor attack even against well-studied defenses such
as trigger inversion method on FL, e.g. FLIP. We note that FLIP is effective in removing back-
doors with patch-based triggers, whereas our proposed attack can effectively evade this SOTA defense.



3       P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY: FTA

3.1     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Based on the federated scenario in Appendix A.1.1, the attacker m trains the malicious
                                                                                     ∗
       to alter the behavior of the global model θ under ERM as follows: θm
models P                                                                                   =
                                             cln                            bd
argmin (x,y)∈Dcln ∪Dbd L(fθ (x), y), where D     is clean training set and D is a small frac-
    θ
tion of clean samples in Dcln to produce poisoned data by the attacker. Each clean sample (x, y)
in the selected subset is transformed into a poisoned sample as (T (x), η(y)), where T : X → X
is the trigger function and η is the target labeling function. And the poison fraction is defined as
|Dbd |/|Dcln |. During inference, for a clean input x and its true label y, the learned f behaves as:
f (x) = y, f (T (x)) = η(y).
To generate a stealthy backdoor, our main goal is to learn a stealthy trigger function T : X → X
to craft poisoned samples and a malicious backdoor model fθm     ∗ to inject backdoor behavior into

the global model with the followings: 1) the poisoned sample T (x) provides an imperceptible
perturbation to ensure that we do not bring distribution divergences between clean and backdoor
datasets; 2) the injected global classifier simultaneously performs indifferently on test input x
compared to its vanilla version but changes its prediction on the poisoned image T (x) to the target
class η(y); 3) the latent representation of backdoor sample T (x) is similar to its benign input x.
Inspired by recent works in learning trigger function backdoor attacks (Cheng et al., 2021; Doan
et al., 2021b; Nguyen & Tran, 2020; Zhao et al., 2022b), we propose to jointly learn T (·) and poison
fθ via the following constrained optimization:
                              X                        X
                      min            L(fθt (x), y) +          L(fθt (Tξ∗ (θ) (x)), η(y))
                        θ
                            (x,y)∈D cln                 (x,y)∈D bd
                                             X
               s.t. (i) ξ ∗ = argmin                   L(fθt (Tξ (x)), η(y))                         (1)
                                      ξ
                                          (x,y)∈D bd

                      (ii) d(Tξ (x), x) ≤ ϵ
where t is FL round, d is a distance measurement function, ϵ is a constant threshold value to ensure a
small perturbation by l2 -norm constraint, ξ is the parameters of trigger function T (·). In the above
bilevel problem, we optimize a generative trigger function Tξ∗ that is associated with an optimally
malicious classifier. The poisoning training finds the optimal parameters θ of the malicious classifier
to minimize the linear combination of the benign and backdoor objectives. Meanwhile, the generative
trigger function is trained to manipulate poisoned samples with imperceptible perturbation, while
also finding the optimal trigger that can cause misclassification to the target label. The optimization
in Equation (1) is a challenging task in FL scenario since the target classification model fθ varies in
each iteration and its non-linear constraint. Thus, the learned trigger function Tξ is unstable based on
dynamic fθ . For the optimization, we consider two steps: learning trigger generator and poisoning
training, and further execute these steps respectively (not alternately) to optimize fθ and Tξ . The
details are depicted in Algorithm 1 (please see Appendix A.2 for more optimization details).

3.2     FTA T RIGGER F UNCTION

We train Tξ based on a given generative network gξ , i.e., our FTA trigger generator. Similar to the
philosophy of generative trigger technology (Doan et al., 2021b; Zhao et al., 2022b), we design our


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trigger function to guarantee: 1) The perturbation of poisoned sample is imperceptible; 2) The trigger
generator can learn features of input domain of target label to fool the global model. Given a benign
sample x and corresponding label y, we formally model Tξ with restricted perturbation as follows:
                       Tξ (x) = x + gξ (x),     ∥gξ (x)∥2 ≤ ϵ       ∀x,    η(y) = c,                     (2)

where ξ is the learnable parameters of the FTA trigger generator and ϵ is the trigger norm bound to
constrain the value of the generative trigger norm. We use the same neural network architecture as
(Doan et al., 2021b) to build our trigger generator gξ , i.e., an autoencoder or more complex U-Net
structure (Ronneberger et al., 2015). The l2 -norm of the imperceptible trigger noise generated by
                                         gξ (x)
gξ is strictly limited within ϵ by: max(1,∥g ξ (x)∥2 /ϵ)
                                                         . Note that, under Equation (2), the distance d in
Equation (1) is l2 -norm on the image-pixel space between Tξ (x) and x.

3.3   FTA’ S O PTIMIZATION

To address the constrained optimization in Equation (1), existing function based attacks alternately
updating fθ while keeping Tξ unchanged, or the other way round, for many iterations. However,
according to our trials, we find that simply updating parameters makes the training process unstable
and harms the backdoor performance. Inspired by (Doan et al., 2022), one local round of FTA attack
is divided into two phases, and each phase is executed for only one iteration with fewer epochs. In
phase one, we fix the classification model fθ and only learn the trigger function Tξ . In phase two, we
use the pre-trained Tξ∗ to generate the poisoned dataset and train the malicious classifier fθ . Since the
number of poisoning epochs of malicious agents is fairly small, which means fθ would not vary too
much during poisoning training process, the hidden features of samples in target label extracted from
fθ will also remain similarly. The pre-trained Tξ∗ can still match with the final locally trained fθ .
In order to make flexible triggers generated by gξ adaptive to global models in different rounds, gξ
should be continuously trained. If a malicious agent is selected more than one round to participate in
FL iterations, it can keep training on previous pre-trained gξ under new global model to make our
flexible triggers match with hidden features of benign samples with target label from new model.

Algorithm 1 FTA Backdoor Attack

Input: Clean dataset Dcln , Global model fθt at            6:    Optimize ξ by using SGD with fixed fθt on
round t, Learning rate of malicious model γf and                 Bbd : ξ ← ξ − γT ∇ξ L(fθt (Tξ (x)), η(y))
trigger function γT , Batch of clean dataset Bcln          7: end for
and poisoned dataset Bbd , Epochs to train trigger         8: ξ ∗ ← ξ
function eT and malicious model ef .                       9: // Stage II: Train malicious model f t .
Output: Malicious model update δ ∗ .                      10: Sample minibatch (x, y) ∈ Bcln from Dcln
                                                              and (xm , ym ) ∈ Bbd from Dbd
 1: Initialize parameters of trigger function ξ and       11: for i = 1, 2, · · · , ef do
    global model: fθt .                                   12:    Optimize θ by using SGD with fixed
 2: Sample subset Dbd from Dcln .                                Tξ∗ on Bcln , Bbd : θ ← θ −
 3: // Stage I: Update flexible T .                              γf ∇θ (L(fθt (x, y))+L(fθt (Tξ (xm )), η(ym )))
 4: Sample minibatch (x, y) ∈ Bbd from Dbd                13: end for
 5: for i = 1, 2, · · · , eT do                           14: θ ∗ ← θ
                                                          15: Compute malicious update: δ ∗ ← θ ∗ − θ


4     ATTACK E VALUATION

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets and Models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of FTA backdoor through comprehensive
experiments on four publicly available datasets, namely Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), FEM-
NIST (Caldas et al., 2018), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and Tiny-ImageNet (Le & Yang,
2015). The classification model used in the experiments includes Classic CNN, VGG11 (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2015), and ResNet18 (He et al., 2016). These datasets and models are representative


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Fashion-MNIST        (b) FEMNIST           (c) CIFAR-10       (d) Tiny-ImageNet

 Figure 3: Fixed-frequency attack performance under FedAvg. FTA is more effective than others.
and commonly used in existing backdoor and FL research works. The overview of our models is
described in Appendix A.6. The details of tasks are depicted in Appendix A.3.
Attack Settings. As in Neurotoxin (Zhang et al., 2022b), we assume that the attacker can only
compromise a limited number of agents (<1% ) in practice (Shejwalkar et al., 2021) and uses them
to launch the attack by uploading manipulated gradients to the server. Malicious agents can only
participate in a constrained number of training rounds in FL settings. Note even if the attacker has
above restrictions, our attack can still be effective, stealthy and robust against defenses (see Figures 3
and 4). Also, the attack effectiveness should last even though the attacker stops the attack under robust
FL aggregators (see Figure 6 in Appendix A.4.1). We test stealthiness and durability of FTA with two
attack modes respectively, i.e., fixed-frequency and few-shot as Neurotoxin. i) Fixed-frequency mode:
The server randomly chooses 10 agents among all agents. The attacker controls exactly one agent in
each round in which they participate. For other rounds, 10 benign agents are randomly chosen among
all agents. ii) Few-shot mode: The attacker participates only in Attack_num rounds. During these
rounds, we ensure that one malicious agent is selected for training. After Attack_num rounds or
backdoor accuracy has reached 95%, the attack will stop. Under this setting, the attack can take effect
quickly, and gradually weaken by benign updates after the attack is stopped.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the performance based on backdoor accuracy (BA) and benign
accuracy according to the following criteria: effectiveness and stealthiness against current SOTA
defense methods under fixed-frequency mode, durability evaluated under few-shot mode.
Comparison. We compare FTA with three SOTA attacks, namely DBA, Neurotoxin and Edge-case
(Wang et al., 2020), and the baseline attack method described in (Zhang et al., 2022b) under different
settings and ten defenses (a variant of norm clipping based on (Sun et al., 2019), FLAME, Multi-Krum
(Blanchard et al., 2017), Trimmed-mean (Yin et al., 2018), RFA (Pillutla et al., 2022), SparseFed
(Panda et al., 2022), SignSGD (Bernstein et al., 2019), Foolsgold (Fung et al., 2020)), RLR (Ozdayi
et al., 2021) and Pruning (Wu et al., 2020b). We show that FTA outperforms 3 SOTA attacks (under
10 robust FL defenses) by conducting experiments on different computer vision tasks (please see
Appendix A.7 for more experimental setup details).

4.2   ATTACK E FFECTIVENESS

Attack effectiveness under fixed-frequency mode. Compared to the attacks with unified triggers,
FTA converges much faster and delivers the best BA in all cases since our poisoned data can reuse
benign routing of target label, see Figure 3. It can yield a high backdoor accuracy on the server
model within very few rounds (<50) and maintain above 97% accuracy on average. Especially in
Tiny-ImageNet, FTA reaches 100% accuracy extremely fast, with at least 25% advantage compared
to others. In CIFAR-10, FTA achieves nearly 83% BA after 50 rounds which is 60% higher than
other attacks on average. There is only <5% BA gap between FTA and Edge-case on FEMNIST in
the beginning and later, they reach the same BA after 100 rounds. We note that the backdoor task
of Edge-case in FEMNIST is relatively easy, mapping 7-like images to the target label of digit “1",
which makes its convergence slightly faster than ours.
Attack effectiveness under few-shot mode. As an independent interest, we test the durability of the
attacks during training stage in this setting. According to Appendix A.4.1, FTA has long-term attack
effectiveness even if we stop attacking early since the poisoned data with our well-learned triggers
contain similar features to benign data and can be naturally misclassified into the target label with
certain confidence by server model. Due to space limit, please see Appendix A.4.1 for more details.
Influence on Benign accuracy and computational cost. We include all benign accuracy results
across tasks in Appendix A.5. Like other SOTA attacks, FTA has a minor effect (no more than 1.5%)


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Fashion-MNIST      (b) FEMNIST          (c) CIFAR-10       (d) Tiny-ImageNet


           (e) Fashion-MNIST      (f) FEMNIST          (g) CIFAR-10       (h) Tiny-ImageNet

Figure 4: Attack stealthiness against defenses. (a)-(d): The variant of norm clipping; (e)-(h): FLAME.
on benign accuracy. Our attack does not significantly increase the computational and time cost due to
our optimization procedure (see Appendix A.10 for details).

4.3     S TEALTHINESS AGAINST D EFENSIVE M EASURES

We test the stealthiness (P1-2) and robustness of FTA and other attacks using 8 SOTA robust FL
defenses introduced in Appendix A.1.3, such as norm clipping and FLAME, under fixed-frequency
scenarios. All four tasks are involved in this defense evaluation. The results, see Figure 4 show that
FTA can break the listed defenses. Beyond this, we also evaluate different tasks on Multi-Krum,
Trimmed-mean, RFA, SignSGD, Foolsgold and SparseFed. FTA maintains its stealthiness and
robustness under these defenses. We put results of compared attacks under defenses in Appendix A.4.

4.3.1    R ESISTANCE TO V ECTOR - WISE S CALING
We use the norm clipping as the vector-wise scaling defense method, which is regarded as a potent
defense and has proven effective in mitigating prior attacks (Shejwalkar et al., 2021). On the server
side, norm clipping is applied on all updates before performing FedAvg. Inspired by (Sun et al.,
2019), we utilize the variant of this method in our experiments. As introduced in Appendix A.3, if
we begin the attack from scratch, the norm of benign updates will be unstable and keep fluctuating,
making us hard to set a fixed norm bound for all updates. We here filter out the biggest and smallest
updates and compute the average norm magnitude based on the rest updates, and set it as the norm
bound in current FL iteration.
As shown in Figure 4 (a)-(d), this variant of norm clipping can effectively undermine prior attacks
in Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, and Tiny-ImageNet. It fails in FEMNIST because benign updates
have a larger norm (for example, 1.2 in FEMNIST at round 10, but only 0.3 in Fashion-MNIST),
which cannot effectively clip the norm of malicious updates, thus resulting in a higher BA of existing
attacks. We see that FTA provides the best BA which is less influenced by clipping than others. FTA
only needs a much smaller norm to effectively fool the global model. Although converging a bit
slowly in FEMNIST, FTA can finally output a similar performance (above 98%) compared to others.

4.3.2    R ESISTANCE TO C LUSTER - BASED F ILTERING
The cluster-based filtering defense method is FLAME, which has demonstrated its effectiveness in
mitigating SOTA attacks against FL. It mainly uses HDBSCAN clustering algorithm based on cosine
similarity between all updates and strains the updates with the least similarity compared with other
updates. In Figure 4 (e)-(h), we see that FLAME can effectively sieve malicious updates of other
attacks in Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR-10, but provides relatively weak effectiveness in FEMNIST
and Tiny-ImageNet. This is so because data distribution among different agents are fairly in non-i.i.d.
manner. Cosine similarity between benign updates is naturally low, making malicious update possibly
evade from the clustering filter.
Similar to result of Multi-Krum (see Appendix A.4.2), FTA achieves >99% BA and finishes the
convergence within 50 rounds in CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet, while delivering an acceptable


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) Baseline Attack          (b) FTA            (c) Euclidean distance   (d) Cosine similarity

Figure 5: (a)-(b): T-SNE visualization of hidden features of input samples in CIFAR-10. The hidden
features between poisoned and benign samples of target label is indistinguishable in FTA framework.
(c)-(d): Similarity comparison between benign & malicious updates. FTA’s malicious updates is more
similar to benign updates than the baseline attack’s.
degradation of accuracy, <20%, in Fashion-MNIST. In FEMNIST, FTA converges slightly slower
than baseline and Neurotoxin but eventually maintains a similar accuracy with only 2% difference.
The result proves that FTA enforces malicious updates to have highly cosine-similarity against benign
updates due to same reason in Appendix A.4.2, so it can bypass defenses based on model similarity.

4.4   E XPLANATION VIA F EATURE V ISUALIZATION BY T-SNE

We use t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization result on CIFAR-10 to illustrate
why FTA is more stealthy than the attacks without “flexible" triggers. We select 1,000 images from
different classes uniformly and choose another 100 images randomly from the dataset and add triggers
to them (in particular, patch-based trigger “square" in baseline method, flexible triggers in FTA).
To analyze the hidden features of these samples, we use two global poisoned models injected by
baseline attack and FTA respectively. We exploit the output of each sample in the last convolutional
layer as the feature representation. Next, we apply dimensionality reduction techniques and cluster
the latent representations of these samples using t-SNE. From Figure 5 (a)-(b), We see that in the
baseline, the distance of clusters between images of the target label “7” and the poisoned images are
clearly distinguishable. So the parameters responsible for backdoor routing should do adjustments to
map the hidden representations of poisoned images to target label. In FTA, the hidden features of
poisoned data overlapped with benign data of target label, which eliminates the anomaly in feature
extraction (P1). FTA can reuse the benign routing in FC layers for backdoor tasks, resulting in much
less abnormality in backdoor routing (P2), thus the malicious updates can be more similar to benign
ones, see Figure 5 (c)-(d), producing a natural parameter stealthiness.

4.5   NATURAL S TEALTHINESS

We evaluate natural stealthiness of our poisoned data by SSIM (Wang et al., 2004) and LPIPS (Zhang
et al., 2018) to indicate that P3 is well addressed by flexible triggers (see Appendix A.9 for results).

4.6   A BLATION S TUDY IN FTA ATTACK

We here analyze several hyperparameters that are critical for the FTA’s performance including trigger
size, poison fraction and batch size of our generator (please see Appendix A.8 for details).

5     C ONCLUSION
We design an effective and stealthy backdoor attack against FL called FTA by learning an adaptive
generator to produce imperceptible and flexible triggers, making poisoned samples have similar
hidden features to benign samples with target label. FTA can provide stealthiness and robustness in
making hidden features of poisoned samples consistent with benign samples of target label; reducing
the abnormality of parameters during backdoor task training; manipulating triggers with imperceptible
perturbation for training/testing stage; learning the adaptive trigger generator across different FL
rounds to generate flexible triggers with best performance. The empirical experiments demonstrate
that FTA can achieve a practical performance to evade SOTA FL defenses. Due to the space limit, we
present discussions on the proposed attack and experiments in Appendix A.12. We hope this work
can inspire follow-up studies that provide more secure and robust FL aggregation algorithms.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
 on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 214–223.
 PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly Shmatikov. How to
  backdoor federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2938–2948. PMLR, 2020.
Jeremy Bernstein, Jiawei Zhao, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. signsgd with
  majority vote is communication efficient and fault tolerant, 2019.
Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Supriyo Chakraborty, Prateek Mittal, and Seraphin Calo. Analyzing federated
  learning through an adversarial lens. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  634–643. PMLR, 2019.
Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning with
  adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for federated
  learning on user-held data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04482, 2016.
Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
Xiaoyu Cao, Minghong Fang, Jia Liu, and Neil Gong. Fltrust: Byzantine-robust federated learning
  via trust bootstrapping. In Proceedings of NDSS, 2021.
Xiaoyu Cao, Zaixi Zhang, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Flcert: Provably secure federated
  learning against poisoning attacks, 2022.
Javier Carnerero-Cano, Luis Muñoz-González, Phillippa Spencer, and Emil C Lupu. Hyperparameter
  learning under data poisoning: Analysis of the influence of regularization via multiobjective bilevel
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01613, 2023.
Siyuan Cheng, Yingqi Liu, Shiqing Ma, and Xiangyu Zhang. Deep feature space trojan attack of
  neural networks by controlled detoxification. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 1148–1156, 2021.
Yanbo Dai and Songze Li. Chameleon: Adapting to peer images for planting durable backdoors in
  federated learning, 2023.
Ittai Dayan, Holger R Roth, Aoxiao Zhong, Ahmed Harouni, Amilcare Gentili, Anas Z Abidin,
   Andrew Liu, Anthony Beardsworth Costa, Bradford J Wood, Chien-Sung Tsai, et al. Federated
   learning for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. Nature medicine, 27(10):
   1735–1743, 2021.
Khoa Doan, Yingjie Lao, and Ping Li. Backdoor attack with imperceptible input and latent modifica-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18944–18957, 2021a.
Khoa Doan, Yingjie Lao, Weijie Zhao, and Ping Li. Lira: Learnable, imperceptible and robust
  backdoor attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 11966–11976, 2021b.
Khoa D Doan, Yingjie Lao, and Ping Li. Marksman backdoor: Backdoor attacks with arbitrary target
  class. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09194, 2022.
Clement Fung, Chris J. M. Yoon, and Ivan Beschastnikh. The Limitations of Federated Learning in
  Sybil Settings. In Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusion, and Defenses, RAID, 2020.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Matthew Jagielski, Alina Oprea, Battista Biggio, Chang Liu, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Bo Li.
 Manipulating machine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures for regression learning. In
 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 19–35. IEEE, 2018.
Jing Jiang, Shaoxiong Ji, and Guodong Long. Decentralized knowledge acquisition for mobile
   internet applications. World Wide Web, 23(5):2653–2669, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Huseyin Kusetogullari, Amir Yavariabdi, Abbas Cheddad, Håkan Grahn, and Johan Hall. Ardis:
  a swedish historical handwritten digit dataset. Neural Computing and Applications, 32(21):
 16505–16518, 2020.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Haoyang Li, Qingqing Ye, Haibo Hu, Jin Li, Leixia Wang, Chengfang Fang, and Jie Shi. 3dfed:
  Adaptive and extensible framework for covert backdoor attack in federated learning. In 2023 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1893–1907, 2023. doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.
 10179401.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and systems,
  2:429–450, 2020.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated learning
  through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6357–6368. PMLR,
  2021a.
Yuezun Li, Yiming Li, Baoyuan Wu, Longkang Li, Ran He, and Siwei Lyu. Invisible backdoor
  attack with sample-specific triggers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 16463–16472, 2021b.
Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. Fine-pruning: Defending against backdooring
  attacks on deep neural networks. In International symposium on research in attacks, intrusions,
  and defenses, pp. 273–294. Springer, 2018.
Yang Liu, Yan Kang, Xinwei Zhang, Liping Li, Yong Cheng, Tianjian Chen, Mingyi Hong, and
  Qiang Yang. A communication efficient collaborative learning framework for distributed features.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11187, 2019.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Anh Nguyen, Tuong Do, Minh Tran, Binh X Nguyen, Chien Duong, Tu Phan, Erman Tjiputra, and
  Quang D Tran. Deep federated learning for autonomous driving. In 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
 Symposium (IV), pp. 1824–1830. IEEE, 2022a.
Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip Rieger, Huili Chen, Hossein Yalame, Helen Möllering, Hossein Fereidooni,
  Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Azalia Mirhoseini, Shaza Zeitouni, Farinaz Koushanfar,
  Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Thomas Schneider. FLAME: Taming backdoors in federated learning.
  In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), pp. 1415–1432, Boston, MA, August
  2022b. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-31-1.
Tuan Anh Nguyen and Anh Tran. Input-aware dynamic backdoor attack. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:3454–3464, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mustafa Safa Ozdayi, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Yulia R Gel. Defending against backdoors in federated
 learning with robust learning rate. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 35, pp. 9268–9276, 2021.

Ashwinee Panda, Saeed Mahloujifar, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Supriyo Chakraborty, and Prateek Mittal.
  Sparsefed: Mitigating model poisoning attacks in federated learning with sparsification. In
  Gustau Camps-Valls, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.), Proceedings of The 25th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 7587–7624. PMLR, 28–30 Mar 2022.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.

Matthias Paulik, Matt Seigel, Henry Mason, Dominic Telaar, Joris Kluivers, Rogier C. van Dalen,
 Chi Wai Lau, Luke Carlson, Filip Granqvist, Chris Vandevelde, Sudeep Agarwal, Julien Freudiger,
 Andrew Byde, Abhishek Bhowmick, Gaurav Kapoor, Si Beaumont, Áine Cahill, Dominic Hughes,
 Omid Javidbakht, Fei Dong, Rehan Rishi, and Stanley Hung. Federated evaluation and tuning for
 on-device personalization: System design & applications. CoRR, abs/2102.08503, 2021.

Krishna Pillutla, Sham M. Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. Robust aggregation for federated learning,
  2022.

Phillip Rieger, Thien Duc Nguyen, Markus Miettinen, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. Deepsight:
  Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated learning through deep model inspection. In NDSS, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Virat Shejwalkar and Amir Houmansadr. Manipulating the byzantine: Optimizing model poisoning
  attacks and defenses for federated learning. In NDSS, 2021.

Virat Shejwalkar, Amir Houmansadr, Peter Kairouz, and Daniel Ramage. Back to the drawing board:
  A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production federated learning. 2022 IEEE Symposium
  on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1354–1371, 2021.

Shiqi Shen, Shruti Tople, and Prateek Saxena. Auror: Defending against poisoning attacks in
  collaborative deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference on Computer
  Security Applications, ACSAC ’16, pp. 508–519, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for
  Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450347716. doi: 10.1145/2991079.2991125.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Ziteng Sun, Peter Kairouz, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and H Brendan McMahan. Can you really
  backdoor federated learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07963, 2019.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.

Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Harit Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong
  Sohn, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can
  backdoor federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16070–
 16084, 2020.

Yulong Wang, Hang Su, Bo Zhang, and Xiaolin Hu. Interpret neural networks by identifying
  critical data routing paths. In proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 8906–8914, 2018.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from
  error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–612,
  2004.
Chen Wu, Xian Yang, Sencun Zhu, and Prasenjit Mitra. Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01767, 2020a.
Chen Wu, Xian Yang, Sencun Zhu, and Prasenjit Mitra. Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01767, 2020b.
Dongxian Wu and Yisen Wang. Adversarial neuron pruning purifies backdoored deep models.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16913–16925, 2021.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Chulin Xie, Keli Huang, Pin-Yu Chen, and Bo Li. Dba: Distributed backdoor attacks against federated
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Chulin Xie, Minghao Chen, Pin-Yu Chen, and Bo Li. Crfl: Certifiably robust federated learning
  against backdoor attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11372–11382.
  PMLR, 2021.
Timothy Yang, Galen Andrew, Hubert Eichner, Haicheng Sun, Wei Li, Nicholas Kong, Daniel
  Ramage, and Françoise Beaufays. Applied federated learning: Improving google keyboard query
  suggestions, 2018.
Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5650–5659. PMLR, 2018.
Tao Yu, Eugene Bagdasaryan, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Salvaging federated learning by local adaptation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04758, 2020.
Kaiyuan Zhang, Guanhong Tao, Qiuling Xu, Siyuan Cheng, Shengwei An, Yingqi Liu, Shiwei
  Feng, Guangyu Shen, Pin-Yu Chen, Shiqing Ma, and Xiangyu Zhang. FLIP: A provable defense
  framework for backdoor mitigation in federated learning. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Zaixi Zhang, Xiaoyu Cao, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Fldetector: Defending federated learning
  against model poisoning attacks via detecting malicious clients. In KDD, 2022a.
Zhengming Zhang, Ashwinee Panda, Linyue Song, Yaoqing Yang, Michael Mahoney, Prateek
  Mittal, Ramchandran Kannan, and Joseph Gonzalez. Neurotoxin: Durable backdoors in federated
  learning. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 26429–26446. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022b.
Bo Zhao, Peng Sun, Tao Wang, and Keyu Jiang. Fedinv: Byzantine-robust federated learning by
  inversing local model updates. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 9171–9179, 2022a.
Zhendong Zhao, Xiaojun Chen, Yuexin Xuan, Ye Dong, Dakui Wang, and Kaitai Liang. Defeat: Deep
  hidden feature backdoor attacks by imperceptible perturbation and latent representation constraints.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  15213–15222, 2022b.
Nan Zhong, Zhenxing Qian, and Xinpeng Zhang. Imperceptible backdoor attack: From input space
  to feature representation. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.



                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     R ELATED WORK

A.1.1    F EDERATED L EARNING
Consider the empirical risk minimization (ERM) in FL setting where the goal is to learn a global
classifier fθ : X → Y that maps an input x ∈ X to a target label y ∈ Y. Recall that the FL server
cannot access to training dataset. It aggregates the parameters/gradients from local agents performing
centralized training with local datasets. The de-facto standard rule for aggregating the updates is
so-called FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017). The trainingPn     task is to learn the global parameters θ by
solving the finite-sum optimization: min fθ = n1 i=1 fθi , where n is the number of participating
                                         θ
agents. At round t, the server S randomly selects nt ∈ {1, 2, ..., n} agents to participate in the
aggregation and sends the global model θt to them. Each of the agents i trains its local classifier
fθi : Xi → Yi with its local dataset Di = {(xj , yj ) : xj ∈ Xi , yj ∈ Yi , j = 1, 2, ..., N } for some
epochs, where N = |Di |, by certain optimization algorithm, e.g.,P stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
The objective of agent i is to train a local model as: θi∗ = argmin (xj ,yj )∈Di L(fθt (xj ), yj ), where
                                                               θt
L stands for the classification loss, e.g., cross-entropy loss. Then agent i computes its local update as
δit = θi∗ − θt , and sends back to S. Finally, the Pserver aggregates all updates and produces the new
global model with an average θt+1 = θt + |nγt | i∈nt δit . where γ is the global learning rate. When
the global model θ converges or the training reaches a specific iteration upper bound, the aggregation
process terminates and outputs a final global model. During inference, given a benign sample x and
its true label y, the learned global classifier fθ will behave well as: fθ (x) = y.
Optimizations of FL have been proposed for various purposes, e.g., privacy (Bonawitz et al., 2016),
security (Blanchard et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2022a), heterogeneity (Li et al., 2020), communication
efficiency (Liu et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020) and personalization issues (Li et al., 2021a; Yu et al.,
2020).

A.1.2    BACKDOOR ATTACKS
Backdoor Attacks on FL. Current backdoor attacks can poison data and models. In data poisoning
(Shen et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2019), the attacker poisons the benign samples with a trigger pattern and
marks them as a target label in order to induce the model to misbehave by training this poisoned dataset.
As for model poisoning (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), the attacker manipulates the
training process by modifying parameters and scaling the malicious update to maximize the attack
effectiveness while evading anomaly detection of robust FL aggregators (Blanchard et al., 2017; Sun
et al., 2019; Panda et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2022b; Rieger et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2018; Bernstein
et al., 2019).
The most well-known backdoor attack on FL is introduced in (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020), where the
adversary scales up the weights of malicious model updates to maximize attack impact and replace
the global model with its malicious local model. To fully exploit the distributed learning methodology
of FL, the local trigger patterns are used in (Xie et al., 2019) to generate poisoned images for different
malicious models, while the data from the tail of the input data distribution is leveraged in (Wang
et al., 2020). Durable backdoor attacks are proposed in (Zhang et al., 2022b; Dai & Li, 2023), and
make attack itself more persistent in the federated scenarios. We state that this kind of attacks mainly
focuses on the persistence, whereas our focus is on stealthiness.
Existing works reply on a universal trigger or tail data, which do not fully exploit the “attribute"
of trigger. Our design is fully applicable and complementary to prior attacks. By learning a
stealthy trigger generator and injecting the sample-specific triggers, we can significantly decrease the
anomalies in P1-3 and reinforce the stealthiness of backdoor attacks.
Function-based Backdoor Attacks. Existing backdoor attacks can leverage generative functions
to produce triggers. (Nguyen & Tran, 2020) implements a trigger generator to make triggers vary
from input to input. To improve the invisibility of triggers, (Doan et al., 2021b) proposes a bi-level
problem to learn a generator to produce invisible sample-specific triggers. Further, (Doan et al.,
2021a) extends the concept of imperceptible backdoors from the input to feature space, which learns
a trigger generator to constrain the similarity of hidden features between posioned and clean data. To


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


improve the stealthiness of triggers on latent representations, (Zhao et al., 2022b) adaptively learns
the generator by constraining the latent layers, which makes triggers more invisible in both input
and latent feature space. Moreover, (Doan et al., 2022) proposed a generator that can learn invisible
triggers with arbitrary target class. Most works propose their customized bi-level optimization
problems and solve them by alternatively learning their generative and classification models. There is
less literature considering function-based attacks against FL, we thus propose a stealthy backdoor
attack to eliminate the abnormality of parameters and bridge the gap between the centralized and
federated scenarios.

A.1.3    BACKDOOR D EFENSES ON FL

There are a number of defenses that provide empirical robustness against backdoor attacks.
Dimension-wise filtering. Trimmed-mean (Yin et al., 2018) aggregates each dimension of model
updates of all agents independently. It sorts the parameters of the j th -dimension of all updates
and removes m of the largest and smallest parameters in that dimension. Finally, it computes the
arithmetic mean of the rest parameters as the aggregate of dimension j. Similarly, Median (Yin et al.,
2018) takes the arithmetic median value of each dimension for aggregation. SignSGD (Bernstein
et al., 2019) only aggregates the signs of the gradients (of all agents) and returns the sign to agents
for updating the local models.
Vector-wise scaling. Norm clipping (Sun et al., 2019) bounds the l2 -norm of all updates to a fixed
threshold due to high norms of malicious updates. For a threshold τ and an update ∇, if the norm
                                           τ
of the update ||∇|| > τ , ∇ is scaled by ||∇|| . The server averages all the updates, scaled or not, for
aggregation.
Vector-wise filtering. Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017) selects a local model, with the smallest
Euclidean distance to n − f − 1 of other local models, as the global model. A variant of Krum
called Multi-Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017) selects a local model using Krum and removes it from
the remaining models repeatedly. The selected model is added to a selection S until S has c models
such that n − c > 2m + 2, where n is the number of selected models and m is the number of
malicious models. Finally, Multi-Krum averages the selected model updates. RFA (Pillutla et al.,
2022) aggregates model updates and makes FedAvg robust to outliers by replacing the averaging
aggregation with an approximate geometric median.
Certification. CRFL (Xie et al., 2021) provides certified robustness in FL frameworks. It exploits
parameter clipping and perturbing during federated averaging aggregation. In the test stage, it
constructs a “smoothed" classifier using parameter smoothing. The robust accuracy of each test
sample can be certified by this classifier when the number of compromised clients or perturbation to
the test input is below a certified threshold.
Sparsification. SparseFed (Panda et al., 2022) performs norm clipping to all local updates and
averages the updates as the aggregate. T opk values of the aggregation update are extracted and
returned to each agent who locally updates the models using this sparse update.
Cluster-based filtering. Recently, (Nguyen et al., 2022b) proposed a defending framework FLAME
based on the clustering algorithm (HDBSCAN) which can cluster dynamically all local updates
based on their cosine distance into two groups separately. FLAME uses weight clipping for scaling-
up malicious weights and noise addition for smoothing the boundary of clustering after filtering
malicious updates. By using HDBSCAN, (Rieger et al., 2022) designed a robust FL aggregation rule
called DeepSight. Their design leverages the distribution of labels for the output layer, output of
random inputs, and cosine similarity of updates to cluster all agents’ updates and further applies the
clipping method.

A.2     T HE PROCEDURE OF FTA OPTIMIZATION

In case of collusion between more than one malicious agent device, the local datasets owned by these
devices are in non-i.i.d. manner. Their local trigger generators gξi are trained by these local datasets.
This kind of dataset bias can degrade attack effectiveness since their malicious updates are for local
triggers from different gξi and cannot be merged together to yield a better attack performance. To
resolve this problem, we develop a practical solution. Before starting the FTA backdoor attack, the


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


malicious agents can share a portion of their local datasets to form a universal poisoned dataset (for
all the malicious agents), so that their local generators gξi can produce the same triggers.


A.3      D ETAILS OF THE TASKS

The details of 4 computer vision tasks are described in Table 1. To prove the stealthiness and further
robustness against defenses of FTA, we use a decentralized setting with non-i.i.d. data distribution
among all agents. The attacker chooses the all-to-one type of backdoor attack (except Edge-case
(Wang et al., 2020)), fooling the global model to misclassify the poisoned images of any label to an
attacker-chosen target label. Following a practical scenario for the attacker given in (Zhang et al.,
2022b), 10 agents among thousands of agents are selected for training in each round and their updates
are used for aggregation and updating the server model. We apply backdoor attacks from different
phases of training. In FEMNIST task, we follow the same setting as (Xie et al., 2019), where the
attacker begins to attack when the benign accuracy of global models starts to converge. For other
tasks, we perform backdoor attacks at the beginning of FL training. In this sense, as mentioned
in (Xie et al., 2019), benign updates are more likely to share common patterns of gradients and
have a larger magnitude than malicious updates, which can significantly restrict the effectiveness of
malicious updates. Note we consider such a setting for the bottom performance of attacks and further,
we still see that our attack performs more effectively than prior works in this case (see Figure 3).


               Table 1: The datasets, and their corresponding models and hyperparameters.


                                       Fahion-MNIST              FEMNIST                        CIFAR-10            Tiny-ImageNet
              Classes                        62                      10                             10                   200
        Size of training set               60000                   737837                         50000                100000
         Size of testing set               10000                   80014                          10000                 10000
            Total agents                    2000                    3000                           1000                  2000
         Malicious agents                    2                        3                             1                     2
       Agents per FL round                   10                      10                             10                    10
        Phase to start attack        Attack from scratch   Attack after convergence         Attack from scratch   Attack from scratch
          Poison fraction                                                         0.2
            Trigger size                     1                       1.5                            1.5                   3
 Dataset size of trigger generator                                               256
       Epochs of benign task                 2                        4                             5                     5
      Epochs of backdoor task            5 (FTA: 2)              10 (FTA: 4)                   10 (FTA: 5)           10 (FTA: 5)
Learning rate of trigger generator          0.01                    0.01                          0.001                  0.01
   Epochs of trigger generator               20                      20                             30                    30
      Local data distribution                                                  non-i.i.d.
       Classification model             Classic CNN             Classic CNN                     ResNet-18             ResNet-18
      Trigger generator model           Autoencoder             Autoencoder                       U-Net              Autoencoder
   Learning rate of benign task              0.1                    0.01                           0.01                 0.001
  Learning rate of backdoor task             0.1                    0.01                           0.01                  0.01
             Edge-case                    FALSE                    TRUE                           TRUE                 FALSE
      Other hyperparameters                                    Momentum:0.9, Weight Decay: 10−4


A.4      FTA AGAINST OTHER DEFENSES

Besides the defense methods used in the main body, we test the performance of FTA under Multi-
Krum, Trimmed-mean, RFA, SignSGD, Foolsgold and SparsedFed. The results prove that FTA is
able to evade the defenses.


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Fashion-MNIST      (b) FEMNIST          (c) CIFAR-10       (d) Tiny-ImageNet

    Figure 6: Few-shot attack performance under FedAvg. FTA is more durable than baseline.


A.4.1    ATTACK EFFECTIVENESS UNDER FEW- SHOT MODE .
In our experiments, the Attack_num is 100 for all attacks, and the total FL round is 1000 for CIFAR-
10, and 500 for other datasets. The results under few-shot settings are shown in Figure 6. All attacks
reach a high BA rapidly after consistently poisoning the server model, then BA gradually drops
after stopping attacking and the backdoor injected into the server model is gradually weakened by
the aggregation of benign updates. FTA’s performance drops much slower than the baseline attack.
For example, in Fashion-MNIST and after 500 rounds, FTA still remains 73% BA, which is only
9% less than Neurotoxin, 61% higher than the baseline. Moreover, FTA can beat DBA and the
baseline on Tiny-ImageNet. After 500 rounds, FTA maintains 37% accuracy while the baseline and
DBA only have 5%, which is 45% less than Neurotoxin. However, Neurotoxin cannot provide the
same stealthiness as shown in following comparison under robust FL defenses. Since malicious and
benign updates have a similar direction by FTA, the effectiveness of FTA’s backdoor can survive after
few-shot attack. The results prove the durability of FTA.

A.4.2    R ESISTANCE TO VECTOR - WISE FILTERING


          (a) Fashion-MNIST      (b) FEMNIST          (c) CIFAR-10       (d) Tiny-ImageNet

                Figure 7: The effectiveness of attack under Multi-Krum in 4 tasks.

Multi-Krum is used as the vector-wise defense method. As described in Appendix A.1.3, it calculates
the Euclidean distance between all updates and selects n − f − 1 updates with the smallest Euclidean
distances for aggregation. In Figure 7, the defense manages to filter out almost all malicious updates
of prior attacks and effectively degrade their attacks’ performance. In contrast, local update of FTA
cannot be easily filtered and thus FTA outperforms others. In CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet, the
attack performance is steady for FTA (nearly 100%) within 40 rounds to converge. In FEMNIST,
Multi-Krum only results in a 10% BA degradation for FTA while BAs of others are restricted to
0%. In Fashion-MNIST, Multi-Krum can sieve malicious updates of FTA occasionally, leading to a
longer convergence time, but still fails to completely defend the FTA. Malicious updates produced
by FTA (which successfully eliminates the anomalies in P1-2) are with a similar Euclidean distance
compared to benign updates, making them more stealthy than other attacks’.

A.4.3    R ESISTANCE TO DIMENSION - WISE FILTERING
We choose Trimmed-mean as the representative of dimension-wise filtering. As mentioned in
Appendix A.1.3, the dimensions of updates are sorted respectively, and the top m highest and smallest
updates are removed, and the arithmetic mean of the rest parameters is computed for aggregated
updates. In our experiments, m is set as 2 because we assume there is no more than one malicious
agent during FL iteration, and setting a higher m can result in lower convergence. As shown in
Figure 8, Trimmed-mean successfully filters out the compared attacks in Fashion-MNIST and Tiny-
ImageNet, and its effects are weakened in CIFAR-10 and FEMNIST. However, FTA survives in all


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Fashion-MNIST       (b) FEMNIST          (c) CIFAR-10        (d) Tiny-ImageNet

              Figure 8: The effectiveness of attack under Trimmed-mean in 4 tasks.


four tasks and performs the best under trimmed-mean. In CIFAR-10, it completes the convergence
within 30 rounds and remains 99.9% BA. In Fashion-MNIST and FEMNIST, FTA takes above 50
rounds to fully converge, and the final accuracy manages to reach 96%. The performance of FTA is
significantly degraded in Tiny-ImageNet, but still with 30% advantage over other attacks on average.
The update of FTA shares a similar weights/biases distribution of benign updates. This ensures our
attack to defeat the defenses based on dimension-wise filtering.

A.4.4   R ESISTANCE TO RFA
In Figure 9, FTA provides the best performance among others in Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10 and
Tiny-ImageNet. In FEMNIST, it converges much faster than prior attacks. Although its accuracy is
8% lower than the baseline in the middle of training, FTA achieves the same performance at the end
(of training).


   (a) Fashion-MNIST            (b) FEMNIST              (c) CIFAR-10           (d) Tiny-ImageNet


                    Figure 9: The effectiveness of attack under RFA in 4 tasks.


A.4.5   R ESISTANCE TO S IGN SGD AND RLR
As shown in Figure 10 (a)-(b), SignSGD mitigates prior backdoor attacks with a universal trigger
pattern. However, FTA still defeats it and remains 94% and 99% BA on Fashion-MNIST and
Tiny-ImageNet, respectively.


   (a) Fashion-MNIST          (b) Tiny-ImageNet        (c) Fashion-MNIST        (d) Tiny-ImageNet


Figure 10: (a)-(b): The effectiveness of attack under SignSGD in Fashion-MNIST and Tiny-ImageNet.
(c): The effectiveness of attack under Foolsgold in Fashion-MNIST. (d): The effectiveness of attack
under SparseFed in Tiny-ImageNet.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RLR can effectively filter out malicious updates, we test FTA under RLR as the variant of SignSGD.
As shown in Figure 11 (a)-(b), FTA achieves above 98% backdoor accuracy in both i.i.d and non-i.i.d
manners.


        (a) FEMNIST          (b) Tiny-ImageNet           (c) FEMNIST               (d) CIFAR-10


Figure 11: (a)-(b): The effectiveness of attack under RLR in FEMNIST and Tiny-ImageNet. (c)-(d):
The effectiveness of attack under Pruning in FEMNIST and CIFAR-10.


A.4.6     R ESISTANCE TO F OOLSGOLD

From Figure 10 (c), we see that Foolsgold hinders the convergence speed of FTA in Fashion-MNIST,
which requires FTA to perform extra 25 rounds for convergence. In this sense, FTA still converges
much faster than others.

A.4.7     R ESISTANCE TO SPARSIFICATION

We choose SparseFed as the representative of the sparsification defense. In Figure 10 (d), only
Neurotoxin and FTA are capable of breaking through SparseFed on Tiny-ImageNet. The BA of
Neurotoxin exhibits fluctuations (between 22% and 36%) throughout the training process, unable
to maintain a continuous rise. In contrast, FTA demonstrates the ability to consistently poison the
global model and later achieves an impressive accuracy of 90% by round 150. The reason for the
above performance difference is that the backdoor task of FTA captures imperceptible perturbations
on model parameters, which eliminates the anomalies of poisoning training. The backdoor tasks
trained by FTA are more likely to contribute to the same dimensions of gradients as benign updates.
Consequently, the top-k filtering mechanism implemented in the server side is ineffective to filter out
FTA’s backdoor effect.

A.4.8     R ESISTANCE TO POST- TRAINING STAGE DEFENSE

We choose Pruning as a strong post-training stage defense. The attack effectiveness of FTA under
Pruning is illustrated in Figure 11 (c)-(d). Figure 11 (c) demonstrates that even with a 50% prune
ratio, FTA maintains 80% backdoor accuracy in FEMNIST. To reduce the backdoor accuracy to
below 40%, it must prune 90% of neurons in CIFAR-10, as depicted in Figure 11 (d). However, this
setting significantly compromises benign accuracy, rendering global model unusable. This is because
the poisoned data shares similar hidden features as the clean data with the target label, allowing FTA
to reuse benign neurons for the backdoor task. Specifically, the baseline attack heavily depends on
certain fine-tuned malicious parameters, making it susceptible to Pruning based on the activation of
clean data. In contrast, FTA does not rely on the fine-tuned malicious parameters too much.

A.5     B ENIGN ACCURACY OF FTA

We showcase the benign accuracy of both the baseline attack and FTA, and also consider the accuracy
without backdoor attacks under FedAvg. We start FTA and the baseline from a specific round (e.g.,
0 or 200 for different datasets) and perform the attacks during Attack_num rounds. We record the
accuracy once the attacks have ended. From Table 2, it is evident that FTA results in a slightly smaller
decrease in the benign accuracy compared to baseline attack.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Benign accuracy of the baseline attack. FTA and no attackers circumstance under different
datasets. Benign accuracy drops by ≤ 1.5% in FTA compared to the accuracy without attack.


        Dataset        Attack start epoch   Attack_num    No attack (%)   Baseline attack (%)   FTA (%)
  Fashion-MNIST                0               50            90.21              85.14            90.02
    FEMNIST                   200              50            92.06              91.27            92.05
     CIFAR-10                  0               100           61.73              56.34            60.61
  Tiny-ImageNet                0               100           25.21              19.06            25.13


A.6     T HE STRUCTURE OF OUR MODELS

A.6.1     T HE STRUCTURE OF CLASSIFICATION MODELS FOR FASHION -MNIST AND FEMNIST
We use an 8-layer classic CNN architecture for training Fashion-MNIST and FEMNIST datasets.
The details are shown in Table 3.

                              Table 3: The structure of classic CNN model.


                         Parameters                  Shape      Hyperparameters of layer
                            Conv2d                1*32*3*3            stride = (1, 1)
                          GroupNorm                 32*32              eps = 10−5
                            Conv2d               32*64*3*3            stride = (1, 1)
                          GroupNorm                 32*64              eps = 10−5
                          Dropout2d                                      p = 0.25
                             Linear               9216*128             bias = True
                  Linear(For Fashion-MNIST)        128*10              bias = True
                     Linear(For FEMNIST)           128*62              bias = True



A.6.2     T HE STRUCTURE OF TRIGGER GENERATOR
In the FTA framework, the trigger generator plays a crucial role in feature extraction in the sense
that it aims to align the hidden features of poisoned samples with the target label samples. We utilize
the Autoencoder as the trigger generator due to its ability to capture essential features of input and
generate outputs satisfying our needs. Moreover, we find that U-Net exhibits comparable performance
for trigger generation while requiring less training data, as stated in (Doan et al., 2021b). Therefore,
we include U-Net in our experiments. Both U-Net and autoencoder architectures used to train the
trigger generator gξ are similar to those presented in (Doan et al., 2021b).

A.6.3     T HE STRUCTURE OF CLASSIFICATION MODELS FOR CIFAR-10 AND T INY-I MAGE N ET
We use a similar ResNet-18 architecture as in (Xie et al., 2019) for training CIFAR-10 and Tiny-
ImageNet.

A.7     OTHER EXPERIMENT SETTINGS

The implementation of all the compared attacks and FL framework are based on PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019). We test the experiments on a server with one Intel Xeon E5-2620 CPU and one NVIDIA
A40 GPU with 32G RAM.
In Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet, a Dirichlet distribution is used to divide training
data for the number of total agent parties, and the hyperparameter for distribution is 0.7 for the
datasets. For FEMNIST, we randomly choose data of 3000 users from the dataset and randomly
distribute every training agent with the training data from 3 users. All parties use SGD as an optimizer


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and train for local training epochs with a batch size of 256. A global model is shared by all agents,
and updates of 10 agents will be selected for aggregating the global model. Benign agents train with
a benign learning rate for benign epochs. The attacker’s local training dataset is mixed with 80%
correct labeled data and 20% poisoned data. The target labels are “sneaker" in Fashion-MNIST, “digit
1" in FEMNIST, “truck" in CIFAR-10 and “tree frog" in Tiny-ImageNet. The attacker has its own
local malicious learning rate and epochs to maximize its backdoor performance. It also needs to train
its local trigger generator with learning rate and epochs before performing local malicious training on
the downloaded global model.
Regarding the attack methods, we set the top-k ratio of 0.95 for Neurotoxin, in line with the
recommended settings in (Zhang et al., 2022b). For DBA, we use 4 distributed strips as backdoor
trigger patterns. Both the baseline attack and Neurotoxin employ a “square" trigger pattern on the top
left as the backdoor trigger. We conduct Edge-case attack on CIFAR-10 and FEMNIST. Specifically,
for CIFAR-10, we use the southwest airplane as the backdoored images and set the target label as
“bird". For FEMNIST, we use images of “7” in ARDIS (Kusetogullari et al., 2020) as poisoned
samples with the target label set as the digit “1”. The dataset settings of the experiments are the same
as those used in (Wang et al., 2020).

A.7.1    V ISUALIZATION OF DIFFERENT TRIGGER SIZES
The benign and poisoned samples with flexible triggers of different sizes generated by FTA are
presented in Figure 12. For Tiny-ImageNet and CIFAR-10, it is hard for human inspection to
immediately identify the triggers, which proves the stealthiness in P3. In Fashion-MNIST and
FEMNIST, the triggers are easier to distinguish because there is only one channel of the input samples
in the datasets. But those flexible triggers are still much more stealthy compared to those produced
by prior attacks on FL (see Figure 2).


              Figure 12: Visualization of backdoored images of different trigger sizes.



A.8     A BLATION STUDIES IN FTA ATTACK

Trigger Size. This size refers to the l2 -norm bound of the trigger generated by the generator,
corresponding to ϵ in Algorithm 1. If the size is set too large, the poisoned image can be easily
distinguished (i.e., no stealthiness) by human inspection in test/evaluation stage. On the other hand,
if we set it too small, the trigger will have a low proportion of features in the input domain. In this
sense, the global model will encounter difficulty in catching and learning these features of trigger
pattern, resulting in a drop of attack performance.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Figure 13 (a)-(d), the trigger size significantly influences the attack performance in all the tasks.
The accuracies of FTA drop seriously and eventually reach closely to 0% while we keep decreasing
the size of the trigger, in which evidences can be seen in CIFAR-10, FEMNIST, and Tiny-ImageNet.
The sample-specific trigger with l2 -norm bound of 2 in CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet is indistin-
guishable from human inspection (see Figure 12 in Appendix A.7.1), while for Fashion-MNIST and
FEMNIST (images with back-and-white backgrounds), additional noise can be still easily detected.
Thus, a balance between visual stealthiness and effectiveness should be considered before conducting
an FTA.


          (a) Fashion-MNIST       (b) FEMNIST          (c) CIFAR-10        (d) Tiny-ImageNet


          (e) Fashion-MNIST       (f) FEMNIST          (g) CIFAR-10        (h) Tiny-ImageNet


          (i) Fashion-MNIST       (j) FEMNIST          (k) CIFAR-10        (l) Tiny-ImageNet

Figure 13: Different hyperparameters on backdoor accuracy. (a)-(d): trigger size; (e)-(h): poison
fraction; (i)-(l): dataset size of trigger generator.


Poison Fraction. This is the fraction of poisoned training samples in the training dataset of the
attacker. Setting a low poison fraction can benefit the attack’s stealthiness by having less abnormality
in parameters and less influence on benign tasks. But this can slow down the attack effectiveness, as a
side effect. Fortunately, we find that FTA can still take effect under a low poison fraction. We set the
local training batch size to 256 for all the tasks, follow the standard settings of other FL frameworks,
and set the poison fraction as 0.2. As stated in Appendix A.5, this fraction setting cannot degrade the
performance of benign accuracy and meanwhile, we would like to explore further to examine the
lower bound of the fraction which FTA’s performance can tolerate. In Figure 13 (e)-(h), FTA is still
effective whilst the fraction drops to 0.05. We also find that sensitivities to poison fraction can vary
among tasks. In Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR-10, FTA remains its performance even if poison fraction
= 0.01, in which only 3 samples are posoined in each batch. As for FEMNIST and Tiny-ImageNet,
under the same rate, the backdoor tasks are dramatically weakened by the benign ones.
Dataset Size of Trigger Generator. Theoretically, if this dataset is small-scale, the trigger
generator could not be properly trained, thus resulting in bad quality and further endangering the
attack performance. During the training, if the attacker controls multiple agents, it can merge
all local datasets into one for generator training. However, in many cases, the attacker can only
control relatively limited agents and is provided by a small-scale dataset for training. Recall that
in Algorithm 1 we use the same dataset for the malicious model and trigger generator training. We
set the size of dataset for learning trigger generator to 1024 for all tasks in default. From Figure 13
(i)-(l) in Appendix A.8, we see that this concern should not be crucial for FTA. Even if the size of
the dataset is only set to 32, FTA can provide a high attack performance. We note that the training
process here is somewhat similar to generative adversarial networks, in which we do not require a
large amount of samples in the training dataset.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 4: Experimental results on trigger stealthiness (SSIM↑ and LPIPS↓).

                            Dataset     Metric    Baseline      DBA       Neurotoxin    Edge-case     FTA(Ours)
                                        SSIM        0.9376     0.9052       0.9359         -           0.9967
                      Fashion-MNIST
                                        LPIPS         NA         NA           NA          NA             NA
                                        SSIM        0.9612     0.9440       0.9638       0.7354         0.9978
                           CIFAR-10
                                        LPIPS       0.0058     0.0091       0.0075       0.3171         0.0008
                                        SSIM        0.9851     0.9734       0.9810          -           0.9881
                      Tiny-ImageNet
                                        LPIPS       0.0072     0.0149       0.0086          -           0.0029


Table 5: Time consumption and computational cost (MEAN±SD) of different attack methods in one
FL iteration under Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet.

           Dataset→               Fashion-MNIST                          CIFAR-10                      Tiny-ImageNet
            Attack↓          Time (s)   Memories (MB)         Time (s)      Memories (MB)         Time (s)      Memories (MB)
             Benign         1.62±0.19        76.8            14.11±1.45         125.1           37.92±2.71          233.5
         Baseline Attack    1.67±0.25        81.6            14.81±2.10         127.2           38.52±2.19          226.4
              DBA           1.57±0.31        81.7            14.91±1.86         124.7           38.74±1.92          248.5
           Neurotoxin       3.39±0.66       120.4            27.85±1.74         279.3           76.38±3.46          478.7
              FTA           2.04±0.52         86             18.38±1.89         169.1           46.98±2.14          298.4



A.9    NATURAL STEALTHINESS

For each dataset, we randomly select 500 sample images from test dataset to evaluate the trigger
stealthiness. As the SSIM value increases, the poisoned sample looks more stealthy. But for LPIPS,
that is the other way round. Table 4 shows that FTA achieves excellent stealthiness in all cases.
Specifically, SSIM values of FTA are the highest in these datasets, which are close to 1. LPIPS
values of FTA are 2-7× improvement to that of baseline attack. Although the baseline attack and
Neurotoxin, which uses a universal square pattern, performs well on more complex datasets, using
such a patch-based pattern can make the original image look “unnatural".

A.10    C OMPUTATIONAL COST

We understand the significance of the external computational cost and time consumption of backdoor
training on malicious devices in our proposed attack under FL scenario. Training with GANs in
federated systems introduces extra time consumption. However, our attack does not significantly
increase the computational and time cost due to our optimization procedure. Compared to training
benign task and baseline backdoor task, FTA only needs to train an additional trigger generator which
is actually a small generative neural network. Our generator only consists of several convolutional
layers in total. It is worth noting that the datasets used to train both two network structures comprise
only 1024 poisoned samples as shown in Table 1 whose size are relatively small compared to the entire
training dataset. For instance, the training dataset for our trigger generator accounts for approximately
0.14% of the FEMNIST dataset Therefore, the time consumption and computational cost for training
this generative network are very minimal. The remaining time consumption is comparable to training
a benign local model. As shown in Table 5, Neurotoxin requires approximately 2× the time and
memory compared to benign training to complete backdoor training for one FL round. This is
attributed to an additional local benign training requirement in Neurotoxin. However, FTA consumes
less than 30% additional time and 25% additional computational cost for backdoor training compared
to benign ones. Given that FTA remains under 70% of the cost of Neurotoxin, it is practical to
conduct an FTA attack in decentralized scenario.

A.11    T HE IMPORTANCE OF ADAPTABILITY OF FTA TRIGGER GENERATOR

We understand and verify the significance of adaptability in our proposed attack. Figure 14 (a)-(b)
demonstrate that the non-adaptive generator provides a lower convergence speed, approximately 70
rounds to achieve 96% backdoor accuracy under CIFAR-10, compared to the adaptive variant. Also,
as shown in Figure 14 (c)-(d), the non-adaptive variant cannot evade norm clipping (vector-wise
scaling) since it needs to significantly tune malicious parameters to achieve high backdoor accuracy.
Our findings provide evidence that the adaptive variant indeed enhances the stealthiness of FTA in
the parameter space.


                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) FEMNIST              (b) CIFAR-10              (c) FEMNIST              (d) CIFAR-10


Figure 14: (a)-(b): The comparison between FTA and its restricted version under no defense in
FEMNIST and CIFAR-10. (c)-(d): The comparison between FTA and its restricted version under
norm clipping in FEMNIST and CIFAR-10.



A.12    D ISCUSSION

In this work, we concentrate on the computer vision tasks, which have been the focus of numerous
existing works (Xie et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2021b; Zhao et al., 2022b; Ozdayi
et al., 2021). In the future, we intend to expand the scope of this work by applying our design to other
real-world applications, such as natural language processing (NLP) and reinforcement learning (RL),
as well as other vision tasks, e.g., object detection.
The primary focus of FTA is to achieve stealthiness rather than durability, in contrast to other attacks
such as Neurotoxin (Zhang et al., 2022b). Neurotoxin manipulates malicious parameters based on
gradients in magnitude, which yields a clear increase in the dissimilarity of parameters and thus harms
the stealthiness of the attack. FTA addresses the dissimilarity difference of weights/biases introduced
by backdoor training by using a stealthy and adaptive trigger generator, which makes the hidden
features of poisoned samples similar to benign ones. We emphasize that the durability of backdoor
attacks on FL is orthogonal to the main focus of this work, and we leave it as an open problem. A
possible solution to achieve persistence could be to decelerate the learning rate of malicious agents,
as proposed in (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020).
Comparison. In addition to the defenses evaluated in this paper, we discuss our attack effectiveness
under other defenses below. As depicted in FLDetector (Zhang et al., 2022a), in a typical FL
scenario where the server does not have a validation dataset that Fltrust (Cao et al., 2021) requires,
the global model remains susceptible to backdoor attacks. However, the stringent demand by
FLtrust for an extra validation dataset could not be practical for conventional FL frameworks and
applications. Furthermore, Fltrust eliminates backdoor effectiveness based on cosine dissimilarity
which is similar to the approach used in FLAME. As shown in Figure 5, FTA’s malicious updates
have less dissimilarity to benign updates than the baseline attack’s. Therefore, we can state that FTA
can evade Fltrust according to the results obtained under FLAME. DnC (Shejwalkar & Houmansadr,
2021) primarily focuses on untargeted poisoning attacks rather than backdoor attacks, and its main
objective is to reduce the accuracy of FL models. Accordingly, we do not consider it as a “proper"
SOTA backdoor defense (to our attack). In particular, DnC is a kind of vector-wise filtering defense.
In our experiments, conducted under Multi-krum and RFA, we ascertain that FTA is robust against
vector-wise filtering. In conclusion, FTA can also successfully evade DnC, much like Multi-krum
and RFA. As for certified defense like Flcert (Cao et al., 2022), while it is a promising approach
to robustness certification, it is not intended to detect and filter out malicious updates in FL. As
outlined in Flcert, the certified accuracy of the global model experiences a decline with the increase of
malicious agents. Fortunately, FTA can cope with a very challenging threat model, where the attacker
is allowed to control merely one malicious agent out of thousands. We thus can achieve a certified
accuracy almost on par with the original global model accuracy against Flcert. FLIP (Zhang et al.,
2023) only considers static backdoors as potential attacks, i.e. patch-based patterns, whereas FTA
can use flexible triggers to break FLIP’s threat model. Using the flexible trigger generator, FTA can
produce sample-specific triggers which pose challenges when applying universal trigger inversion
method in FLIP’s step 1.


                                                   24
