Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NSTRUCT E DIT: I MPROVING AUTOMATIC M ASKS FOR
D IFFUSION - BASED I MAGE E DITING W ITH U SER I N -
STRUCTIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



           Input          Mask image      Edited image       Input image             Edited images


                                   DiffEdit                                 “Turn the black “Make the brown
                                                                           horse to a zebra” horse look like
                                                                                                a camel”
      “Replace the beef
      with raspberries”


                                 InstructEdit                                “Change the      “Add a flood
                                                                             buildings to     on the street”
                                                                               palaces”

Figure 1: Left: a comparison between DiffEdit and InstructEdit. Right: examples of editing using
InstructEdit. Note that InstructEdit only requires user instructions as input, while DiffEdit needs an
input caption and an edited caption instead.

                                                 A BSTRACT
         Recent works have explored text-guided image editing using diffusion models and
         generated edited images based on text prompts. However, the models struggle to
         accurately locate the regions to be edited and faithfully perform precise edits. In
         this work, we propose a framework termed InstructEdit that can do fine-grained
         editing based on user instructions. Our proposed framework has three components:
         language processor, segmenter, and image editor. The first component, the language
         processor, processes the user instruction using a large language model. The goal of
         this processing is to parse the user instruction and output prompts for the segmenter
         and captions for the image editor. We adopt ChatGPT and optionally BLIP2 for
         this step. The second component, the segmenter, uses the segmentation prompt
         provided by the language processor. We employ a state-of-the-art segmentation
         framework Grounded Segment Anything to automatically generate a high-quality
         mask based on the segmentation prompt. The third component, the image editor,
         uses the captions from the language processor and the masks from the segmenter
         to compute the edited image. We adopt Stable Diffusion and the mask-guided
         generation from DiffEdit for this purpose. Experiments show that our method
         outperforms previous editing methods in fine-grained editing applications where
         the input image contains a complex object or multiple objects. We improve the
         mask quality over DiffEdit and thus improve the quality of edited images. We show
         that our framework can accept multiple forms of user instructions as input.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Generative diffusion models are a versatile tool to generate images (Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b), videos (Ho et al., 2022b;


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Esser et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022a; Blattmann et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022), and 3D shapes (Hui
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023). In addition, the powerful
representation learned by generative diffusion models makes them a great basis for downstream
editing operations. In this paper, we are particularly interested in image editing operations.
Training-free and tuning-free text-guided image editing using diffusion models (Hertz et al., 2022;
Couairon et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Liew et al., 2022) usually relies on descriptive text captions
for both input image and edited image. However, one line of work focuses on accepting human
instructions as input to edit images, as human instructions are more intuitive for a user to provide,
and can be free from specific prompting structures. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) constructs
an “input caption, edited caption, user instruction” triplet dataset by fine-tuning GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) and generates pairs of input image and corresponding edited image using Prompt-to-
Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022). Here we also try to accept human instructions as input. Instead of
fine-tuning a large language model, we utilize its in-context learning ability to parse user instructions
on the fly. One challenge of this tuning-free approach is that the user instructions can be as unclear as
“Add glasses” or “Turn him into a bearded man”, where no information about the referred object is
given. To tackle this problem, we utilize a large language model to understand the user instructions
along with a multi-modal model to improve comprehension.
Using a mask to provide guidance to the models about the specific areas to edit is a logical and
intuitive approach. There already exist several editing models (Brooks et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022;
Liew et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) that do not require a mask as input. This approach generally
works well when there is a single object in the image or if there is no object of the same type as the
object the user wants to edit. However, with multiple objects in the input image, diffusion models
struggle to correctly identify which object the user intends to edit. For example, if the user wants to
edit a specific object like “A yellow chair” in an image with multiple chairs present or “The cat on
the left” in a group of cats. In such cases, an input mask can help the model to correctly locate the
object of interest. As InstructPix2Pix utilizes the mask-free image editing method Prompt-to-Prompt
to generate the paired input-edited images, its ability to accurately locate objects is not sufficient in
complex cases. One possible solution is to create more paired images and paired captions to fine-tune
InstructPix2Pix. Here we provide another solution by adopting a pre-trained image segmentation
model for generating high-quality masks to guide the editing. This does not require any training or
dataset collection.
While it is possible to ask a user to paint a mask, it requires time-consuming and detailed user
interaction. We therefore follow the previous work DiffEdit that employs automatically generated
masks. While DiffEdit obtains very good masks in many cases, there are several instances where
DiffEdit fails to produce high-quality masks: 1) the descriptive captions are not informative enough;
2) the threshold of the mask filtering is not correctly set; 3) there is more than one object of the same
or different type; and 4) there are many parts of one object in the image that may cause ambiguity. In
our work, we set out to tackle the challenge of computing improved masks in such challenging cases.
We adopt a powerful grounding segmentation module called Grounded Segment Anything (Grounded
SAM). By simply providing the segmentation prompt to Grounded SAM, a mask that exactly matches
the shape of the object can be generated. This provides extra grounding and segmentation ability to
the framework, which helps the model to locate and extract the object(s) to be edited.
In this work, we propose a framework called InstructEdit to use large pre-trained models to edit
images following user instructions based on DiffEdit. We automatically extract higher-quality masks
compared to DiffEdit, and therefore achieve more preferable and stable editing results in more
complex multi-object image editing scenarios. Specifically, our method has three components:
a language processor, a segmenter, and an image editor. We first use the language processor to
understand the user instruction by identifying which object(s) should be edited and how. This first
step yields the segmentation prompt for the segmenter and captions for the image editor. We use
ChatGPT to parse the user instruction and optionally adopt BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023a) when the user
instruction is unclear. The segmenter then accepts the segmentation prompt and generates a mask that
outlines the region according to the segmentation prompt. We utilize Grounded Segment Anything as
the segmenter which combines both high grounding and segmentation abilities. Finally, the image
editor performs image editing using the captions along with the generated mask. We adopt Stable
Diffusion along with the mask-guided image editing process to do the editing.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We show that our method outperforms previous editing methods in fine-grained editing applications.
Specifically, we are interested in input images that contain 1) one object and we want to edit one
part of the object. 2) multiple objects and we want to edit one or multiple objects. We show that
we improve the quality of edited images by improving the mask quality over DiffEdit. We also
show that our framework can accept multiple forms of user instructions as input. We summarize our
contributions as below:

       • We propose a diffusion-based text-guided image editing framework that accepts user instruc-
         tion as input instead of input caption and edited caption.
       • We outperform baseline methods in fine-grained editing when we want to edit one part of
         the object in a single-object image or one or multiple objects in a multi-object image.
       • We improve the mask quality over the original DiffEdit and thus improve the image quality.
       • Our framework can be combined with the NeRF editing pipeline to achieve fine-grained
         scale NeRF editing application.

2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   I MAGE EDITING USING DIFFUSION MODELS

Pre-trained diffusion models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Huang
et al., 2023a) can be used to do various image editing tasks. Several works (Valevski et al., 2022;
Kawar et al., 2022; Kwon & Ye, 2022) fine-tune the diffusion model weights or optimize a loss
function to perform image editing. However, in these works fine-tuning requires a relatively long
time to obtain a single edited image, and each editing prompt requires its own fine-tuning process.
Many works (Meng et al., 2021; Hertz et al., 2022; Parmar et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) achieve
good image editing results using a tuning-free approach. Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022)
proposes to edit the cross-attention maps by comparing the input caption and the edited caption.
MDP (Wang et al., 2023) proposes to manipulate the diffusion path by analyzing the sampling
formula. In this line of work, a mask is not required during the editing process, thereby making it
easier to use than systems that rely on masking. These kinds of methods usually perform well when
there is a single foreground object in the image, but fail when more fine-grained control is needed.
By providing a manually designed mask as input, a user can explicitly control which region to
edit and which region to preserve. Blended Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022b) and Blended Latent
Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022a) utilize a mask to perform text-guided image editing by operating
either in pixel space or in latent space. Shape-guided Diffusion (Park et al., 2022) proposes to use a
mask with inside-outside attention to preserve the shape of the object to be edited. MasaCtrl (Cao
et al., 2023) focuses on performing non-rigid editing while using a mask to alleviate the confusion of
foreground with background objects.
Although a mask provides additional control in the editing process, generating a manual mask can
be a burden for the user if the mask is not automatically estimated. (Park et al., 2022; Cao et al.,
2023) can also replace the manual mask with an automatic mask generated by cross-attention maps.
Another prominent work DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022) proposes a way to automatically predict a
mask by contrasting the predicted noise conditioned on the input caption and the edited caption. In
this work, we intend to exploit the benefit of using a mask without bringing the burden of manually
labeling a mask to the user. We adopt large pre-trained models to help us automatically infer a mask.
Several recent video editing papers that extend the concepts from image editing to videos (Liu et al.,
2023a; Wu et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Molad et al., 2023). While video editing
is beyond the scope of our work, it is very interesting for future research, as our proposed editing
capabilities are not yet available in video editing frameworks.

2.2   F OUNDATIONAL MODELS

Large language models. The development of large language models has been a rapidly evolving
field in recent years (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2020; Clark et al., 2020). One important contribution is the GPT series of models (Radford et al.,


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Input                                                             Processing                                                     Output
 “Change the cat to a fox”                                           Language Processor   “Photo of a dog and a cat”   Image Editor

     User Instruction I                                                                       Input caption c(i)

                             BLIP2   “Photo of a dog and a cat”          “Cat”            “Photo of a dog and a fox”

                                     Description d (Optional)     Segmentation prompt q      Edited caption c(e)


                                                                                                    Segmenter



    Input Image Img(i)                                                                                                 Mask M         Edited Image Img(e)


Figure 2: Pipeline: given a user instruction, a language processor first parses the instruction into a
segmentation prompt, an input caption, and an edited caption. A segmenter then generates a mask
based on the segmentation prompt. The mask along with the input and edited captions are then going
to an image editor to produce the final output.

2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020). These models are pre-trained on massive amounts of text data and
then fine-tuned for specific tasks. Most notably, ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) is a variant of the GPT
series of models that are designed specifically for generating human-like responses in conversational
settings. We make use of ChatGPT in our work for the purpose of information extraction from user
instruction.
Segmentation model and grounding detector. Segment Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023) is a
segmentation model that uses a combination of different input prompts and enables zero-shot
generalization to unfamiliar objects and images without requiring additional training. Ground-
ing DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) is an open-set object detector that combines the Transformer-based
detector DINO (Zhang et al., 2022) with grounded pre-training to detect arbitrary objects with human
inputs such as category names or referential expressions. Their system outputs multiple pairs of
object boxes and noun phrases give a prompt.
Images and language. Vision language models (VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022;
Mañas et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023a) are a powerful class of models that combine
computer vision and natural language processing. VLMs have gained significant attention in recent
years due to their ability to bridge the gap between visual and textual information, enabling a range
of applications such as image captioning, visual question answering, and image retrieval. Especially,
BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023a) unlocks the capability of zero-shot instructed image-to-text generation.
Given an input image, BLIP-2 can generate various natural language responses according to the
user’s instruction.

3        M ETHOD

3.1         P RELIMINARIES

During the training process of diffusion models, we have the objective function
                                                                                                         2
                                                       min Ex0 ,ϵ,t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , c, t)∥ ,                                                              (1)
                                                          θ

where x0 is the input image, ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is Gaussian noise that is added to the input image and ϵθ
is the noise estimator that is used to predict the added noise. t is the denoising timestep while c is the
condition of the diffusion model. In this work, we only consider c to be a text prompt of a text-guided
diffusion model. After training, the noise estimator ϵθ can be used to generate new samples. We use
DDIM (Song et al., 2021), which is a deterministic sampler with denoising steps
                                √                       p
                       xt−1 = αt−1 · fθ (xt , c, t) + 1 − αt−1 · ϵθ (xt , c, t),                       (2)
                                     √
where fθ (xt , c, t) = xt − 1−α   ·ϵ (x ,c,t)
                                √t θ t
                                 αt           , and αt is the noise schedule factor in DDIM. We denote
ϵt = ϵθ (xt , c, t). Given an input image, we can use DDIM inversion to invert it into an initial noise
tensor xT . Each inversion step is calculated as
                                √                          p
                        xt+1 = αt+1 · fθ (xt , c, t) + 1 − αt+1 · ϵθ (xt , c, t).                   (3)


                                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We iteratively apply this formula until obtaining xT . However, if we stop the inversion step at
timestep r ≤ T , we encode x0 into a less noised version xr . r is called the encoding ratio as in
DiffEdit. A larger value r indicates a stronger editing effect, making the edited image guided more
by the edited caption but look less like the input image.

3.2   L ANGUAGE PROCESSOR

Given a user instruction I as input, we use a large language model ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) to
extract segmentation prompt q for the segmenter, and an input caption c(i) and an edited caption c(e)
for the image editor. Here, we utilize the in-context learning ability of large language models (Dong
et al., 2023) to achieve zero-shot task learning. In-context learning does not require any tuning of the
parameters of the language model. Instead, it learns the pattern from the task examples and makes
predictions when it sees a new example. In this work, by giving a few examples, ChatGPT is able to
learn the task and follow the instructions. We show one task example in the Supplementary Materials.
A task example shows how ChatGPT should manipulate a user instruction that is provided as input.
When the user instruction I or the description of the object to be edited is unclear, it is difficult for
ChatGPT to correctly provide the prompts as it has no access to the content of the input image. The
vision-language model BLIP2 can process the image and is able to answer questions about its content.
BLIP2 can provide a short description of the original image, which can assist ChatGPT in providing
prompts for the segmenter and captions for the image editor.
In this work, we optionally query BLIP2 to obtain a description d of the image. Given an input image,
we first ask BLIP2 “Is this a photo, a painting, or another kind of art?”. We denote the answer as ρ
and reuse it in another query to BLIP2 composed as “ρ of” to obtain a completed sentence describing
the image as input prompt to ChatGPT. ChatGPT in turn can refine the prompt by identifying which
object to edit and provide more details even when the user instruction does not specify the content to
be edited or the description is incomplete to unambiguously refer to the intended objects in the image.

3.3   S EGMENTER

We use Grounded Segment Anything as our segmenter to locate the object(s) to be edited and to
compute a corresponding mask. Grounded Segment Anything is a framework which combines
Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) and Segment Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023). Grounding DINO
is an open-set object detector, which can accept a given text and output one or multiple detected
bounding boxes and a text similarity score per bounding box. Segment Anything (SAM) is a powerful
segmentation model. It can accept the bounding box output by Grounding DINO and produce
high-quality binary masks for the downstream tasks.
Grounding DINO is first applied to get a bounding box for a given segmentation prompt q by
                                DINO(x0 , q) = b = [h, w, ∆h, ∆w],
where [h, w] is the top-left corner coordinate of the detected bounding box in pixel space, and
[∆h, ∆w] is the size of the bounding box. Then, the bounding box is refined to a per-pixel binary
mask M by
                                       SAM(x0 , b) = M.

3.4   I MAGE EDITOR

We adopt the mask-guided image editing as in DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022). Given an input image
Img(i) (which is also denoted as x0 in 3.1), we want to edit it to get the edited image Img(e) . With
the automatically generated mask M and an encoded noise xr , the mask-guided DDIM denoising
step is formulated as
                                      et = Myt + (1 − M)xt ,
                                      y                                                              (4)

              xr                if t = r,
where yt =                                  The region within the mask will have the changes guided
              ϵθ (yt−1 , c, t) otherwise.
by the edited caption, while the region outside the mask will be mapped back to the original pixels.
We obtain Img(e) = y  e0 after iteratively applying Eq. 4.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 1: Quantitative comparisons between our method and baselines.

                                                   MDP-ϵt   InstructPix2Pix   DiffEdit   InstructEdit
          LPIPS ↓                                   0.214         0.290        0.167         0.121
          CLIP score ↑                             26.414        25.844       26.847        27.404
          CLIP directional similarity ↑             0.079         0.114        0.106         0.082
             Input image      User instruction                  DiffEdit                  InstructEdit


                             “Change the corgi
                                 to a cat”


                           “Change the cupboards
                              to bookshelves”


Figure 3: Comparison of the masks (colored in red and blended with the input image) and the
corresponding edited image (below each mask) generated by DiffEdit and InstructEdit.

4       E XPERIMENTS

4.1      S ETTINGS

Baselines. We choose three text-guided image editing methods that do not require a manual mask
as input as our baselines. MDP-ϵt (Wang et al., 2023) is a mask-free editing method that manipulates
the diffusion paths by mixing the predicted noise guided by the input caption and the edited caption
according to a defined mixing schedule. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) is also a mask-free
editing method. It trains a conditional diffusion model that accepts both an image and a user
instruction as input to edit the input image. It highlights the user instruction as input without edited
captions by exploiting a large language model. DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022) is a mask-based
editing method that produces an automatically computed mask by subtracting the predicted noises
guided by the input caption and the edited caption. InstructEdit adopts the same mask guidance as in
DiffEdit to generate the edited image. However, InstructEdit uses a pre-trained segmentation model
to automatically compute a new mask.
All the experiments are performed on a single NVIDIA A100. We use Stable Diffusion v1.5 as the
backbone of the image editor. We use the model’s weights and implementation of Grounded Segment
Anything from 1 . More details can be found in the Supplementary Materials.

Evaluation. We provide both qualitative and quantitative results for our method. For quantitative
metrics, we use LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) to measure the similarity between the input image and
the edited image, CLIP score (Hessel et al., 2022) to measure the instruction-image compatibility
and CLIP directional similarity (Gal et al., 2021) to see if the change in images is consistent with the
change in captions. As quantitative metrics alone usually cannot align with human judgment, we
additionally conduct a user study for a better evaluation.
    1
        https://github.com/IDEA-Research/Grounded-Segment-Anything


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Input              Generated prompts               Edited images                            Input                Generated prompts            Edited image

                                 “Cat”                                                                                   “Girl, pearl earring”
                             “Photo of a dog                                                                           “Painting of a girl with a
                               and a cat”                                                                                    pearl earring
                             “Photo of a dog                                                                              by Jan Van Gogh”
                               and a fox”                                                                              “Painting of an alien girl”

                                                              w. BLIP2                                                                                  w. BLIP2

                                                                                                                           “None needed”
“Change the cat to a fox”        “Cat”                                                       “Turn it into an alien”     “Photo of the object
                            “Photo of a cat”                                                                                to be edited”
                            “Photo of a dog”                                                                             “Photo of the object
                                                                                                                             as an alien”

                                                             wo. BLIP2                                                                                  wo. BLIP2


Figure 4: Examples of how BLIP2 improves the quality of edited images by improving the generated
prompts. The three generated prompts are segmentation prompt, input caption, and edited caption,
respectively. For the first example, the BLIP2 description of the image is “Photo of a dog and a cat”.
We show three examples for w./wo. BLIP2 with increasing encoding ratio r from left to right. In the
second example, the BLIP2 description is “Painting of a girl with a pearl earring by Jan Van Gogh”.
(BLIP2 gets the name of the painting correct but the name of the artist is wrong.)

      Input image                                      Edited image                                          Input image                        Edited image


                                  “Make the carpet    “What would the       “Turn the wall                                                           “Smile!”
                                    like Mars”       mirror look like if    into a galaxy”
                                                     it was a painting?”

Figure 5: Examples of the variety of the input user instructions. Under each edited image is the input
instruction.


4.2      BASELINE COMPARISONS

We provide selected qualitative comparisons between our method and other baselines in Fig. 6.
It can be seen that InstructEdit can accurately locate either an object or a part of an object to be
edited according to the user instruction in a fine-grained manner. In addition, the edits are faithfully
performed within the regions InstructEdit identifies. The three baselines have difficulty to accurately
locate the object of interest. We show more examples in Sec. 4.3 to show that InstructEdit outperforms
DiffEdit by improving the quality of masks.
We show the results of the quantitative evaluation in Tab. 1 for the 10 editing examples shown in
Fig. 6. Results show that our method has the best semantic preservation of the edited image compared
to the input image and the best alignment of the instruction and edited image pair. The metrics do
not capture the large improvements due to our method, because CLIP itself does not capture the
fine-grained spatial localization required to judge our complex edits. We therefore perform a user
study for these 10 editing examples by comparing our method with the other baseline methods. The
results show that InstructEdit was preferred over MDP-ϵt , InstructPix2Pix, and DiffEdit in 83.0%,
83.0%, and 84.5% of the cases, respectively.

4.3      M ASK IMPROVEMENT
We show examples of how InstructEdit improves the mask quality over the original DiffEdit in
Fig. 3. For each example, we use the user instruction as input to InstructEdit and design specific
input captions and edited captions for DiffEdit. We also select three different mask thresholds θ
for DiffEdit to show how the mask threshold influences the mask quality and therefore the image
quality. We show that for DiffEdit the generated mask cannot accurately outline the intended region
as specified in the user instruction for all different θ. Therefore, the generated images either have
too many or too few changes. On the contrary, for InstructEdit there is no such mask threshold and
the generated masks can exactly localize the intended region to be edited. By improving the mask
quality, InstructEdit can faithfully do the edit and outperform DiffEdit. We show that without the


                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Input          User instruction          MDP-ϵt   InstructPix2Pix   DiffEdit   InstructEdit


                     “Change the garage door
                        and main door to
                        a chocolate bar”


                   “Change the tie color to red”


                   “Change the cat on the right
                           to a tiger”


                     “Change the orange cat
                          to a tiger”


                     “Change the green buses
                        to yellow buses”


                     “Change the middle bus
                          to a truck”


                    “Change the carrot slices
                           to fries”


                   “Change the sofa to a bench”


                    “Change the windows to a
                      painting of pikachu”


                     “Change all the laptops
                        to newspapers”


Figure 6: Qualitative results of baselines and our method. Here we use the same form of instruction
“Change ... to ...” as an example.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Input     Instruction          InstructPix2Pix as backbone         InstructEdit as backbone


                   "Color the
                   lips purple"


                   "Make the
                   pants red"


Figure 7: Comparison of the NeRF editing results of our method and InstructPix2Pix as backbone
using Instruct-NeRF2NeRF as the editing pipeline.

help of the grounding pre-trained network, it is very hard for the diffusion model itself to accurately
outline the region and do fine-grained editing at this scale.

4.4   I NSTRUCTION PROCESSING

In Fig. 4 we show the results of an ablation study and how BLIP2 helps to improve the quality of
the edited images. When the instruction does not clearly refer to all the prominent objects in the
image, e.g. not mentioning a visible “dog” like in the the first example, the input and edited captions
provided by ChatGPT do not contain “dog” as well. This leads to difficulties when the encoding ratio
r is increasing. In the second example, where an unclear “it” is used to refer to the object to be edited,
without BLIP2 ChatGPT fails to correctly generate a segmentation prompt and the captions. In such
a case, BLIP2 provides an extra description of the image such that ChatGPT can understand which
object should be edited and provides improved captions.
We also show in Fig. 5 that InstructEdit is very robust and can correctly understand differently phrased
instructions as input. This demonstrates the benefit of adopting a large language model to process the
instruction rather than hard-coded parsing.

4.5   N E RF EDITING

We show that our framework can be used as an image editing backbone for a NeRF editing pipeline.
We adopt Instruct-NeRF2NeRF (Haque et al., 2023), which is a NeRF editing method based on
user instructions. Instruct-NeRF2NeRF iteratively updates images from the training dataset using
InstructPix2Pix while optimizing the NeRF scene. Instead of using InstructPix2Pix as the image
editor, we replace it with our method and follow the same editing pipeline as Instruct-NeRF2NeRF.
We show the comparison in Figure 7 and accompanying video in the project webpage. Our method
can do the edit within the desired region, while InstructPix2Pix tends to overedit the image.


5     D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS
There are several limitations in our work. As ChatGPT and BLIP2 are probabilistic models, their
outputs are not always optimal and thus may fail to correctly parse the user instruction. Also, as the
editing is performed within the generated mask, which has the same shape as the object, it is difficult
to conduct deformations. In this work, we proposed a framework termed InstructEdit that can do
fine-grained editing and directly accept user instructions as input. We use a language processor to
process user instructions, a segmenter to generate high-quality masks, and an image editor to do the
mask-guided editing. Experiments show that our method outperforms previous editing methods when
doing fine-grained edits. We improve the mask quality over DiffEdit and thus improve the quality of
edited images. Our framework can be also combined with NeRF editing pipeline.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.02779, 2022a.
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of natural
 images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 pp. 18208–18218, 2022b.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika Aittala,
  Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i: Text-to-image
  diffusion models with ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and
  Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models. In
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09800, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl:
 Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing, 2023.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, and Christopher D. Manning. ELECTRA: pre-training
  text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. In 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1xMH1BtvB.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-based
  semantic image editing with mask guidance, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, Lei
  Li, and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning, 2023.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Germanidis.
  Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada:
  Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anchit Gupta, Wenhan Xiong, Yixin Nie, Ian Jones, and Barlas Oğuz. 3dgen: Triplane latent diffusion
  for textured mesh generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05371, 2023.
Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Instruct-
  nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626, 2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-
  free evaluation metric for image captioning, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv:2204.03458, 2022b.
Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Composer: Creative
  and controllable image synthesis with composable conditions, 2023a.
Xinyu Huang, Youcai Zhang, Jinyu Ma, Weiwei Tian, Rui Feng, Yuejie Zhang, Yaqian Li, Yandong
  Guo, and Lei Zhang. Tag2text: Guiding vision-language model via image tagging. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.05657, 2023b.
Ka-Hei Hui, Ruihui Li, Jingyu Hu, and Chi-Wing Fu. Neural wavelet-domain diffusion for 3d shape
  generation. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers, pp. 1–9, 2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15264, 2022.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models, 2023a.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. 2023b.
Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Daquan Zhou, and Jiashi Feng. Magicmix: Semantic mixing with
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16056, 2022.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control, 2023a.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b.
Yue Ma, Yingqing He, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, Xiu Li, and Qifeng Chen. Follow
  your pose: Pose-guided text-to-video generation using pose-free videos, 2023.
Oscar Mañas, Pau Rodriguez, Saba Ahmadi, Aida Nematzadeh, Yash Goyal, and Aishwarya Agrawal.
  Mapl: Parameter-efficient adaptation of unimodal pre-trained models for vision-language few-shot
  prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07179, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Image
  synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073,
  2021.
Eyal Molad, Eliahu Horwitz, Dani Valevski, Alex Rav Acha, Yossi Matias, Yael Pritch, Yaniv
  Leviathan, and Yedid Hoshen. Dreamix: Video diffusion models are general video editors, 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt, 2023. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
Dong Huk Park, Grace Luo, Clayton Toste, Samaneh Azadi, Xihui Liu, Maka Karalashvili, Anna
  Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. Shape-guided diffusion with inside-outside attention. arXiv, 2022.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation, 2023.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing, 2023.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/
  papers/v21/20-074.html.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In 9th Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021.
   OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=St1giarCHLP.
Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Justin Kerr, Terrance Wang,
 Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, David McAllister, and Angjoo
 Kanazawa. Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural radiance field development. In ACM
 SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, SIGGRAPH ’23, 2023.
Dani Valevski, Matan Kalman, Yossi Matias, and Yaniv Leviathan. Unitune: Text-driven image
  editing by fine tuning an image generation model on a single image, 2022.
Qian Wang, Biao Zhang, Michael Birsak, and Peter Wonka. Mdp: A generalized framework for
  text-guided image editing by manipulating the diffusion path, 2023.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu, Ying
  Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion
  models for text-to-video generation, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruihan Yang, Prakhar Srivastava, and Stephan Mandt. Diffusion probabilistic modeling for video
  generation, 2022.
Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Niessner, and Peter Wonka. 3dshape2vecset: A 3d shape
  representation for neural fields and generative diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11445,
  2023.
Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Shilong Liu, Lei Zhang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Lionel M. Ni, and Heung-Yeung
  Shum. Dino: Detr with improved denoising anchor boxes for end-to-end object detection, 2022.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric, 2018.
Xin-Yang Zheng, Hao Pan, Peng-Shuai Wang, Xin Tong, Yang Liu, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Locally
  attentional sdf diffusion for controllable 3d shape generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04461,
  2023.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      R EPRODUCIBILITY

Our implementation can be found in https://anonymous.4open.science/r/InstructEdit_Anonymous-
D2CC.


B      D IFF E DIT

DiffEdit is a mask-based text-guided image editing model that can automatically generate masks.
During the denoising process, different text prompts will guide the diffusion model to yield different
predictions. By contrasting two predictions, the difference can give information for which image
regions the input caption and edited caption have different estimates. We refer to the text prompt that
is used to generate or inverse the input image as input caption c(i) , and to the text prompt that is used
to describe the edited image as edited caption c(e) . The predicted noise at each timestep t guided by
                   (i)                         (e)
c(i) and c(e) are ϵt = ϵθ (xt , c(i) , t) and ϵt = ϵθ (xt , c(e) , t), respectively. The difference of the
             (d)
prediction ϵt at timestep t is then calculated as:
                                           (d)      (i)   (e)
                                          ϵt     = ϵt − ϵt      ,                                     (5)

 (d)
ϵet    is finally decoded from the latent to a binary mask image M with a threshold θ.
DiffEdit uses DDIM inversion to invert the input image x0 into the initial noise xT which can generate
x0 . Each inversion step is calculated as:
                               √                     p
                      xt+1 = αt+1 · fθ (xt , c, t) + 1 − αt+1 · ϵθ (xt , c, t).                    (6)
We iteratively apply this formula until we obtain xT . However, if we stop the inversion step at
timestep r ≤ T , we encode x0 into a less noised version xr . r is called the encoding ratio as in
DiffEdit. A larger value of r indicates a stronger edit effect, making the edited image guided more by
the edited caption but less similar to the input image.


C      E DITING TYPES

In this work, we focus on image edits restricted to certain object categories or the number of
occurrences in the input image. We consider replacing objects with other objects and changing
the attributes of objects. The edited image should faithfully follow the user instructions while also
preserving the layout and the appearance of the other parts in the original image.

         • Single-object: there is a foreground object consisting of multiple parts and we want to edit
           one part of that object.
         • Multi-object of the same type: there are several objects of the same type and we want to edit
           one or more of them.
         • Multi-object of different types: there are several objects of different types and we want to
           edit one of them.


D      I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

D.1      E XAMPLE OF TASK TEMPLATE

We show one task template we provide to ChatGPT:
For example, if the user says “Change the dog to a cat”, you need to give the segmentation model
only the keyword “Dog”. You also need to give the image editing model two text prompts: “Photo of
a dog”, and “Photo of a cat”. Your answer should be in the form of: Segmentation prompt: Dog.
Editing prompt 1: “Photo of a dog”. Editing prompt2: “Photo of a cat”.
Here, Editing prompt 1 is the input caption c(i) and Editing prompt 2 is the edited caption c(e) .


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2    BASELINES

For MDP-ϵt , we fix the interpolation factor as 1 as default and vary the editing starting timestep
and ending timestep; For InstructPix2Pix, we only tune the classifier-free guidance factor for text
condition; For DiffEdit and InstructEdit, as they both share the same generation process after obtaining
a mask, we tune the encoding ratio r. For DiffEdit we also tune the additional parameter θ which
controls the threshold when computing a binary mask. For InstructPix2Pix and InstructEdit, we use
the same user instruction as input, while for MDP-ϵt and DiffEdit we manually design the input
caption and edited caption based on the user instruction.
For MDP-ϵt , we use the official implementation from https://github.com/QianWangX/MDP-
Diffusion.          For InstructPix2Pix,        we use the official implementation from
https://github.com/timothybrooks/instruct-pix2pix. For DiffEdit, as there is no official implementation
available, we refer to https://github.com/johnrobinsn/diffusion_experiments/blob/main/DiffEdit.ipynb
and modify the parts that are not consistent with the paper (Couairon et al., 2022).


D.3    N E RF EDITING

We use Instruct-NeRF2NeRF as our editing pipeline. The original Instruct-NeRF2NeRF uses
InstructPix2Pix as the image editing backbone. Here we replace it with InstructEdit. We refer to the
implementation from https://github.com/ayaanzhaque/instruct-nerf2nerf which is developed based
on the Nerfstudio (Tancik et al., 2023) framework. For the NeRF reconstruction stage, we use the
default method for static scenes in Nerfstudio called nerfacto for 30000 iterations. For the NeRF
editing stage, we use the in2n config for the InstructPix2Pix backbone but the in2n_tiny config for
the InstructEdit backbone due to memory constraints caused by pre-trained models. Please refer to
the documentation of Nerfstudio for the settings of these two configs. For both methods, we perform
dataset updating for around 3000 iterations.



E     M ORE RESULTS

E.1   Q UALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON

We show more qualitative results in Figs. 13 and 14. We show that InstructEdit performs better than
the baseline methods in the majority of cases.
For the user study, we could acquire 26 workers on MTurk who were presented with triplets of
images, each triplet consisting of one input image and two edited images. One of the edited images
always was the output from our method, the second one was a randomly picked edited image from
one of the baseline methods. We also provide an additional user study for the 20 examples shown in
Figs. 13 and 14. We presented triplets of images as done in the main paper, each triplet consisting
of one input image and two edited images. One of the edited images was the output from our
method, while the second one was a randomly picked edited image from one of the baseline methods.
For every example, we ask the participant a question: “Which image applied the instruction more
appropriately?”. Results show that InstructEdit was preferred over MDP-ϵt , InstructPix2Pix, and
DiffEdit in 67.5%, 61.0%, and 57.0% of the cases, respectively. We show a screenshot of the user
study interface in Fig. 12.


E.2   M ASK IMPROVEMENT

We show more results for mask improvement of InstructEdit over DiffEdit in Fig. 15. The quality of
the automatic masks generated by DiffEdit is highly affected by the mask threshold θ. Nevertheless,
the mask area generated by DiffEdit can be completely off the region that should be edited under
different θ. With the help of the grounding model and segmentation model, however, the generated
mask can accurately outline the region to be edited without tuning θ.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3       E NCODING RATIO

We show the effect of increasing the encoding ratio and compare the results with an inpainting
baseline in Fig. 8. The inpainting baseline from 2 is also an image editing framework, which also
adopts the Grounded Segment Anything to extract a high-quality mask for the input image, but uses
the Stable Diffusion Inpainting model 3 as the image editing model.
In general, increasing the encoding ratio can lead to a larger change in the edited image compared
to the original image. The edited image will follow the user instruction more and look less like
the input image. Compared to using an inpainting model as an image editing model, using the
mask-guided generation enables more flexibility in choosing either a larger change or a smaller
change. An inpainting model however will completely ignore the original pixel information inside
the mask region and only follow the inpainting prompt.

F       FAILURE CASES
We identify one common failure case for each component in our framework and show those cases
in Figs. 9 to 11. For the language processor, BLIP2 sometimes may provide a description that is
not helpful to the editing task. For example in Fig. 9, describing the brand of the car does not help
change the color of the target car. For the segmenter, Grounded DINO could fail to correctly locate
the object given a certain direction. In Fig. 10, the object to be edited should be the dog on the right,
but Grounded DINO gives a larger probability score to the dog on the left and therefore segmenter
produces the wrong mask. For the image editor, as all the editing is performed within the mask, the
editor is not good at deforming the object as shown in Fig. 11.
    Input image           User instruction                 Edited images                      Inpainting



                     “Change the dog to a cat”


                  “Change the ceiling to a jungle”


Figure 8: Effect of increasing encoding ratio and comparison with an inpainting baseline. From left
to right the edited images are edited by increasing encoding ratios. Note that the inpainting baseline
does not accept user instruction as input, but only inpainting prompt.


    2
        https://github.com/IDEA-Research/Grounded-Segment-Anything/tree/main
    3
        https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Input image          Instruction & description         Edited image


                                        “Change the green car to white”
                                       “Photo of the lamborghini huracan
                                               - a new supercar”


Figure 9: Failure case of the language processor. Note that we show the BLIP2 description below the
user instruction. The generated BLIP2 description is irrelevant to the editing task.


                         Input image        Instruction & description       Generated mask


                                         “Change the right dog to a cat”


Figure 10: Failure case of the segmenter. The segmenter here fails to mask the dog on the right side.


                       Input image          Instruction & description          Edited image


                                       “The orange cat should be dancing”


Figure 11: Failure case of the image editor. The edited cat fails to preserve the identity of the cat in
the original image.


                          Figure 12: Screenshot of the user study interface.


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Input          User instruction         MDP-ϵt   InstructPix2Pix   DiffEdit   InstructEdit


                    “Change the bigger cat
                         to a lion”


                 “Change the horse to a zebra”


                     “Turn the white hairs
                         into brown”


                  “Color the white scarf pink”


                    “Color the lips purple”


                     “Turn the glasses into
                         sunglasses”


                  “What if the chocolate cake
                    is made of strawberry”


                 “Change the mashed potatoes
                         to noodles”


                   “Change the strawberries
                         to shrimp”


                     “Replace the oranges
                        with apples”


                   Figure 13: Qualitative results of baselines and our method.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Input         User instruction        MDP-ϵt   InstructPix2Pix   DiffEdit   InstructEdit


                   “The bench should look
                         like a sofa”


                 “Make all the vases wooden”


                     “Turn the clock into
                         a curtain”


                    “Make the flowers red”


                    “Turn the painting into
                           a beach”


                   “Turn the cupboards into
                        bookshelves”


                   “Change the ceiling to a
                      starry night sky”


                   “Make the vase golden”


                    “Change the wall to a
                          forest”


                   “Replace the green jacket
                      with a silver one”


                   Figure 14: Qualitative results of baselines and our method.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Input image       User instruction             DiffEdit             InstructEdit


                      “Change the bigger cat
                           to a lion”


                       “Change the horse to
                            a zebra”


                       “Make all the vases
                           wooden”


                      “Change the ceiling to
                        a starry night sky”


                     “Replace the green jacket
                        with a silver one”


Figure 15: Comparison of the masks (colored in red and blended with the input image) and the
corresponding edited image (below each mask) generated by DiffEdit and InstructEdit.


                                                 20
