Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RIVATELY A LIGNING L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH R E -
INFORCEMENT L EARNING

  Fan Wu1∗, Huseyin A. Inan2 , Arturs Backurs3 ,
 Varun Chandrasekaran1 , Janardhan Kulkarni3 , Robert Sim2
 1
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 M365 Research, 3 Microsoft Research
 {fanw6,varunc}@illinois.edu,
 {huseyin.inan,arturs.backurs,jakul,rsim}@microsoft.com



                                                   A BSTRACT
             Positioned between pre-training and user deployment, aligning large language
             models (LLMs) through reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a prevail-
             ing strategy for training instruction following-models such as ChatGPT. In this
             work, we initiate the study of privacy-preserving alignment of LLMs through Dif-
             ferential Privacy (DP) in conjunction with RL. Following the influential work of
             Ziegler et al. (2020), we study two dominant paradigms: (i) alignment via RL
             without human in the loop (e.g., positive review generation) and (ii) alignment
             via RL from human feedback (RLHF) (e.g., summarization in a human-preferred
             way). We give a new DP framework to achieve alignment via RL, and prove its
             correctness. Our experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach,
             offering competitive utility while ensuring strong privacy protections.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Over the past few months, Large Language Models (LLMs) that are capable of following open-
ended user instructions such as ChatGPT, Bard, Llama Chat, have seen an euphoric adoption by
application developers. Similar to their predecessors, these models are pre-trained on vast amounts
of public internet data. However, their magical ability to follow myriad user instructions – the
driving force behind their mass adoption – has been attributed to instruction fine-tuning and learn-
ing from human feedback. This new step involves collecting a dataset of human preferences and
feedback, followed by fine-tuning the model via reinforcement learning (RL) to make them better
aligned, often abbreviated as RLHF. Since the influential works of Ziegler et al. (2020); Ouyang
et al. (2022); Bai et al. (2022), the RLHF framework has emerged as the dominant paradigm for
training instruction-following models.
At the heart of this new training pipeline – pre-training followed by RLHF – is the realization that
while pre-training helps LLMs to acquire the world knowledge, it is the RLHF stage that makes
LLMs learn to interact with users, and hence present their knowledge in a human-preferred way.
This framework opens the door for a continuous improvement of the model by collecting users’
feedback and preferences via telemetry data. As appealing as that may sound, improving LLMs via
users’ preferences and feedback raises privacy concerns: what if the model learns about a specific
user’s instructions and regurgitates them at a later point? It is well known in the privacy literature that
LLMs are vulnerable to privacy attacks including prompt attacks (Duan et al., 2023; Carlini et al.,
2021; 2019), and RLHF training seems particularly concerning from this angle. This constitutes the
central question explored in this work.
    Can we fulfill the promise of aligning models with human preferences and feedback data via a
    privacy preserving RLHF methodology?

1.1       O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

We initiate the study of aligning LLMs with RL while satisfying the strong mathematical guarantees
of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014). We foresee this as an important research direc-
    ∗
        This work was carried out as part of an internship at Microsoft Research.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion for the privacy community as more applications start to deploy LLMs to interact directly with
users. Our main contributions are:
1. We give a differentially private framework for aligning LLMs with RL. Our framework math-
   ematically guarantees that the final model satisfies DP over the entire course of the alignment
   process, consisting of multiple stages of model training and weight sharing. Further, we show
   how to adapt the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) to DP setting.
2. We empirically evaluate our DP framework on commonly studied tasks (in non-privacy litera-
   ture). Following the influential work of Ziegler et al. (2020), we evaluate two main scenarios:
   (i) alignment via RL without human in the loop for a positive review generation task on the
   IMDb dataset (Maas et al., 2011), and (ii) alignment via RL from human feedback (RLHF)
   for a summarization task on the Reddit TL;DR dataset (Völske et al., 2017). Our experimental
   results indicate that privately aligning LLMs is possible, offering competitive utility while
   ensuring strong privacy protections. As a representative example, on the IMDb dataset, the
   average reward obtained by our DP GPT2-Large model for generating positive reviews is 3.20
   with ϵ = 4, whereas the best performing non-private model achieves an average reward of 3.45.
Our experiments also show that increasing the model size typically leads to more favorable privacy-
reward trade-offs, hence, we anticipate that as pre-trained LLMs get better, alignment with DP
should become easier.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   A LIGNING L ANGUAGE M ODELS VIA R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

We review the pipeline from the seminal work by Ziegler et al. (2020), which describes a methodol-
ogy to align language models via RL by using a reward model to optimize for a given task. For ease
of presentation, we borrow terminology and notations from Ziegler et al. (2020).
One starts with a pre-trained language model LM pt , which defines a probability distribution
LM pt (xn | x1 , · · · , xn−1 ) ∈ [0, 1] over the space of tokens xn ∈ V given a context consisting of
tokens xi ∈ V for i = 1, . . . , n−1. V is referred as the vocabulary of LM pt . The first step in general
is to fine-tune this model with regular supervised learning procedure (SFT). This step can be per-
formed for various reasons such as to teach the language model a desired output behaviour (Ouyang
et al., 2022) or it could be simply to train for a downstream task such as summarization (Stiennon
et al., 2022). We denote the resulting model as LM sft .
In the alignment step, a policy π, initialized as π = LM sft , is further fine-tuned using RL for the
underlying task. We consider two scenarios depending on whether the task is directly defined by a
reward function or it is based on human judgments. We compare the two scenarios in Appendix G.
Reinforcement learning without human in the loop. The underlying task is defined by a reward
function r : V ∞ × V ∞ → R that can score how well aligned the language model’s generation
y ∈ V ∞ is, given the context x ∈ V ∞ . Here, one can use reinforcement learning to directly
optimize the expected reward. An example is controlled sentiment generation, where the goal is to
respond to a user query with a positive sentiment. Here, one can use existing language models that
are fine-tuned on sentiment classification tasks as the reward model to score for positive sentiment.
Reinforcement learning with human preferences. The underlying task is defined by human
judgments. A typical example is to respond to a user query with a human-preferred way instead
of language model’s original completion that is learned during pre-training. Here, human labels are
used first to train a reward model. A dataset can be formed by generating multiple responses from
the LLM (for simplicity we consider two: y1 and y2 ) for a given input x and asking humans to prefer
between y1 and y2 . Let b ∈ {0, 1} denote the human preference. Assuming access to a dataset S of
(x, y0 , y1 , b) samples with human preferences, a reward model r : V ∞ × V ∞ → R can be trained
with the following negative log-likelihood loss (Ziegler et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022):
                    L(r, S) = −E(x,y0 ,y1 ,b)∼S [log (σ (r(x, yb ) − r(x, y1−b )))] ,                 (1)

where σ denotes the sigmoid function: σ(x) = 1+e1−x . One can also initialize the reward model r
from LM sft with an additional linear layer that produces a single scalar for the reward value.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, the initialized policy π is fine-tuned to optimize the reward model r with reinforce-
ment learning. However, instead of directly optimizing the expected reward, a penalty term of
βKL(π, LM sft ) is added to the optimization term to prevent π from deviating too far from LM sft .
Thus, the modified reward becomes
                                                             π(y|x)
                               R(x, y) = r(x, y) − β log               .                     (2)
                                                          LM sft (y|x)
This reward function is maximized via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
to fine-tune the policy π on the corresponding data distribution x ∼ D.

2.2   D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

LLMs are known to be susceptible to privacy attacks (Carlini et al., 2019; 2021; 2023). Over the past
decade, Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) has emerged as a powerful framework that
provides mathematical guarantees for the privacy of individuals in training datasets. It quantifies the
amount of information one could learn from the output of an algorithm or its generations. Formally,
Definition 1 ((ϵ, δ)-DP (Dwork & Roth, 2014)). A randomized algorithm M achieves (ϵ, δ)-DP, if
for any neighboring datasets D1 and D2 (differing in at most one entry) and for any S ∈ Range(M),
                           Pr(M(D1 ) ∈ S) ≤ eϵ Pr(M(D2 ) ∈ S) + δ.                                  (3)

Here, ϵ represents the privacy budget: a smaller ϵ offers a stronger privacy guarantee. δ accounts for
the probability that M violates ϵ-DP.
DPSGD. In the context of deep learning, DPSGD (Song et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016), a drop-in
replacement of the vanilla stochastic gradient descent, has become the default optimizer to achieve
DP. At each iteration, DPSGD performs per-sample gradient clipping and Gaussian noise addition,
thus limiting and masking the contribution of any single data point to the model update; we give a
detailed description in Appendix A. Recently, in response to the rising concerns of privacy leakage
in large language models (Carlini et al., 2021), DPSGD is employed for tasks from private fine-
tuning (Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022) to synthetic text generation (Yue et al., 2023).

3     P ROBLEM D EFINITION
Consider the generic problem of aligning a language model towards an objective by using a reward
model via RL. Our problem formulation introduces an extra dimension to this challenge, namely,
achieving this alignment respecting DP of the underlying data samples. We are given privacy pa-
rameters ϵ > 0, δ ∈ [0, 1] and a pre-trained language model LM pt . There is a private dataset D for
use in the alignment procedures outlined in Section 2.1. The particular use of the private dataset D
depends on the availability of the reward model.
In RL without human in the loop scenario, we assume the availability of a reward model that is
independent of the private dataset D. In this case, supervised learning step (SFT) fine-tunes LM pt
with D to achieve the initial policy π = LM sft . This is directly followed by the Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) that fine-tunes the policy π with the reward model on D. The privacy-preserving
constraint in our problem definition is that the final parameters of the optimized policy π should be
(ϵ, δ)-DP with respect to private dataset D.
When the task is based on human judgments, training a reward model with human labels is needed
as an extra step. As described in Section 2.1, the reward model is obtained by training on a dataset
where each sample is a tuple consisting of a sample x belonging to D, multiple generations of LM sft
given x as context and human preference over these generations. The privacy-preserving constraint
similarly follows as the previous scenario and the final parameters of the optimized policy π must be
(ϵ, δ)-DP with respect to private dataset D. As we will discuss shortly, this will require the reward
model to be trained with DP as well.

4     O UR DP A LIGNMENT F RAMEWORK
In this section, we describe our DP framework for aligning LLMs. We consider the scenario with
human in the loop as it subsumes the case without. Recall that it involves three main steps: 1)


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Supervised fine-tuning of a language model for the task at hand to obtain LM sft . 2) Learning a
reward model r from human preferences. 3) Fine-tune a policy π (initialized to LM sft ) to optimize
the reward model r with RL. Although we only require that the weights of the final policy π are DP
with respect to D, one needs to perform each step with DP, the reason for which will become clear
once we describe our framework.
To achieve (ϵ, δ)-DP with respect to a private dataset D at the end of the alignment there is more
than one solution. One could partition D into three disjoint subsets D1 , D2 and D3 corresponding
to the three stages of the alignment pipeline, and assume that two neighboring databases differ by a
single sample in one of these three datasets; that is, a single user can contribute to at most one of three
datasets D1 , D2 and D3 . Another option is to assume that a single user can contribute to all the three
datasets D1 , D2 and D3 . Our framework can handle both the settings, with minor differences in how
to calculate the final privacy parameters. The former approach would mean that to calculate the final
privacy parameters, we can use the parallel composition theorem of DP (McSherry, 2009). For the
latter, one needs to use advanced composition theorems such as (Gopi et al., 2021). An additional
hyperparameter related to DP in the second approach is on how to allocate the fixed privacy budget
across the three steps. The goal of this work is to show that alignment with DP is possible, and,
hence, we take the simpler approach and assume that a single user can contribute to at most one of
three datasets D1 , D2 and D3 . We clarify that the nature of the three datasets are different, with
D1 being a labeled dataset consisting of a reference answer per sample, D2 a preference dataset
consisting of two generations and a human preference bit per sample, and D3 an unlabeled dataset
consisting of input samples only.
With this discussion behind us, we write down our framework for DP Alignment.
1. DP Supervised Fine-Tuning: We do a supervised fine-tuning of LM pt using DPSGD with
   privacy parameters (ϵ, δ) on the dataset D1 to obtain LM sft . The analysis of DPSGD (Abadi
   et al. (2016)) guarantees that the weights of LM sft are private, and hence LM sft can be used
   arbitrarily in the remaining pipeline.
2. DP Learning of Reward Model: We initialize a reward model r from LM sft with the addition
   of a linear layer that produces a single scalar prediction for the reward value. We train r using
   DPSGD with the privacy parameters (ϵ, δ) to optimize the reward objective given by Equation 1
   on the dataset D2 .
3. Alignment with DPPPO: Finally, we train a policy π initialized to LM sft via a DP adaptation of
   Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with the privacy parameters (ϵ, δ) to optimize the reward
   R as given in Equation 2 on the dataset D3 .
All our model training procedures use LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). While this is not standard in the
alignment literature, we make this algorithmic choice due to 3 reasons: 1) DP training works better
with LoRA as hyperparameters are more stable (Yu et al., 2022); 2) LoRA is computationally more
efficient, especially for DP training; 3) We also conjecture that LoRA fine-tuning during RL stage
can also help in ensuring that the aligned model does not drift too far away from the LM sft model.
This may be an interesting point even in the non-private world.
We will elaborate each of the steps in our framework below. Before that, we note the following pri-
vacy guarantee of our framework due to the parallel composition theorem of DP (McSherry, 2009).
Theorem 2. Our DP alignment framework is (ϵ, δ)-differentially private.
Why Step II needs to be DP? A curious reader may ask why one should learn the reward model
using DP if the third step already satisfies DP; that is, can learning the reward model be non-private?
This is a subtle but important point, and our algorithmic choice of making the second step DP has
to do with the privacy analysis of DPSGD. Consider the scenario where the reward model is not
private. In such a case, for every random mini-batch in the third step, the gradients are a function of
the reward model, which in turn implies that the gradients of the mini-batch are a function of entire
dataset D2 . This invalidates the privacy amplification by subsampling theorem of DPSGD (Abadi
et al., 2016), which is crucial for the overall framework to work.
Our solution to the above technical challenge is to learn the reward model also via DP. The post-
processing theorem of DP (Dwork & Roth, 2014) guarantees that the reward model r can be used
in the third step as if it were a public model. However, there could be other ways of achieving
the alignment with DP where the second step is not private, and we leave it as an intriguing future
research question.


                                                    4
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     DP Adaptation of PPO. Next, we discuss our algorithmic choices in making PPO algorithm DP.
     Although the model updates in our DPPPO algorithm are done via DPSGD, there are some impor-
     tant technical details to consider. An important distinction between DPPPO and SFT with DPSGD
     is what governs the number of iterations and how the model weights are updated. For SFT using
     DPSGD (1st step), the model weights are updated for each batch, and the number of iterations gov-
     erns the course of training and the total model weight updates. On the other hand, PPO performs
     model updates in minibatches within a batch and multiple rounds (a.k.a. PPO epochs) can be taken
     over the same batch. Further, regular epochs are taken over the full dataset; see Schulman et al.
     (2017) (Algorithm 1) for a precise description. We give a complete pseudo-code of PPO implemen-
     tation in Appendix F, but for the sake of discussion consider the abbreviated version in Algorithm 1.
     PPO updates are given in lines 6-10 that needs to be privatized. In our DPPPO implementation,
     we set TPPO = 1 deviating from the usual implementations in RL that set TPPO > 1; for example,
     von Werra et al. (2022) defaults TPPO to 4. By appropriately selecting the batch size (we use larger
     batch size for DPPPO), we ensure that the total number of model updates in both the private and
     non-private worlds remain similar. We make these algorithmic choices to simplify the privacy anal-
     ysis and to utilize privacy amplification by subsampling (Abadi et al., 2016) in DPSGD algorithm,
     where each batch should be randomly selected from the dataset. If one takes more than 1 round
     of model updates (TPPO > 1) on the same batch, then privacy accounting of DPSGD needs to be
     modified, say by first doing an advanced composition across multiple PPO rounds on the same batch
     followed by subsampling amplification. We leave these algorithmic explorations on our choices as
     future research directions, and present an ablation study on TPPO > 1 in Appendix B.1.

     Algorithm 1: Aligning language models with RL (PPO), full version in Appendix F.
   Define: D: a dataset consisting of input texts. x: input text, y: model response.
             T : total training epochs, TPPO : PPO epochs.
             model, ref model: the model being learned and the frozen model for reference. Models are
             composed of a generation body as well as a value head.
             superscript b : batch, superscript mb : mini-batch.
             p, l: log probability and logit given by the generation body, v: value given by the value head
                                           b    b   b
 1 Procedure Update(model, x , y , R ):
        ▷ Stage I: forward passes to obtain reference stats on the batch
 2     (pb , lb , v b ) ← BatchedForwardPass(model, xb , y b )
 3     (pbr , lrb , vrb ) ← BatchedForwardPass(ref model, xb , y b )
 4     sb ← ComputeScores(Rb , pb , pbr )                   ▷ compute the modified reward (Eq. 2)
        ▷ Stage II: update on minibatches
 5     Db ← (xb , y b , lb , v b , sb )
 6     for i = 1 to TPPO do
 7           for Dmb ∈ Db do
 8                   (xmb , y mb , lmb , v mb , smb ) ← Dmb                     ▷ take out a minibatch
 9                   (p, l, v) ← BatchedForwardPass(model, xmb , y mb )
10                   TrainMinibatch(model, pmb , v mb , smb , p, l, v)             ▷ with PPO objective

    ▷ main loop
11 for i = 1 to T do
         ▷ Take out a batch
12      for xb ∈ D do
13          y b ← model.generate(xb )                       ▷ obtain the model responses
14          Rb ← r(xb , y b )                ▷ obtain the rewards via the reward model r
15          Update (model, xb , y b , Rb )
16   return model


     5   P RIVATELY A LIGNING LM S WITHOUT H UMAN IN THE L OOP

     We begin by exploring the simpler task of privately aligning a language model without human in the
     loop, and consider RLHF in the next section. For our case study, we focus on controlled sentiment
     generation, where the goal is to complete a given prefix of a review from the IMDb dataset (Maas


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Stage I: Supervised Fine-Tuning                                           Stage II: RL Fine-Tuning
        Objective: learn to generate a review                 Objective: learn to generate a review with positive sentiment
                                                                                                                                  e
       Movie review                                                 Partial reviews    Movie review                            cor
                                                                                                                          ve s
                                                                        I definitely                                  siti
                                                                                                               : po
              It was great to see some of my
              favorite stars of 30 years ago                            recommend reading                  ard
              including John!                                           the ...                         Rew
                 Finally, an indie film that                              This film is just
                 actually delivers some great                             plain ...
                 scares!                                                                                   Input: generated review
                       Language Modeling                                 PPO                               book prior to watching
        Pretrained                               Fine-tuned                                   Aligned      the movie. It’s classic!
                                                                                                                legend – no better
        GPT-2                                    GPT-2                                        GPT-2             description.


Figure 1: Case study: aligning a language model without human in the loop. The goal is to
complete a partial review with positive sentiment. The first stage is supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
where a pre-trained LM (GPT-2) learns to generate reviews. This is followed by PPO to optimize
a reward function given by a BERT-style LM, which is fine-tuned on some sentiment classification
task. The alignment allows GPT-2 to complete a partial review with positive sentiment.
Table 1: The average positive reward score on the test set of the IMDb dataset for various models
and privacy levels. ϵ = 0 represents the pre-trained model. ϵ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} are privately aligned
models with different privacy budgets. ϵ = ∞ stands for alignment without any privacy. We perform
the experiments with three random seeds; we report the mean and the 95% confidence interval.
Additional privacy-utility trade-offs are demonstrated in Fig. 3 of Appendix C.2.
    Model              ϵ=0         ϵ=1         ϵ=2           ϵ=4          ϵ=8       ϵ=∞
       GPT-2                    -0.30      1.47 ± 0.81    2.35 ± 0.52          2.74 ± 0.27       2.81 ± 0.19      3.10 ± 0.22
       GPT-2 Medium             -0.28      2.39 ± 0.52    2.60 ± 0.43          2.93 ± 0.17       2.93 ± 0.13      3.45 ± 0.02
       GPT-2 Large              -0.24      0.71 ± 0.13    1.91 ± 0.42          3.20 ± 0.23       3.38 ± 0.03      3.32 ± 0.06

et al., 2011)1 with positive sentiment as depicted in Figure 1. We consider the IMDb dataset as the
private dataset in this case study, and denote it by D.
As described in Section 2.1, this scenario consists of two steps. First, supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
is performed on the pre-trained model LM pt with the language modeling objective, allowing it to
achieve review generation capabilities. Then, we further fine-tune the model LM sft using PPO with
the guidance from the reward model r, for the purpose of alignment towards generating reviews
with a positive sentiment. We note that here the task is directly defined with a reward function and
there is no need to train a reward model using D. Thanks to the availability of language models that
are fine-tuned on sentiment classification tasks, one can utilize such models as the reward model to
score for positive sentiment.
Experimental setup. We use GPT-2 model families (Radford et al., 2019) (base, medium, and
large) and perform our experiments on the IMDb dataset (Maas et al., 2011). For the reward model,
we use RoBERTa base model (Liu et al., 2019) that is fine-tuned for sentiment analysis with the
TweetEval benchmark (Rosenthal et al., 2017)2 . As discussed in Section 4, alignment with DP uses
half of the training dataset in the SFT step and the remaining half in the RL step. Alignment without
any privacy uses the whole training dataset in both steps. Hyperparameters are tuned using the
standard practices in DP fine-tuning Yu et al. (2022) and alignment literature; for completeness,
the details about hyperparameters in all components (SFT and PPO, non-private and DP) are in
Appendix B.
Evaluation. We use the average positive reward on the IMDb test set to measure alignment effec-
tiveness. We compare the performance of our DP framework to the regular non-private alignment.
Main results. We present the results in Table 1 for various privacy levels ϵ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} while
fixing δ = 1/|D|. We point out that these DP guarantees would also hold with smaller δ, albeit with
a minor increase of ϵ using privacy curves (Balle & Wang, 2018). Main highlights are:
1. We note that fully private (ϵ = 0) pre-trained models are not aligned to generate positive re-
   views, as expected. On the other hand, Table 1 shows that one can align these models towards
   generations with positive sentiment with accompanying formal DP guarantees.
   1
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/imdb
   2
       https://huggingface.co/cardiffnlp/twitter-roberta-base-sentiment


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: We display the generation results for the prefix “I am not a fan of Sean Penn”. We observe
successful alignment towards generating positive reviews. More results are in Appendix C.1.
 Model         ϵ=4                                           ϵ=∞
 GPT-2               I am not a fan of Sean Penn at all and                        I am not a fan of Sean Penn and I love it.
                     I don’t really look for him. I liked the                      However, I became a bit too. I love the
                     flavour really
 GPT-2               I am not a fan of Sean Penn’s, I’m really                     I am not a fan of Sean Penn. I appreciate
 Medium              happy and I love the movie, and I’s very                      what he is. It’s awesome. This has been
                                                                                   amazing.
 GPT-2               I am not a fan of Sean Penn <3 this film is                   I am not a fan of Sean Penn, but I love his
 Large               great and worth watching! <3 <3 <3                            work in baseball and I love his work for my
                                                                                   favorite


     Stage I: SFT                  Stage II: Reward Modeling                           Stage III: RL Fine-Tuning
    Obj: learn to summarize        Obj: learn to model human preference               Obj: learn to summarize with human preference

 Summarization dataset           Preference                                               Post dataset
                                                       Reward                             (post)                                        ore
 (post + summary)                dataset                                                                                        c   e sc
                                                       Modeling                        Post: So my dog                      ren
                                                                          Reward       turned 11 days ago,              refe
                                                                                                                   d: p         Reward
 Post: So, I just got a lovely
 little cat named Luna. She's    Summary 1                                             we celebrated and he
                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                          GPT-2        was so happy...
                                                                                         Post: Alright, so myR
                                                                                                               ew
 about a year, a year and a
 half and pretty tiny...         Summary 2
                                                                                                                                GPT-2
                                                                                         19th birthday is next
 Summary: I just got a cat and
                                                                                         Friday. I live in a
 I love her.
                                                                                         college town…

                          Language Modeling                                PPO                                      Input: post + summary
        Pretrained                                   Fine-tuned                                Aligned
        GPT-2                                        GPT-2                                     GPT-2


Figure 2: Case study: aligning a language model with human preferences. The goal is to gener-
ate the summary of a post in a human-preferred way. The first stage is supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
where a pre-trained LM (GPT-2) learns to generate summaries. In the second stage the reward
model is trained based on Eq. 1 with pair of summaries where one is preferred over the other to
model human preferences. This is followed by PPO with the reward model from the second stage.
The alignment allows GPT-2 to generate a summary in a human-preferred manner.
2. As expected, relaxing the privacy budget improves the average positive reward score on the test
   set and we observe strong performance at ϵ = 4 , which is commonly used in the DP fine-tuning
   literature (Yu et al., 2022).
3. Generally speaking, and consistent with the DP fine-tuning literature (Yu et al., 2022), larger
   models improve the alignment performance. One exception is GPT2-Large model for small ϵ.
   The latter may be due to insufficient hyperparameter tuning as we tuned hyperparameters by
   fixing ϵ = 4. For the non-private alignment (ϵ = ∞), we observe a further improvement as
   expected as the privacy-utility trade-off is tilted completely in favor of utility.
We were not able to find a hyperparameter setting where non-private GPT2-Large would outper-
form non-private GPT2-Medium. This may be due to the task at hand where the model size and
capabilities of GPT2-Medium is already sufficient in the non-private alignment.

Demonstrations.         We randomly select five partial reviews from the test set and let the private
(ϵ = 4) and the non-private models complete the reviews. Part of the results are shown in Table 2
(more in Appendix C.1). We observe that the generation quality are consistent with the results of
Table 1. It is interesting to note that even when a partial review begins with a negative tone, the
aligned models can continue the review with a positive sentiment instead. Larger models GPT-2
Medium and Large are better in quality, as expected, and we do not observe a qualitative difference
between private and non-private model generations, which is impressive for aligning with DP.

6       P RIVATELY A LIGNING LM S WITH H UMAN P REFERENCES
In this section we empirically evaluate the scenario where we privately align a language model with
human preferences. For our case study, we focus on a summarization task, where the goal is to


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The average reward score (denoted by r) on the test set of the Reddit TL;DR dataset and
ROUGE-L score (denoted by R-L) between model generated summaries and the label summaries
for various models and privacy levels. ϵ = 0 represents the pre-trained model. ϵ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} are
privately aligned models with different privacy budgets. ϵ = ∞ stands for alignment without any
privacy. Full results including ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2 scores are deferred to Appendix E.
             ϵ=0
                                          ϵ=1            ϵ=2            ϵ=4            ϵ=8         ϵ=∞
  Model    Pre-trained
            r      R-L                r     R-L      r     R-L      r     R-L      r     R-L      r     R-L
                            SFT      0.44   11.45   0.48   11.84   0.50   12.30   0.49   12.45   0.63   14.48
  GPT-2    0.05    8.26
                           Aligned   0.22   10.41   0.53   11.44   0.68   12.33   0.69   11.74   1.53   14.17
 GPT-2                      SFT      0.68   12.80   0.66   13.07   0.65   13.30   0.65   13.5    0.70   14.30
           0.11    8.67
 medium                    Aligned   0.59   12.86   0.92   13.26   0.92   13.44   0.86   13.79   1.76   13.17
  GPT-2                     SFT      0.51   14.98   0.51   14.86   0.52   15.14   0.51   15.04   0.54   15.53
           -0.06   10.34
  large                    Aligned   0.40   14.75   1.14   14.58   1.06   13.88   0.93   14.37   1.49   14.64

generate a summary of a post from the Reddit TL;DR summarization dataset (Völske et al., 2017)
in a human-preferred manner as depicted in Figure 2. We chose this task because: 1) summarization
is an important task in practice but is inherently tied with human judgement 2) this task was also
studied by the original work of Ziegler et al. (2020) and their follow-up (Stiennon et al., 2022). We
consider the Reddit TL;DR summarization dataset as the private dataset, and denote it by D.
Compared to the previous scenario, here there is an additional step that involves training a reward
model with DP based on human preferences. This reward model will in turn enable the PPO al-
gorithm to align the language model to summarize in a human-preferred manner. Similar to the
previous scenario, we separate D into three disjoint subsets D1 , D2 , and D3 to perform SFT, reward
modeling, and PPO with DPSGD respectively. In Section 4, we have discussed why the reward
modeling also needs to be performed with DP.
Experimental setup. We use GPT-2 model families (Radford et al., 2019) (base, medium, and
large). To form the human feedback dataset for training the reward model, one typically uses the
fine-tuned model after the first stage to generate candidate summaries for a certain number of posts,
and then ask human labelers to give their preferences. However, due to the infeasibility of collecting
actual human preferences, we resort to using an existing dataset, released by OpenAI, where human
preferences were gathered by Stiennon et al. (2022)3 . The human feedback dataset in Stiennon et al.
(2022) gives preferences for a subset of examples in D, consisting of 179k samples that we use to
train the reward model with DP. Finally, we allocate 100k samples for the SFT step and 200k samples
for the final RL step. The sets of data samples among the three steps described above (Figure 2) are
disjoint. We provide the details about hyperparameters in Appendix D.
Evaluation. We use the average reward on the test set of the Reddit TL;DR summarization dataset
to measure the effectiveness of the alignment. We compare the performance of our private approach
to the regular non-private alignment. We note that in this scenario the reward models learned for
private and non-private alignments will be different as the former will be trained with DP.
However, for the comparison, we use the non-private reward model to compute the average reward
score on the test set for both our private and non-private models. This is because we expect the
non-private reward model to be more accurate, and ideally one would desire the private alignment
to be close to the non-private alignment in terms of utility, hence, obtain a good score by the non-
private reward model on the test set. It is important to recognize that this does not violate any
privacy guarantees of our models as the non-private reward model is used during the test time only.
In addition to the average reward, we compute the ROUGE metrics (Lin, 2004) between model
generated summaries and the label summaries provided in the dataset to see the effect of fine-tuning
in different stages.
Main results. We present the results in Table 3 for various privacy levels ϵ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} while
fixing δ = 1/|D|. Main takeaways are:

  3
    https://huggingface.co/datasets/openai/summarize_from_feedback/viewer/
comparisons/train?row=0


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. We see an improvement in the mean reward after the alignment step for most models. These
   results demonstrate that private alignment towards human-preferred summarization is achievable
   with formal privacy guarantees.
2. Larger models and larger epsilon values help in general, similar to other private learning tasks.
   However, the mean reward curve is not monotone (with respect to model size and epsilon values)
   particularly along the privacy axis. The private model achieving the highest mean reward is
   GPT2-Large with ϵ = 2. More extensive hyperparmeter tuning is necessary to understand this
   phenomenon.
3. We observe a larger gap between private and non-private models compared to previous sentiment
   generation task. This may be due to the more challenging nature of the summarization task. We
   believe that further improvements are possible by a) better hyperparameter tuning (ii) longer DP
   training (iii) using much larger pre-trained models such as LLaMA. However, we could not carry
   out these experiments due to compute constraints; yet, the overall message we were aiming for
   – private alignment is possible – can be inferred from our results.
4. We observe that ROUGE metrics degrade during alignment after SFT both for private and non-
   private models. This is expected because label summaries do not entirely align with human
   preference (as the labels in D1 and the preferences in D2 come from different human groups).
   Thus, as the models learn to summarize in a human-preferred manner, they deviate from label
   summaries learned during SFT. Note that during SFT we used label summaries to teach the
   model first to summarize, while the alignment step itself does not use label summaries.

7   R ELATED W ORK
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a prominent technique
in fine-tuning language models. Christiano et al. (2017) laid the foundation, utilizing human feed-
back for reward modeling and employing PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for model training. Early
applications of RLHF in the natural language realm focused on stylistic continuation (Ziegler et al.,
2020), summarization (Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021), etc. Subsequent
research endeavors shifted towards training AI assistants that align with human values across a wide
spectrum of instruction tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).
DP in language models Exploiting the memorization ability of language models (Carlini et al.,
2023), privacy attacks have been launched, extracting training data or inferring membership (Carlini
et al., 2019; 2021; Elmahdy et al., 2022; Mattern et al., 2023). In response to these vulnerabilities,
DP fine-tuning via DPSGD (Abadi et al., 2016) has been proposed (Li et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022). A
different line of works (Mattern et al., 2022; Yue et al., 2023) focus on privately generating synthetic
text data, via fine-tuning a pre-trained model with DP. Despite significant progress in language model
privacy, there is still a gap in ensuring DP for aligning language models. To our best knowledge, we
are the first that take a step in this direction.
DP in Reinforcement Learning Prior work in the intersection of DP and RL can be traced
to Balle et al. (2016). Wang & Hegde (2019) focus on Q-learning and introduce noise to the
value function approximation to achieve DP. Ma et al. (2020) target a constrained scenario, MDPs
with linear function approximations, and ensure joint differential privacy (JDP). Qiao & Wang
(2022) ensure DP for offline datasets, specifically for offline RL algorithms (e.g., APVI (Yin &
Wang, 2021)). None of these fulfills the need of achieving DP for online RL (e.g., PPO) with the
neighboring relation defined on a fixed dataset. Our DP adaptation of PPO (Section 4) fills the gap.
We defer a more complete description of the related work to Appendix H.

8   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper we initiated the study of privately aligning LLMs with human feedback. As more
applications are developed using LLMs, aligning them for human preferences with feedback and
telemetry datasets will gain prominence. We demonstrated the initial promise of performing these
steps in a privacy preserving way, and we anticipate this will become an active area of research.
Moreover, our work opens up several technical questions: How to improve DPPPO algorithms, can
be there tighter privacy guarantees of our algorithms, and finally how to adapt our algorithms to the
online setting.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Fan Wu would like to thank Yuzheng Hu for his support. Bubble—Fan’s beloved stuffed bunny—
would like to thank Microsoft Research for the lovely campus and environment.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,
  2022.
Borja Balle and Yu-Xiang Wang. Improving the gaussian mechanism for differential privacy: Ana-
  lytical calibration and optimal denoising. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  394–403. PMLR, 2018.
Borja Balle, Maziar Gomrokchi, and Doina Precup. Differentially private policy evaluation. In
  Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2130–2138, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR.
Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer:
  Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX Security
  Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pp. 267–284, 2019.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=TatRHT_1cK.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Haonan Duan, Adam Dziedzic, Nicolas Papernot, and Franziska Boenisch. Flocks of stochas-
  tic parrots: Differentially private prompt learning for large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.15594, 2023.
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Adel Elmahdy, Huseyin A. Inan, and Robert Sim. Privacy leakage in text classification a data
  extraction approach. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Privacy in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 13–20, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.privatenlp-1.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  privatenlp-1.3.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sivakanth Gopi, Yin Tat Lee, and Lukas Wutschitz. Numerical composition of differential privacy.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11631–11642. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2021.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  nZeVKeeFYf9.
Julia Kreutzer, Shahram Khadivi, Evgeny Matusov, and Stefan Riezler. Can neural machine transla-
  tion be improved with user feedback? In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
  ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  Volume 3 (Industry Papers), pp. 92–105, New Orleans - Louisiana, June 2018. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-3012. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/N18-3012.
Xuechen Li, Florian Tramer, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Large language models can be
  strong differentially private learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bVuP3ltATMz.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In Proceedings of the
   7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR ’19, 2019.
Pingchuan Ma, Zhiqiang Wang, Le Zhang, Ruming Wang, Xiaoxiang Zou, and Tao Yang. Differ-
  entially private reinforcement learning. In Jianying Zhou, Xiapu Luo, Qingni Shen, and Zhen Xu
  (eds.), Information and Communications Security, pp. 668–683, Cham, 2020. Springer Interna-
  tional Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-41579-2.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150,
  Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P11-1015.
Justus Mattern, Zhijing Jin, Benjamin Weggenmann, Bernhard Schoelkopf, and Mrinmaya Sachan.
  Differentially private language models for secure data sharing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4860–4873, Abu Dhabi, United
  Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2022.emnlp-main.323. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.323.
Justus Mattern, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zhijing Jin, Bernhard Schölkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan,
  and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Membership inference attacks against language models via neigh-
  bourhood comparison, 2023.
Frank McSherry. Privacy integrated queries: an extensible platform for privacy-preserving data
  analysis. Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
  data, 2009.
Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural
  machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1464–1474, 2017.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 27730–27744, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Qiao and Yu-Xiang Wang. Offline reinforcement learning with differential privacy. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.00810, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533.

Sara Rosenthal, Noura Farra, and Preslav Nakov. Semeval-2017 task 4: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
  In Proceedings of the 11th international workshop on semantic evaluation (SemEval-2017), pp.
  502–518, 2017.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D Sarwate. Stochastic gradient descent with differ-
  entially private updates. In 2013 IEEE global conference on signal and information processing,
  pp. 245–248. IEEE, 2013.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback, 2022.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. TL;DR: Mining Reddit to learn
 automatic summarization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization,
 pp. 59–63, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Leandro von Werra, Younes Belkada, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Tristan Thrush, Nathan
  Lambert, and Shengyi Huang. Trl: Transformer reinforcement learning. https://github.
  com/huggingface/trl, 2022.

Baoxiang Wang and Nidhi Hegde. Privacy-preserving q-learning with functional noise in continuous
  spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
   tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
   2021.

Ming Yin and Yu-Xiang Wang. Towards instance-optimal offline reinforcement learning with pes-
 simism. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:4065–4078, 2021.

Da Yu, Saurabh Naik, Arturs Backurs, Sivakanth Gopi, Huseyin A Inan, Gautam Kamath, Janardhan
  Kulkarni, Yin Tat Lee, Andre Manoel, Lukas Wutschitz, Sergey Yekhanin, and Huishuai Zhang.
  Differentially private fine-tuning of language models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Q42f0dfjECO.

Xiang Yue, Huseyin Inan, Xuechen Li, Girish Kumar, Julia McAnallen, Hoda Shajari, Huan Sun,
  David Levitan, and Robert Sim. Synthetic text generation with differential privacy: A sim-
  ple and practical recipe. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1321–1342, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.74. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.74.

Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020.


                                                12
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  A    DPSGD A LGORTIHM

  We provide a pseudocode for the DPSGD algorithm in Algorithm 2. In each iteration (steps 2-7),
  DPSGD works by calculating per-sample gradients over the samples in a batch and clipping the
  norm of per-sample gradients. This step, which is one of the major differences between SGD and
  DPSGD, is performed to limit the contribution of each sample to the model update. Note that,
  thanks to clipping, the ℓ2 sensitivity of the operation in Step 6 is bounded, which otherwise would
  not be bounded. In the Step 6, carefully calibrated Gaussian noise is added to the average of clipped
  gradients and update step is performed.
  The privacy analysis of DPSGD works as follows. Fix one iteration of the algorithm. Since the
  clipping step ensures that the ℓ2 -sensitivity of the average of gradients remains bounded, it is not hard
  to prove that each iteration of DPSGD satisfies (ϵ, δ)-DP with some privacy parameters. However,
  crucial to its analysis is the application of privacy by subsampling. Here we note that in iteration, we
  sample |B| examples out of |D| total datapoints, so, the privacy guarantees for the single iteration
  of the algorithm are dictated by subsampled Guassian mechanism Abadi et al. (2016); Gopi et al.
  (2021). Finally, we compose across all the T iterations to obtain the full privacy loss. The PRV
  account that we use Gopi et al. (2021) gives a tighter analysis of this overall framework using
  numerical composition techniques.

  Algorithm 2: Differential Privacy Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD)
  Define: Dataset D, model parameters θ, loss function L(θ, x), learning rate η, noise scale σ,
           gradient norm bound C, sampling probability p, number of epochs T
1 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
2     Sample B ⊆ D with sampling probability p
3     for xi ∈ B do
4         Compute gradient: gi ← ∇θ L(θ, xi )
5         Clip gradient: gi ← gi / max(1, ∥gCi ∥2 )
                                               1
                                                    P              2 2

6     Add noise and calculate update: g ← |B|        i gi + N (0, σ C I)
7     Update model: θ ← θ − η · g
8 return θ


  B    H YPERPARAMETERS FOR S ECTION 5

  In the following, we describe the details of our hyperparameter search for the results in Section 5.
  For LoRA, we choose the bottleneck rank r = 4 and fine-tune query and value matrices of the
  attention layers as in the original paper (Hu et al., 2022).
  For non-private SFT, we tune the batch size and the learning rate from the set {8, 16, 32, 64} and
  in the range [1e-6, 1e-2] respectively. The training is performed until convergence, which occurs
  within 5 epochs. We use the optimizer AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with cosine annealing
  for the learning rate and set weight decay to 0.01. The final batch size and learning rate are reported
  in Table 4.

                 Table 4: Non-private SFT hyperparameters for the results in Section 5.
                            Model            Batch size Learning rate
                             GPT-2                    64             5e-4
                             GPT-2 Medium             64             5e-4
                             GPT-2 Large              64             2e-4

  For DP SFT, informed by prior work (Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), we aim to set large batch size
  and constant learning rate with a long training course. We set the batch size to 512 and the number
  of epochs to 40. We similarly tune the learning rate in the range [1e-5, 1e-1] and finally set to 3e-4


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all models. We use the optimizer AdamW with weight decay 0.01. For the DP parameters, we set
a small per-sample clipping norm as 1.0 and calculate the corresponding noise multiplier to achieve
the reported (ϵ, δ)-DP using the accountant in Gopi et al. (2021).
For PPO, we use the TRL framework4 and set the hyperparameters specific to PPO as default values
therein. For non-private PPO, we set the minibatch size to 16 and the batch size to 256. PPO epochs
is set to 4 and one epoch is passed on the full dataset. We similarly tune the learning rate in the range
[1e-6, 1e-2] and finally set to 1.4e-3 for GPT-2 and GPT-2 Medium, and 2e-4 for GPT-2 Large.
For DPPPO, we follow a similar course as DP SFT. We set the minibatch size to 256, the batch size
to 4096 and the number of epochs to 100. PPO epochs must be set to 1 as explained in Section 5.
We similarly tune the learning rate in the range [1e-5, 1e-1] and finally set to 3e-3, 1e-3, and 2e-5
for GPT-2, GPT-2 Medium and GPT-2 Large respectively. DP parameters also follow as DP SFT.

B.1      A BLATION STUDY ON TPPO

We perform an ablation study on TPPO using the GPT-2 model for ϵ = 4 to investigate the im-
plications of setting TPPO = 1 in our DPPPO algorithm. We report the results in Table 5. The
results indicate that setting TPPO > 1 does not provide improvement for the performance and set-
ting TPPO = 1 is reasonable as it leverages privacy amplification by subsampling in the DPSGD
algorithm.


Table 5: Ablation study on TPPO . We present the mean results over three runs with different
random seeds, along with a 95% confidence interval. Results show that the implications of setting
TPPO = 1 is insignificant.
                            Model ϵ TPPO Average reward
                                                1          2.74 ± 0.27
                                                2          2.72 ± 0.14
                              GPT-2      4
                                                4          2.73 ± 0.05
                                                8          2.64 ± 0.81


C       A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR THE POSITIVE REVIEW GENERATION TASK
        IN S ECTION 5

We present the following additional results as a compliment to Table 1 in Section 5.

C.1      S AMPLE GENERATIONS FOR S ECTION 5

Table 6 demonstrates the alignment towards generation with positive sentiment for private and non-
private models via completions on randomly sampled prefixes from the test set.

C.2      T RADE - OFF BETWEEN PRIVACY AND UTILITY

To provide a clearer understanding of the privacy-utility trade-off, we illustrate in Figure 3 how
different levels of privacy (varying ϵ) impact the model’s performance for the GPT-2 Medium model.
We observe that the model performance improves from the fully-private model (ϵ = 0) to the private
model with privacy level ϵ = 4. The performance plateaus in this region and decreasing the privacy
of the model by using larger levels of ϵ ∈ [4, 10] does not further improve the performance. The
non-private model (ϵ = ∞) has expectedly the best performance, albeit with the lack of privacy.

D       H YPERPARAMETERS FOR S ECTION 6

We mostly follow the hyperparameters described in Appendix B. Here we state only the differences.
    4
        https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/index


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         3.5                                            model: GPT2-medium


         average positive reward score
                                         3.0
                                         2.5
                                         2.0
                                         1.5
                                         1.0
                                         0.5
                                         0.0
                                               0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7    8 10
                                                           privacy budget
Figure 3: Trade-off between utility and privacy for the positive review generation task. Results
are obtained on the GPT2-medium model. The shaded area denotes the 95% confidence interval.
ϵ = 0 represents the pre-trained model; ϵ = ∞ represents the non-private alignment.
Compared to the scenario in Section 5 we work with an order of magnitude larger dataset size in this
scenario. Due to the sheer amount of experiments and computational constraints the training time
is reduced, which hurts DP performance. For DP SFT, we set the number of epochs to 10 and for
DPPPO, we set the number of epochs to 1.
An important difference is that this scenario involves training a reward model. We fix GPT-2 model
to be used for reward model in all experiments. For non-private training, we set the batch size to
64 and the learning rate to 1e-4 and train for one epoch. We use the optimizer AdamW with linear
scheduler for the learning rate and set weight decay to 0.01. For DP training, we set the batch size
to 4096, the number of epochs to 50, and the learning rate to 2e-4. We use the optimizer AdamW
with weight decay 0.01. For the DP parameters, we set a small per-sample clipping norm as 1.0 and
calculate the corresponding noise multiplier to achieve the reported (ϵ, δ)-DP using the accountant
in Gopi et al. (2021).


E    F ULL RESULTS FOR THE SUMMARIZATION TASK IN S ECTION 6

We present the complete set of results for the summarization task in Table 7, additionally including
the ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2 scores.


F    F ULL PSEUDO - CODE

We present the complete version of the pseudo-code in Algorithm 3. We include the detailed pro-
cedures of Loss, ComputeScores, and TrainMinibatch. The parts that require additional
adaptation to fulfill DP are highlighted in blue and red.


G    T WO PARADIGMS OF ALIGNING LANGUAGE MODELS

Depending on the nature of the reward signal—whether it is from some standard and commonly
endorsed criteria or from the preferences from a group of humans, there are two main paradigms in
using RL for alignment.
RL without human in the loop. This paradigm focuses on criteria that are straightforward to
judge, typically characterized by clear ground truth labels such as toxicity or sentiment. Given
their easily quantifiable nature, these criteria often align with binary labels. Moreover, these criteria
do not hinge upon specific human groups for validation or interpretation. The advantage of this


                                                                                15
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 3: Aligning language models with RL (PPO), full version
   Define: D: a dataset consisting of input texts. x: input text, y: model response.
           T : total training epochs, TPPO : PPO training epochs.
           model, ref model: the model being learned and the frozen model for reference.
           Models are composed of a generation body as well as a value head.
           superscript b : batch, superscript mb : mini-batch.
           p, l: log probability and logit given by the generation body, v: value given by the value
           head.
                        old old old
 1 Function Loss(p         , v , s , p, l, v):
 2    A ← ComputeAdvantages(v old , sold )                 ▷ through generalized advantage
          estimation (Schulman et al., 2015)
 3      r ← exp(p − pold )                                                  ▷ compute the ratio
 4      lossp ← min(−rA, −Clip(r, 1 − ε, 1 + ε)A)                           ▷ clipped objective
 5      lossv ← αv · (A + v old − v)2 .mean()
 6      return lossp , lossv
 7   Function ComputeScores(Rb , pb , pbr ):
        ▷ adjust the score by KL divergence.    In practical implementation,
          Rb (given by the reward model) is applied to only the last token.
 8      return Rb − αKL · (pb − pbr )
 9 Procedure TrainMinibatch(model, pold , v old , sold , p, l, v):
10    lossp , lossv ← Loss(pold , v old , sold , p, l, v)
11    loss = lossp + lossv                                ▷ sum of policy loss and value loss
12    optimizer.zero grad()
13    loss.backward()
14    optimizer.step()
15 Procedure Update(model, xb , y b , Rb ):
       ▷ Stage I: forward passes to obtain reference stats on the batch
16    (pb , lb , v b ) ← BatchedForwardPass(model, xb , y b )
17    (pbr , lrb , vrb ) ← BatchedForwardPass(ref model, xb , y b )
18    sb ← ComputeScores(Rb , pb , pbr )                ▷ compute the modified reward (Eq. 2)
       ▷ Stage II: update on minibatches
19    Db ← (xb , y b , lb , v b , sb )                                 ▷ compose batched data
20    for i = 1 to TPPO do
21          for Dmb ∈ Db do
22                 (xmb , y mb , lmb , v mb , smb ) ← Dmb              ▷ take out a minibatch
                                                                   mb mb
23                 (p, l, v) ← BatchedForwardPass(model, x , y )
24                 TrainMinibatch(model, pmb , v mb , smb , p, l, v) ▷ with PPO objective

25
    ▷ main loop
26 for i = 1 to T do
        ▷ take out a batch
27     for xb ∈ D do
28         y b ← model.generate(xb )                     ▷ obtain the model responses
29         Rb ← r(xb , y b )              ▷ obtain the rewards via the reward model r
30         Update (model, xb , y b , Rb )
31   return model

     paradigm is that there exists a plethora of pre-trained classifiers5 and detection APIs6 available to


       5
         https://huggingface.co/nlptown/bert-base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment,
     https://huggingface.co/cardiffnlp/twitter-roberta-base-sentiment-latest
       6
         https://developers.perspectiveapi.com/s/about-the-api?language=en_US


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the public. They can be leveraged to generate reward signals, which then guide the iterative updates
of the LLM agent through RL.
RL with human preferences. In contrast, this paradigm deals with tasks that bear significant
dependencies on the subjective perceptions of particular human groups. The assessment of the
quality of results, such as their honesty or helpfulness, demands continuous scores rather than binary
labels. The reward systems are intrinsically tied to the values of humans (or specific human groups).
Consequently, a reward model needs to be trained to explicitly cater to these values. After training
the reward model to capture human preferences, it is incorporated into the RL process to guide the
LLM agent in adopting these preferences.

H    F ULL VERSION OF THE RELATED WORK
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a prominent technique
in fine-tuning language models. Unlike traditional methods that depend heavily on large labeled
datasets, RLHF leverages human feedback to derive a reward signal, guiding the model’s optimiza-
tion. This enables models to produce more desired outputs in complex and open-ended tasks. Chris-
tiano et al. (2017) laid the foundation, utilizing human feedback for reward modeling and employing
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for model training. Early applications of RLHF in the natural language
realm focused on stylistic continuation (Ziegler et al., 2020), summarization (Ziegler et al., 2020; Sti-
ennon et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021), and translation (Nguyen et al., 2017; Kreutzer et al., 2018). Sub-
sequent research endeavors shifted towards training AI assistants that align with human values across
a wide spectrum of instruction tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).
DP in language models Exploiting the memorization ability of language models (Carlini et al.,
2023), many privacy attacks have been launched, aimed at extracting training data or inferring train-
ing set membership (Carlini et al., 2019; 2021; Elmahdy et al., 2022; Mattern et al., 2023). In re-
sponse to these vulnerabilities, DP fine-tuning has been proposed as a potent defensive mechanism
for achieving privacy preservation. Li et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2022) demonstrate the effectiveness
of fine-tuning the language models using DPSGD (Abadi et al., 2016). Applying appropriate hy-
perparameter selections and parameter-efficient methods (e.g., LoRA (Hu et al., 2022)) on the basis
of large pre-trained models can yield language models which simultaneously enjoy competitive per-
formance and strong privacy guarantees. A different line of works (Mattern et al., 2022; Yue et al.,
2023) focus on privately generating synthetic text data, via fine-tuning a pre-trained model with DP.
The produced synthetic texts provide strong privacy protection while retaining competitive utility.
Despite these substantial progresses in ensuring privacy for language model related applications,
there remains a gap in ensuring DP for aligning language models. To our best knowledge, we are
the first that take a step in this direction.
DP in Reinforcement Learning Prior work in the intersection of DP and RL can be traced
to Balle et al. (2016). Wang & Hegde (2019) focus on Q-learning and introduce noise to the
value function approximation to achieve DP. Ma et al. (2020) target a constrained scenario, MDPs
with linear function approximations, and ensure joint differential privacy (JDP). Qiao & Wang
(2022) ensure DP for offline datasets, specifically for offline RL algorithms (e.g., APVI (Yin &
Wang, 2021)). None of these fulfills the need of achieving DP for online RL (e.g., PPO) with the
neighboring relation defined on a fixed dataset. Our DP adaptation of PPO (Section 4) fills the gap.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: We randomly sample 5 prefixes from the test set and let private and non-private models
generate completions. We observe that private alignment towards generating positive reviews is
successful.
 Prefix               Model      ϵ=4                                  ϵ=∞
 I loathe, despise,   GPT-2      I loathe, despise, love eep too      I loathe, despise, and part of
                                 great ideas and functions perfect    joined in and is still handled
                      GPT-2-M    I loathe, despise, love and I love   I loathe, despise, but I love
                                 this game, it’s                      this book. Hats! And
                      GPT-2-L    I loathe, despise, love this         I loathe, despise, love us. I
                                 movie! I was really happy!           love us! I want
 Seriously! You’ve    GPT-2      Seriously! You’ve just got to see    Seriously! You’ve just got
 just got to see                 this awesome comedy! It is fun       to see this so what wonder-
                                 funny                                ful stuff we’re going
                      GPT-2-M    Seriously! You’ve just got to see    Seriously! You’ve just got
                                 it! I am very appreciative of        to see watching this cool
                                                                      movie. The movie is
                      GPT-2-L    Seriously! You’ve just got to see    Seriously! You’ve just got
                                 this awesome movie!! It’s awe-       to see this beautiful collec-
                                 some!                                tion. We love the way
 With a title like    GPT-2      With a title like that, you will     With a title like that, you
 that, you                       love it! I love this. It is excit-   have huge up and great. It
                                 ing and could make it really         is a fantastic story and I en-
                                                                      joyed it all
                      GPT-2-M    With a title like that, you can’t    With a title like that, you’re
                                 help but feel positive but cer-      amazing, we’re ready to
                                 tainly is a very inspiring concept   continue. It looks cooler. I
                                 and the way                          can’t
                      GPT-2-L    With a title like that, you know     With a title like that, you’re
                                 special production...great job!!     right. I love this site! It
                                 Jessica is great! Great material     makes me feel good, and I
                                 and great acting
 I am not a fan of    GPT-2      I am not a fan of Sean Penn at all   I am not a fan of Sean Penn
 Sean Penn                       and I don’t really look for him.     and I love it. However, I be-
                                 I liked the flavour really           came a bit too. I love the
                      GPT-2-M    I am not a fan of Sean Penn’s,       I am not a fan of Sean Penn.
                                 I’m really happy and I love the      I appreciate what he is. It’s
                                 movie, and I’s very                  awesome. This has been
                                                                      amazing.
                      GPT-2-L    I am not a fan of Sean Penn          I am not a fan of Sean Penn,
                                 <3 this film is great and worth      but I love his work in base-
                                 watching! <3 <3 <3                   ball and I love his work for
                                                                      my favorite
 In the original      GPT-2      In the original French version,      In the original French ver-
 French version,                 the jokes were pretty fun and        sion, the jokes are amazing.
 the jokes                       pretty neat. I really liked          I love them so much, I
                      GPT-2-M    In the original French version,      In the original French ver-
                                 the jokes are beautifully clear      sion, the jokes are great, but
                                 and funny. I am a very               I am excited to look at
                      GPT-2-L    In the original French version,      In the original French ver-
                                 the jokes were very funny! my        sion, the jokes were quite
                                 main pleasure from this movie        good and it was quite close
                                                                      to the



                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: The average reward score (denoted by r) on the test set of the Reddit TL;DR summarization
dataset and ROUGE metrics (ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L denoted by R-1, R-2, and R-
L, respectively) between model generated summaries and the label summaries in the test set for
various models and privacy levels. ϵ = 0 represents the pre-trained model. ϵ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} are
privately aligned models with different privacy budgets. ϵ = ∞ is the alignment procedure without
any privacy. Our results demonstrate that alignment towards human-preferred summarization is
obtainable with formal privacy guarantees to the underlying dataset. Larger models improve the
alignment performance with privacy at reasonable privacy levels such as ϵ = 4. ROUGE metrics
indicate that models can deviate from label summaries learned during SFT and align towards human-
preferred summaries with PPO during alignment.
               Model      ϵ       Stage      Mean Reward      R-1     R-2     R-L
                          0    Pre-trained        0.05        12.91   0.78    8.26
                                 SFT              0.44        16.69   1.69   11.45
                          1
                                Aligned           0.22        14.69   1.50   10.41
                                 SFT              0.48        17.23   1.85   11.84
                          2
               GPT-2            Aligned           0.53        16.62   1.53   11.44
                                 SFT              0.50        17.84   2.02   12.30
                          4
                                Aligned           0.68        17.75   1.80   12.33
                                 SFT              0.49        17.89   2.01   12.45
                          8
                                Aligned           0.69        16.55   1.62   11.74
                                 SFT              0.63        20.85   2.97   14.48
                         ∞
                                Aligned           1.53        20.61   3.13   14.17
                          0    Pre-trained        0.11        13.53   0.90    8.67
                                 SFT              0.68        18.70   2.36   12.80
                          1
                                Aligned           0.59        18.44   2.44   12.86
                                 SFT              0.66        18.79   2.47   13.07
              GPT-2       2
                                Aligned           0.92        19.60   2.34   13.26
              Medium
                                 SFT              0.65        19.27   2.62   13.30
                          4
                                Aligned           0.92        19.48   2.45   13.44
                                 SFT              0.65        19.62   2.62   13.50
                          8
                                Aligned           0.86        19.85   2.65   13.79
                                 SFT              0.70        20.59   2.85   14.30
                         ∞
                                Aligned           1.76        19.64   2.50   13.17
                          0    Pre-trained       -0.06        16.13   1.56   10.34
                                 SFT              0.51        21.67   3.37   14.98
                          1
                                Aligned           0.40        21.17   3.28   14.75
                                 SFT              0.51        21.41   3.35   14.86
               GPT-2      2
                                Aligned           1.14        21.33   3.33   14.58
               Large
                                 SFT              0.52        21.83   3.47   15.14
                          4
                                Aligned           1.06        19.63   2.83   13.88
                                 SFT              0.51        21.71   3.34   15.04
                          8
                                Aligned           0.93        20.26   3.04   14.37
                                 SFT              0.54        22.22   3.58   15.53
                         ∞
                                Aligned           1.49        21.81   3.32   14.64


                                               19
