Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P IVOTAL P ROMPT T UNING                               FOR       V IDEO DYNAMIC
E DITING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


    Input Video


    Dynamic Edit: “A man is raising hand while riding a snowboard ”


    Temporal Dynamic Edit: “A man on a snowboard jumps ”                         Temporal Edit


Figure 1: PDEdit – Pivotal Dynamic Editing. PDEdit can perform various text-based non-rigid
video editing involving large dynamic motion variations and temporal changes while preserving
consistency among the neighboring frames.


                                          A BSTRACT

        Text-conditioned image editing has recently provided high-quality edits on images
        based on diffusion frameworks. Unfortunately, this success did not carry over to
        video editing, which continues to be challenging. Video editing is limited to rigid
        editing such as object overlay and style transfer. This paper proposes pivotal dy-
        namic editing (PDEdit) for performing spatial-temporal non-rigid video editing
        based only on the target text, which has never been attempted before. PDEdit is
        capable of synthesizing a new pose of an object/person in the video, either at a
        specific moment or throughout the video, while preserving the temporal consis-
        tency of edited motions and a high level of fidelity to the original input video.
        In contrast to previous works, the proposed method performs editing based only
        on the input video and target text. It does not require any other auxiliary inputs
        (e.g., object masks or source video captions). Based on the video diffusion model,
        PDEdit using the proposed prompt pivoting leverages the target text prompt for
        editing the input video. The quality and adaptability of the proposed method on
        numerous input videos from different domains show the proposed to be highly
        effective. It can produce high-fidelity video edits under a single unified PDEdit
        framework. The code for this work will be made publicly available.


                                                1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Input video                                                                  Source text                                  Target text
                                                         Video               “A man is riding   Video                     “A man on a
                                                                              a snowboard”                              snowboard jumps”

                                                                      T2V model                           T2V model
    Target text: “A man on a snowboard jumps”                        (Video Tuning)                     (Video Editing)
 Output videos                           Tune-A-Video                     (b) Current Video Editing Framework
                                                                               Target text                                 Target text
                                                         Video                “A man on a       Video                     “A man on a
                                                                            snowboard jumps”                            snowboard jumps”
                                         PDEdit (Ours)
                                                                              Prompt Pivoting   Spatial-Temporal Focusing


                                                                        T2V model                          T2V model
                                                                 (Pivotal Prompt Tuning)         (Temporal Dynamic Editing)
             (a) Video Editing Results                                     (c) Pivotal Dynamic Editing Framework

Figure 2: Edited results (a) of existing model and PDEdit on the same video according to the target
text. Previous models are not able to perform non-rigid edit (e.g., motion change). Illustrations of
video editing frameworks about the current system (b) and our proposed system (c).


1       I NTRODUCTION

The recent success of generative frameworks (Creswell et al., 2018; Kingma & Welling, 2013; Ho
et al., 2020) and large-scale models (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2021)
has paved the way for machines to produce surreal outputs that surpass human capability. The
diffusion frameworks (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2020c) underpin a building block of
such innovative changes, and based on this, many large-scale generative models (Rombach et al.,
2022; Song et al., 2020a) have emerged. To be specific, diffusion-based text-to-image (T2I) models
(Nichol et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) synthesize high-quality images and further edit (Ruiz
et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2022) the image by freely changing specific attributes corresponding to
the input target text while maintaining the others in the image. Extending from the image, diffusion-
based text-to-video (T2V) models (Bar-Tal et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b) also have been considered.
To overcome the insufficient training resources of the video, several respectful technical contribu-
tions (Singer et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022) have been made to distill knowledge into the T2V
model from large-scale pre-trained T2I models. Researchers are currently pushing the boundary of
text-based video generation to a more controlled and fine-grained approach by generating attributes
corresponding to users’ needs in the text onto videos, ultimately performing text-based video editing.
In a formal definition of text-based video editing, as shown in Figure 2 (a), systems are given an
input video and a target text prompt that describes the desired attributes within the video, where
they produce an edited video that conforms to the target text prompt. To perform this, the editing
systems largely follow two canonical processes: (1) video tuning and (2) video editing. In video
tuning, the system is trained to generate the input video and understand the contextual meaning
of the video. In video editing, the system generates the variants of the input video that obey the
meaning of the target text prompt. To generate proper variants of video aligned with the target
text, pre-trained vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) have been
introduced to provide the required attributes for editing. Although recent video editing models (Liu
et al., 2023; Ceylan et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Shin et al., 2023) have presented proper capabilities
to modify existing frames according to the input text, they are still limited to rigid edits within the
scope of inpainting, such as style transfer and object overlay. To be specific, as shown in Figure
2 (a), for the given target text prompt (e.g., “A man on a snowboard jumps”) that requires editing
of dynamic motion change (i.e., synthesizing a new pose), current video editing systems do not
conform to the target prompt and return the original input video under over-fidelity. Otherwise,
they often perform impractical edits by keeping a single moment of the changed motion throughout
the video, which does not correctly represent the intended complete motion. Therefore the results1
concerning to complex non-rigid editing (e.g., dynamic and temporal change) are still unsatisfactory.

    1
        Our categorical analysis of current editing results is further presented in Appendix B.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory edits is rooted in the video tuning process of current video
editing frameworks. As shown in Figure 2 (b), current editing frameworks require captions (i.e.,
source text prompt) that describe the video as additional inputs for tuning a video. After tuning, they
perform an edit to the video with the target text prompt. However, the use of source prompts causes
functionally unnecessary tuning of the video on content (e.g., focusing on the ‘riding’ by source
prompt) unrelated to the required editing (e.g., ‘jump’), resulting in suboptimal edits. Furthermore,
the results become vulnerable to the variants of the source prompts. Therefore, the frameworks that
tune a video by utilizing a source prompt are not suitable for effective text-based video editing.
To this end, we propose pivotal dynamic editing (PDEdit) framework that performs spatial-temporal
non-rigid edits to a video with only a target text prompt. As shown in Figure 2 (c), the proposed
PDEdit framework includes a pivotal prompt tuning (PPT) that enables the system to tune a video
with a target text prompt via our proposed prompt pivoting. The prompt pivoting makes the video
tuning independent of the source prompt by providing a textual prompt from the target prompt that
aligns with the input video. Furthermore, to provide effective non-rigid editing with respect to
dynamic motion changes, PDEdit also includes temporal dynamic editing (TDE) which promotes
motion changes in spatial and temporal domains by maximizing the effect of the edit in the intended
moment via our proposed spatial-temporal focusing. PDEdit enhances the overall visual appeal
of the video and ensures that edits are seamlessly integrated into the original footage. Therefore,
PDEdit pursues the general format of text-based video editing and performs various types of editing
including style transfer, object overlay, and motion changes. Extensive experiments on PDEdit vali-
date its high fidelity and editability in video editing while enhancing visual appeal and effectiveness.

2     R ELATED WORKS
2.1   D IFFUSION - BASED GENERATIVE MODELS

Score-based generative frameworks (Vincent, 2011; Song et al., 2020b), particularly deep diffusion
models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a), have shown promise in surpassing the previous state-
of-the-art quality of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020). Diffusion
models gradually denoise data and can restore the original or conditionally generate data based on
input conditions. Especially, remarkable progress was made in image generation, where diffusion-
based text-to-image (T2I) models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022a) generate high-quality
images from input text. The T2I models are currently extending their visual generative abilities into
video to perform text-to-video (T2V) generation. Early work (Ho et al., 2022b) in T2V generation
considers adding another axis on the T2I model to accommodate video data, and further works
(Wu et al., 2022a; Hong et al., 2022) utilized pre-trained T2I model with large-scale text-to-image
datasets (Deng et al., 2009). To ensure temporal consistency in video frames, temporal attention
methods (Ho et al., 2022a; Singer et al., 2022) are also proposed. Many lines of diffusion-based
models extend synthesis to various visual reconstructions including inpainting and super-resolution
(Saharia et al., 2022b; Lugmayr et al., 2022). Among them, visual editing is facing new challenges
in incorporating multi-modality and video domains, which will be discussed in more detail below.

2.2   I MAGE AND VIDEO EDITING

GAN has been a popular basis for image editing, and currently, the diffusion models have revo-
lutionized it (Meng et al., 2021; Avrahami et al., 2022), offering a new framework for synthesis.
Text-based image editing models aim to edit images based on free-text descriptions. To perform
this, Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) proposes to train a model to generate an input image
based on one prompt and to modify it conditioned on another prompt. To hold the fidelity of an
input image, personalized fine-tuning methods (Valevski et al., 2022) are also introduced. Instruct-
Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) incorporates pre-trained diffusion models and performs quick edits
without fine-tuning. Along with the growth of image editing, there have been several efforts to
perform video editing. Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022) presents zero-shot text-based editing for an
image and videos. Although many works including Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022b) Gen-1 (Esser
et al., 2023), VideoComposer (Wang et al., 2023) and Control-A-Video (Chen et al., 2023) properly
edit styles or objects in a video, they are limited to rigid types of editing (i.e., style transfer, object
overlay) and still challenging to dynamic motion change or seamless temporal editing. Thus, PDEdit
first performs spatial-temporal non-rigid edits to a video based on the texts.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3       P RELIMINARIES
3.1       D ENOISING DIFFUSION PROBABILISTIC MODELS

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020) are probabilistic generative
models trained to reconstruct a sequence of data x1 , · · · , xT satisfying Markov chain. For a given
data distribution x0 ∼ q(x0 ), the Markov transition is defined as given below, assuming Gaussian
distribution and pre-defined variance βt of scheduling diffusion process:
                                                p
                     q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I)                t = 1, · · · , T,                 (1)
where this process is adding Gaussian noise gradually up to the distribution of xT , which is referred
to as a forward process of the diffusion process. The reason that we first perform the forward process
is the distributions in this process can be used as information for training our DDPMs in the reverse
process. Thanks to the Bayes’ rule and Markov property, 2 we further derive an intuitive format of
the forward process as conditional probabilities with the input of original data x0 as given below:
                      √
  q(xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I),
                                                                         √                  √
                                                                           ᾱt−1 βt           αt (1 − ᾱt−1 )    (2)
  q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) = N (xt−1 ; µ̃t (xt , x0 ), β̃t I), µ̃t (xt , x0 ) =            x0 +                      xt
                                                                          1 − ᾱt                1 − ᾱt
where αt = 1 − βt , ᾱt = Πts=1 αs , and β̃t = 1−          ᾱt−1
                                                          1−ᾱt βt . In the reverse process the DDPMs
generate the Markov chain of data x1 , · · · , xT from prior distribution p(xT ) = N (xT ; 0, I) by
utilizing Gaussian transitions as pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), σθ (xt , t)), which finally aims
to maximize the log-likelihood log(pθ (x0 )). To this, one can follow the variational inference, and
detour this by maximizing the variational lower bound of the negative log-likelihood. This makes
a closed-form of KL divergence among the distributions pθ (xt−1 |xt ) and q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ), while
getting close together by optimizing the learnable parameter θ. The beauty of DDPMs is that the
whole process is summarized that the model is interpreted as a sequence of denoising autoencoders
ϵθ (xt , t) and is trained to predict a denoising variant of input xt as given below:
                              Ex,ϵ∼N (0,1),t∼U {1,T } [||ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)||22 ].              (3)
To hold the robustness in all steps of denoising encoders, the step t is sampled from a discrete
uniform distribution U{1, T } ranging up to maximum denoising step T .

3.2       T EXT- GUIDED DIFFUSION MODEL AND L ATENT MODEL

Text-guided diffusion model is one of the conditional diffusion frameworks, where it aims to re-
cover an output data x0 from the t step random noise xt under the condition of input text prompt
P. Following the DDPM, the network is also performed for the process of denoising encoder with
the objective given as Ez,ϵ∼N (0,1),t∼U {1,T } [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, C)||22 ]. To give a deep multi-modal under-
standing between text and the data, a latent encoding zt = E(xt ) is introduced from pre-trained
encoders (e.g., VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017)) and also from large-scale pre-trained textual
embedding C = ψ(P) (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)). To be specific, as we work on video data,
the zt ∈ Rl×p×d is d dimensional features from video with a frame length l and p is the number
of image patches in a single frame for patch-wise image feature quantization. The ϵθ is the latent
neural networks for video diffusion models (Ho et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2022b; Singer et al., 2022)
that have the capacity to consider temporal consistency among the frames.

3.3       DDIM SAMPLING AND INVERSION

To accelerate the reverse process of DDPM, denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) (Song et al.,
2020a) is presented. DDIM samples latent features with a small number of denoising steps as below:
                           r            s               r        !
                             αt−1             1            1
                   zt−1 =          zt +              −        − 1 · ϵθ (zt , t, C).             (4)
                               αt          αt−1 − 1       αt
DDIM sampling
        q     can also
                     q be reversed to
                                   qmake latent
                                             noise, which gives corresponding latent features
                  αt+1              1           1
as zt+1 =          αt zt +       αt+1 −1 −      αt − 1   · ϵθ (zt , t, C) denoted as DDIM inversion process.
    2
        See the detailed proof of reverse process in Appendix C.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Pivotal Prompt Tuning
     Prompt Pivoting                                                            Video                                  Video Diffusion Model                           Attention layers


                                                                                            Diffusion
       video                                                                                                                                                           3D Covolution layers
      text                                                                                                                                                           𝜓 Text embeding
      “A”                                                                                               Latent noise


                                                         Pivoting
      “woman”
                                                                    Target               × T step          ( )         × T step                                        Target prompt text features
      “jumps”
                                                                    Prompt                                                                       Reconstruction
      “while”                                                                                                                                                           Pivotal prompt text features
                                                                               “A woman [mask] while                              Cross               loss


                                     mean
                                                                                                                                          Temp
      “road”
                                                                               walking down the road”                  𝜓          Attn    Attn
     Text-video similarity map (m)          Word-video
                                             Score (s)                         Pivotal Prompt (            )
                                                                                                                                           *STF: Spatial-Temporal
 Input: Target Prompt (                             )                        Temporal Dynamic Editing                             STF       Focusing (Section 4.2)


    “A woman jumps while                                                       Target Prompt (             )

    walking down the road”                                                     “A woman jumps while                    𝜓          Cross   Temp
                                                                               walking down the road”                             Attn    Attn

Input: Video (               )                                                                                                                                       Output: Edited Video (            )


                                                                                          Inversion


                                                                                                                                                       sampling
                                                                                                                                                        DDIM
                                                                                           DDIM
                                                                                                        Latent noise
                                                                                                                       × T step
                                                                                          × T step          ( )                                        × T step
                                                                                Video                                  Video Diffusion Model



Figure 3: Pivotal Dynamic Editing (PDEdit) is composed of two processes: (1) pivotal prompt
tuning that tunes an input video with pivotal prompt and (2) temporal dynamic editing that edits the
input video conforming to the target prompt by applying spatial-temporal focusing.


4        P IVOTAL DYNAMIC E DITING

Text-based video editing aims to modify an input video in a way that accurately conveys the meaning
of a given target text. To this, the video editing framework is typically built on a pre-trained text-to-
video (T2V) model, which generates the necessary attributes for editing before they are incorporated
into the desired video. In the formal definition of text-based video editing, the system takes inputs of
video V and a target text prompt T and produces a modified video V T containing the intended textual
meaning. In procedures, video editing systems involve two key processes: (1) tuning an input video
and (2) editing the video. During the tuning process, the system is trained (i.e., tuned) to generate
the input video and understand the contextual meaning of the video. In the editing process, the
system generates a modified video based on the input video by incorporating the attributes required
in the target prompt, which shows the resulting video properly combining the given video and the
attributes obtained from the knowledge in the pre-trained model. Under this process, in Figure 3,
we propose the pivotal dynamic editing (PDEdit) framework, which contains two main processes of
tuning and editing referred to as (1) Pivotal Prompt Tuning and (2) Temporal Dynamic Editing. The
details of each process are provided in the following.


4.1             P IVOTAL P ROMPT T UNING

Objectives for the video tuning process are two folds: (1) understanding the contextual meaning in
the input video and (2) controlling the model to generate input video with high fidelity. Current
systems (Hertz et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b) have introduced additional text prompt (i.e., source
prompt) that describes the input video and utilize it to control the model to generate the input video
according to the source prompt. Although these prompts are primarily focused on understanding
the video, there were not much of concerns about which prompts are more effective in controlling
the model. Furthermore, the resulting edits were vulnerable to the variants of the source prompts.
To this end, our solution is to deduce a prompt for tuning based on the target prompt. We refer to
the process of deducing a prompt from a target prompt as prompt pivoting, where it aims to modify
a target prompt into another prompt that has more alignment with the input video while preserving
textual resemblance. Figure 3 presents a pivotal prompt P that we obtained by applying prompt
pivoting to the target prompt. The pivotal prompt is reasonable as (1) the system no longer relies on
the source prompt and (2) it provides more effective conditions to control the model. By ensuring
a resemblance to the target prompt, the editing model can generate a video with high fidelity to the
input video while remaining the key differences required for effective editing. In the following, our
technical contribution is to introduce two prompt pivoting methods formulated as P = f (T , V) (i.e.,
f : prompt pivoting): (1) Editing Factor Pivoting and (2) Distributional Pivoting.


                                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Editing Factor Pivoting. As a target prompt describes the context to be changed from the input
video, the prompt is composed mainly of two groups of words: (1) words aligned with the input
video and (2) words unrelated to the input video that contribute to editing. Intrigued by this, we
define the words that contribute to editing as ‘editing factor’ denoting wk = {w1 , · · · , wk }, where
the k is the number of words in the editing factor. Thus, our proposed prompt pivoting aims to
identify the wk and build a pivotal prompt by disentangling them from the target prompt. In detail,
to identify the editing factor, we introduce the similarity-based selection by calculating word-video
clip (Radford et al., 2021) scores. We first embed the video and target prompt into d-dimensional
features as v = ψv (V) ∈ Rl×d and t = ψt (T ) ∈ Rm×d , where the ψv (·), ψt (·) are clip embedding
for image and word, and l, m are the numbers of frames and words. As shown in Figure 3, we build
a clip similarity score map as m = tv⊤ ∈ Rm×l and take an average pooling along the frame axis
and obtain word-video scores as s = {s1 , · · · , sm }. The words with low similarities denote that
they are not related to the input video and are rather close to words for editing, thus we regard them
as editing factors as wk = wargmin(s,k) . The argmin(s, k) is the indices of bottom-k words in terms
of the word-video score s. To disentangle the wk from the target prompt T , we apply a pad token
mask on wk in T and finally build a pivotal prompt P. This process can be formally summarized as
P = fk (T , V), where fk is the editing factor pivoting and the k denotes bottom-k words to mask.

Distributional Pivoting. Although the editing factor piv-
oting is quite intuitive, there exists a heuristic that the num- ratio Text-video similarity score distributions
ber of editing factors is fixed to the number k. To avoid the               0.19
                                                                          Positive Distributions


                                                                                                                               Positive
                                                                                                         Negative
heuristic, we introduce text-video similarity score distribu-               0.17
                                                                          Negative Distributions
tions D ⊃ {X , Y} composed of positive X and negative                     Deterministic score
                                                                            0.15


Y distributions in Figure 4. Here, the positive contains the


                                                                                                       Intersection Boundary
                                                                            0.13

scores of the text-video pairs describing each other and the                0.11

negative contains the scores when texts are not related to                  0.09

videos. Based on two distributions, we define a determin-                   0.07
istic score s∗ ∈ R to identify the editing factor. In detail,
our study sets s∗ at the score where X and Y intersect3 in                  0.05



Figure 4 and the words in target prompt are determined as              10.0    12.5      15.0    17.5 22.5 25.0 CLIP score

editing factor if their word-video scores s are lower than
the score s∗ . We formulate it as distributional editing factor Figure 4: Clip score distributions of
w = warg(s<s∗ ) , where the arg(s < s∗ ) is the indices of the positive and negative text-video pairs.
scores lower than s∗ . We summarize the whole process as
P = fs∗ ∼D (T , V, s∗ ), where fs∗ ∼D is a distributional pivoting process with a pad mask. To collect
the D, we use Charades-STA (Gao et al., 2017) dataset that contains videos and their descriptions of
various scenes (i.e., See examples of text-video pairs in Appendix D). The X is obtained from texts
and their annotated video moments and Y is from texts and the other videos in the dataset.

Video tuning. Based on the pivotal prompt P, we tune an input video V into our text-to-video
(T2V) model. We first prepare noise features z of the input video using diffusion, and the model is
trained to reconstruct the original video by denoising the z, where the pivotal prompt P is condi-
tioned in the denoising process. This denotes that our T2V model is tuned to generate original video
with the input of the pivotal prompt. For the details of the T2V model, similar to work (Ho et al.,
2022b), we extend 2D pre-trained diffusion model (i.e., Stable Diffusion) into 3D with a temporal
domain by modifying 2D convolution and attention layers. We inflate 3 × 3 kernels in 2D convolu-
tion layers to 1 × 3 × 3 kernels as pseudo-3D convolution layers and append temporal attention in
each attention layer to give temporal consistency. The text conditioning is performed on cross atten-
tion between noise features z and pivotal prompt features CP . As explained in Section 3.2, the model
is trained to reconstruct video under the objective Ez,ϵ∼N (0,1),t∼U {1,T } [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, CP )||22 ], where
CP = ψ(P) is the pivotal prompt embedding and zt is t-step noise feature in denoising process.

4.2    T EMPORAL DYNAMIC E DITING

The video editing works in a way that the tuned T2V model infers a video based on input video when
a conditional text is the target prompt. Thus, it is crucial to recognize the difference between the
   3
     Score s∗ is such that |f˜X (s∗ )− f˜Y (s∗ )| < δ, where f˜X , f˜Y is approximation of the true probability density
functions fX , fY by binning. δ = 0.01 is chosen when s∗ approximates the unique intersection, fX (s) = fY (s)


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


prompt (i.e., P) used for tuning and the target prompt T , and then the model reflects the difference
in generating the video. Our pivotal prompt contributes to a sensible edit because the resemblance
to the target prompt enables the model to generate a video with high-fidelity to input video while
preserving the key differences (i.e., editing factor) needed for effective editing. However, our studies
found that non-rigid editing (e.g., motion change) is still challenging and unsatisfactory. Therefore,
we devise temporal dynamic editing that modulates the influence of the editing factor on our T2V
model. We break this down into two functionalities: (1) Spatial Focusing and (2) Temporal Focusing.

Spatial-Temporal Focusing. Spatial focusing aims to en-
hance the editing effect in the spatial domain. As shown in


                                                                                  woman
                                                                                  [mask]
                                                                                  while

                                                                                              road
Figure 5, we build spatial focusing by reweighting the atten-


                                                                                  A
tion of editing factor w in cross attention map between the query ( ) Cross                 Attention map 𝒚𝒊
target prompt T and the latent noise z. Thus,   √ we  first build  key (   ) Attn            (video tuning)
                                i         i ⊤            m×p
the cross attention map as x = CT (z ) / d ∈ R                by Fidelity weighting 𝜷𝐖
                                                                                                 Cross
taking CT , z i as query and key of attention (Vaswani et al., Editing weighting                   Attn
                                     m×d                                            𝜶𝐖
2017), where CT = ψ(T ) ∈ R               is target prompt fea-
        i      p×d
tures, z ∈ R        is i-th frame latent feature and p (e.g., 64 query ( ) Cross            Attention map 𝐗 𝒊
x 64) is the number of patches for image quantization. Our key ( ) Attn                      (video editing)


                                                                                              road
                                                                                  woman

                                                                                    while
                                                                                       A

                                                                                   jumps
reweighting incorporates the following two weightings: (1)
editing weighting and (2) fidelity weighting. The fidelity
weighting utilizes attention
                        √        map of the pivotal prompt P
as yi = CP (z i )⊤ / d ∈ Rm×p , which allows control- Figure 5: Conceptual illustration of
ling the fidelity in editing process. Therefore the spatial spatial focusing process.
focusing is formulated as xi = αw ⊙ xi + βw ⊙ yi , where
αw = {0, 0, α, · · · } ∈ Rm denotes editing coefficient (1 < α < 2) corresponding to the position of
editing factor w, βw = {β, β, 0, · · · } ∈ Rm is fidelity coefficient (0 < β < 1) and ⊙ is element-
wise multiplication with broadcasting. Especially, when the editing factor includes a ‘predicate’, we
consider the target prompt requires motion change and assign further weights in αw to the words
about the subject4 to focus on the subject of the motion. Certain motion edits (e.g., jump, turn) re-
quire temporary changes. To address this, we introduce temporal weights γ ∈ Rl with frame length
l as xi = γ i (αw ⊙ xi ) + (1 − γ i )(βw ⊙ yi ), which smoothly blend editing along the frames. Figure
6 shows an example of temporal focusing using a Gaussian curve.

Video editing. Founded on spatial-temporal focusing, PDEdit performs denoising on initial latent
noise obtained from input video using DDIM inversion. For denoising, our diffusion-based T2V
model predicts the added noise. Using the predicted noise, DDIM sampling performs step-wise
denoising as given in Equation 4, which is formulated as V T = T2V(DDIMinv (V), T ).

5    A PPLICATIONS OF P IVOTAL DYNAMIC E DITING F RAMEWORK
In this section, we showcase various editing results on our proposed PDEdit framework.

Object overlay and Style transfer. The first and the second videos of Figure 6 are about the video
according to the rigid edits. Utilizing the knowledge of the pre-trained T2I model and PDEdit prop-
erly changes targets (i.e., object or background) in the video while maintaining frame consistency
under our proposed temporal frame attention. Especially in the video of the last row, the back-
ground of a woman walking is changed to an environment similar to an airport, while preserving the
woman’s walking motion. Further applications of our PDEdit are also available in Appendix F.

Motion change and Temporal change. The video in the fourth row of Figure 6 shows the editing
results from the input video according to the non-rigid edits. The non-rigid edits such as dynamic
motion change are more challenging than rigid-type free editing (e.g., style transfer, object overlay)
as they require predicting and generating movements within a given range of possibilities. PDEdit
changes motion in a way that a walking woman dances at the same time, conforming to the target text
“A woman dances ballet while walking on the road.” In the last row’s video, PDEdit demonstrates
   4
     Motion change is usually performed by subjective in the target text prompt. Appendix E provides more
details about finding the subjective in a text.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Input video


                              Target Text: “A woman is walking down the road wearing a wedding dress”
          [Object overlay]


                              Target Text: “A woman is walking on the airport terminal”
          [Style transfer]


                              Target Text: “A woman dances ballet while walking on the road”
          [Motion change]


                              Target Text: “A woman jumps while walking down the road”
          [Temporal change]


                              1.0
                              1.0                                                                       Temporal weight (𝜸)
                              0.0



Figure 6: Sample results of applications with PDEdit in terms of different edits (object overlay, style
transfer, motion change, temporal change). Best viewed in zoom.


its ability to edit temporal motion. When the target prompt describes “jumping” while a woman is
walking, temporal changes are necessary to depict the jumping action realistically. Our temporal
focusing approach is used to design the natural jumping motion in this scenario.

6       E XPERIMENTS

6.1       BASELINE C OMPARISONS

Dataset and Baseline. We select 21 videos from DAVIS (Pont-Tuset et al., 2017), which contain
a variety of objects and scenes spanning about 50 to 70 frames. We introduce target prompts that
require both rigid and non-rigid edits on the input videos. We compare baselines on their public
codes5 : Text2Video-Zero (T2V-Zero) (Khachatryan et al., 2023) zero-shot video editing to given
target text, Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu et al., 2022b) recent text-based video generation to edit video.

Qualitative and Quantitative Results. Figure 7 (a) and (b) show visual comparisons of two typ-
ical edits: (1) motion change and (2) object overlay. PDEdit accurately represents the rolling down
action in motion change. In object overlay, all three models make edits, but PDEdit maintains the
highest fidelity to the input video, as indicated by the red box. We conducted quantitative evaluations
    5
        https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/Text2Video-Zero; https://github.com/showlab/Tune-A-Video


                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Input video                                                  Input video                                                                               Text-video alignment ↑
                                                                                                                                                          29
                                                                                                                                                                    Rigid edit       Non-rigid edit
                                                                                                                                                          28


                                                                                                                                             Clip score
                                                                                                                                                          27
                                                                                                                                                          26
                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                                          24
            Target Text: “Man rolls down with snowboard”                  Target Text: “A cowboy on a walking camel”                                        T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit
                                                                                                                                                           x103        Frame consistency ↓


                                                              T2V-Zeros
T2V-Zeros


                                                                                                                                                          4.5       Rigid edit       Non-rigid edit
                                                                                                                                                          4.0
                                                                                                                                                          3.5


                                                                                                                                             FVD
                                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                          2.0


                                                              TAV
                                                                                                                                                             T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit
TAV


                                                                                                                                                                       Human evaluation ↑
                                                                                                                                                          90         Rigid edit      Non-rigid edit


                                                                                                                                             Percentage
                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                              PDEdit
PDEdit


                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                          10

                                                                                                                                                            T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit T2V-Zeros TAV PDEdit
                  (a) Motion change (non-rigid edit)                                    (b) Object overlay (rigid edit)                                              (c) Qunatitative evaluations


Figure 7: Qualitative and quantitative comparisons to previous text-based video editing systems.
Further results on more metrics with different types of datasets are also available in Appendix F.

      Target text: “Person jumps while walking road.”                                                   Attention maps on the word ‘jump’
                                                                  [w/ Distributional pivoting]                              [w/ Sptial focusing]                                     [w/o Sptial focusing]


       Pivotal text: “Person [mask] while walking road.”                                                   Attention map      Single frame output                 Attention map          Single frame output
                                                                   [w/ Editing factor pivoting]                                                                                   [w/o Temporal focusing]


       Pivotal text: “Person [mask] [mask] walking [mask].”
                     (a) Edit results on different pivotal prompt tuning                                             (b) Ablative analysis on temporal dynamic editing


Figure 8: Ablation studies of pivotal prompting and temporal dynamic editing on input in Figure 6.


comparing our edits to previous baselines. In Figure 7(c), we used clip similarity scores to assess
text-video alignment. PDEdit outperforms others, especially in non-rigid editing. We also measure
Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) (Unterthiner et al., 2019) for frame consistency, where both PDEdit
and TAV excelled in non-rigid edits, but TAV’s edits do not align well with the target text. In human
evaluation, with 36 participants rating the edits for preference, PDEdit received higher scores.

6.2               A BLATION STUDIES

Ablation studies were conducted on two prompt pivoting methods (editing factor and distributional)
for pivotal prompt tuning, and two focusing methods (spatial and temporal) for temporal dynamic
editing. In Figure 8 (a), both pivoting methods perform editing, but the distributional appears more
effective for reconstruction. The editing factor sometimes mistakes due to the fixed number of words
(e.g., k=3), affecting unsatisfied reconstruction (e.g., “bench” in the red box). Focusing modules
enhance editing effectiveness. In Figure 8 (b), spatial focusing enhances dynamic editing by high-
lighting the object in the attention map related to the editing factor (e.g., “jump”). Without temporal
focusing, editing related to temporal motion changes, as seen with levitation, is not successful.


7               C ONCLUSION

Pivotal Dynamic Editing (PDEdit) framework for text-based video editing that allows spatial-
temporal non-rigid edits to a general video using a single target text. It can change the motion
of objects in a video at specific moments or throughout the entire video while maintaining temporal
consistency. PDEdit is versatile and effective for editing various types of videos.


                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ETHICS STATEMENT
PDEdit proposes general framework for text-based video editing, where we showcase several pos-
sible applications of our framework. Although editing is designed to generate an appropriate image
or video corresponding to the user’s needs, but the highly advanced editing technology can result
in several societal negative impacts such as fake material for commercial profit and privacy issues.
Therefore it is also required to build regulations (e.g., Learning-based forensic analysis, Digital
watermarking) against indiscriminate abuse in editing or generative models in the future.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022.
Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video and
 image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
 on Computer Vision, pp. 1728–1738, 2021.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Con-
 ference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV, pp. 707–723. Springer,
 2022.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09800, 2022.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao Paul Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12688, 2023.
Weifeng Chen, Jie Wu, Pan Xie, Hefeng Wu, Jiashi Li, Xin Xia, Xuefeng Xiao, and Liang Lin.
 Control-a-video: Controllable text-to-video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.13840, 2023.
Antonia Creswell, Tom White, Vincent Dumoulin, Kai Arulkumaran, Biswa Sengupta, and Anil A
  Bharath. Generative adversarial networks: An overview. IEEE signal processing magazine, 35
  (1):53–65, 2018.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Germani-
  dis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7346–7356, 2023.
Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Zhenheng Yang, and Ram Nevatia. Tall: Temporal activity localization via
   language query. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
   5267–5275, 2017.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022b.
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868, 2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04761, 2023.
Edward Loper and Steven Bird. Nltk: The natural language toolkit. arXiv preprint cs/0205028,
  2002.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Im-
  age synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073,
  2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Federico Perazzi, Sergi Caelles, Pablo Arbeláez, Alex Sorkine-Hornung, and
  Luc Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.00675, 2017.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09535, 2023.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad
  Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 2022b.
Chaehun Shin, Heeseung Kim, Che Hyun Lee, Sang-gil Lee, and Sungroh Yoon. Edit-a-video:
  Single video editing with object-aware consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07945, 2023.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced score matching: A scalable approach
  to density and score estimation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 574–584. PMLR,
  2020b.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020c.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Fvd: A new metric for video generation. 2019.
Dani Valevski, Matan Kalman, Yossi Matias, and Yaniv Leviathan. Unitune: Text-driven image edit-
  ing by fine tuning an image generation model on a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09477,
  2022.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Xiang Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Dayou Chen, Jiuniu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen,
  Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Videocomposer: Compositional video synthesis with motion con-
  trollability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02018, 2023.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. Nüwa:
  Visual synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022:
  17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XVI, pp.
  720–736. Springer, 2022a.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022b.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

PDEdit framework is based on pre-trained image diffusion model Rombach et al. (2022) with public
pre-trained weights6 The input video is uniformly sampled by 24 frames with a resolution of 512 x
512. For tuning a video, it takes about 200 steps with a single sample (i.e., batch size of 1) and a
learning rate of 3 x 10-5, which corresponds to 8 minutes of our NVIDIA A100 GPU. For editing
a video, we utilize DDIM sampler Song et al. (2020a) with classifier-free guidance Ho & Salimans
(2022), which takes 2 minute for operation. The text feature embedding utilizes the pre-trained CLIP
model (ViT-L/14) Radford et al. (2021) and the image feature embedding utilizes Variational Auto
Encoder Kingma & Welling (2013) for latent feature representation.


B        A NALYSIS ON VIDEO EDITING RESULTS OF CURRENT EDITING SYSTEMS


           Input video                                                      Target Text: a man is sitting down while waving his hands


                                                         Tune-a-video


                                                                                             (a) Unchanged edit

           Input video                                                       Target Text: a bear sits on the ground
                                                         Text2Video-Zeros


                                                                                              (b) Incorrect edit

                           Figure 9: Failure cases of current video editing systems


Figure 9 shows that the current editing systems Wu et al. (2022b); Khachatryan et al. (2023) are not
available to perform non-rigid edits (i.e., motion change, temporal change) by resulting in unchanged
edits or incorrect edits.


C        P ROOF FOR REVERSE DIFFUSION PROCESS

For the proof of q(xt1 |xt , x0 ), we apply Bayes’ rule, as given below:

                                     q(xt−1 |x0 )
  q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) = q(xt |xt−1 , x0 )           ,
                                      q(xt |x0 )
                  √                          √                     √
        1 (xt − αt xt−1 )2          (xt−1 − ᾱt−1 x0 )2      (xt − ᾱx0 )2
∝exp(− (                       )+                         −                 ))
        2           βt                    1 − ᾱt−1              1 − ᾱt
                  √                                    √                                        √
        1 x2 − 2 αt xt xt−1 + αt x2t−1         x2 − 2 ᾱt−1 x0 xt−1 + ᾱt−1 x20        (xt − ᾱt x0 )2
=exp(− ( t                                  + t−1                                   −                     )),
        2                 βt                               1 − ᾱt−1                         1 − ᾱt
                                          √           √
        1 αt            1                2 at        2 ᾱt−1
=exp(− (( +                   )x2t−1 − (       xt +           x0 )xt−1 + C(xt , x0 ))),
        2 βt       1 − ᾱt−1               β        1 − ᾱt−1
                                                                                                        (5)
where the C(xt , x0 ) can be interpreted as function not involving xt−1 . For the µ̃t (xt , x0 ), following
the Gaussian density function, we have the equations in terms of mean and variance parameterized

    6
        https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as given below:
                                    αt         1                αt − ᾱt + βt −1     1 − ᾱt−1
                          β̃t = (       +             )−1 = (                   ) =            βt
                                    βt     1 − ᾱt−1            βt (1 − ᾱt−1 )       1 − ᾱt
                                    √            √
                                      αt           ᾱt−1          αt          1
                 µ̃t (xt , x0 ) = (      xt +              x0 )/( +                )
                                     βt        1 − ᾱt−1           βt    1 − ᾱt−1
                                    √            √                                                      (6)
                                      αt           ᾱt−1        1 − ᾱt−1
                                =(       xt +              x0 )            βt
                                     βt        1 − ᾱt−1         1 − ᾱt
                                  √                 √
                                     ᾱt−1 βt          αt (1 − ᾱt−1 )
                                =             x0 +                     xt
                                    1 − ᾱt               1 − ᾱt

    Scene description: a person is opening a book.


1.3sec               Positive video                  7.7sec   16.3sec         Negative video        23.8sec

 Scene description: a person is sitting in a chair in the bathroom.


0.0sec               Positive video                  3.0sec   0.0sec          Negative video        2.8sec

  Scene description: a person opens the window.


15.2sec              Positive video                  21.1sec 1.3sec           Negative video        3.9sec


Figure 10: Samples in Charades-STA dataset, where we build the positive text-video pairs and
negative pairs for constructing positive score distributions and negative distributions.


D        S PECIFICATIONS AND EXAMPLES OF C HARADES -STA DATASET
Charades-STA Gao et al. (2017) dataset includes about 30 seconds of videos for human behaviors
and scene descriptions of language queries. The dataset contains 12,400 video-text pairs and 3700
pairs for testing and all the pairs have their temporal annotations (i.e., start-time, end-time) in video
corresponding to the text. Figure 10 provides the illustrations of videos in Charades-STA and we
leverage the dataset to measure clip scores by building positive text-video pairs and negative pairs.
The positive pairs are obtained from text and annotated moments in the video of each pair, while the
negative pairs are obtained from the same text but other annotated moments in other videos in the
dataset under random selection.

E        I DENTIFYING A SUBJECT IN TARGET PROMPT FOR EDITING MOTION
As an editing about motion change requires a modification in visual attributes pertaining to the
subject of the motion, we provide a further weighting to the attention map corresponding to the
subject. In detail, to investigate whether the target prompt requires editing about motion change, we
scrutinize that the editing factors include “predicate” (i.e., predicate usually contains information
about motion). If the editing factor includes a predicate, the editing is regarded as motion change
and further weights are given to the attention map of subjective in the target prompt. Here, we


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


utilize the part of speech (POS) tagger provided by the natural language toolkit Loper & Bird (2002)
for identifying predicate and subjective in the target prompt. As a specific example, for the target
text prompt (i.e., “A woman jumps while walking down the road”) provided in Figure 3 of the
paper, the editing factor was selected as w = {“jumps”}, thus the editing factor weighting is
initially constructed as αw = {0, 0, α, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0} and fidelity weighting is constructed as βw =
{β, β, 0, β, β, β, β, β}. Henceforth, the editing is about motion change, thus we give further weight
to the subjective (i.e., “woman”), updating as αw = {0, α, α, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}.

F             A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

                               Alignment                     Consistency                                                            Fidelity
                                CLIP⋆ ↑                  CLIP† ↑      FVD ↓                                  PSNR ↑                 LPIPS ↓                    SSIM ↑
     PDEdit                    26.1 / 27.9              93.1 / 94.2         2831 / 2521              19.75 / 21.24              0.367 / 0.312               0.713 / 0.782
       w.o. PPT                24.3 / 25.5              92.5 / 93.9         3161 / 2916              15.37 / 17.12              0.453 / 0.443               0.611 / 0.635
       w.o. STF                25.9 / 27.2              90.8 / 92.2         3552 / 2864              18.86 / 20.13              0.375 / 0.346               0.656 / 0.684
     TAV                       16.4 / 26.0              89.8 / 92.6         3403 / 2720              14.62 / 17.46              0.577 / 0.445               0.542 / 0.627
     T2V-Zero                  13.7 / 24.9              86.1 / 87.4         4052 / 4235               9.31 / 11.73              0.590 / 0.573               0.409 / 0.426
     Video-P2P                 15.1 / 26.5              91.6 / 93.4         3261 / 2683              16.17 / 18.46              0.450 / 0.395               0.583 / 0.718
     Pix2Video                 15.9 / 25.8              90.4 / 91.8         3131 / 2704              16.09 / 18.31              0.496 / 0.421               0.561 / 0.729


Table 1: Quantitative evaluations about edited videos based on DAVIS dataset in terms of non-
rigid/rigid type editing corresponding to textual alignment (Alignment), frame consistency (Consis-
tency), and fidelity. PPT: Pivotal Prompt Tuning, STF: Spatial-Temporal Focusing, CLIP⋆ : text-
video clip score, CLIP† : image-image clip score, FVD: fréchet video distance, PSNR: peak signal-
to-noise ratio, LPIPS: learned perceptual image patch similarity, SSIM: structural similarity index
measure. Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023) and Pix2Video (Ceylan et al., 2023) are reproduced by their
public codes.


                                                      Alignment              Consistency                                            Fidelity
                                                       CLIP⋆ ↑             CLIP† ↑ FVD ↓                       PSNR ↑               LPIPS ↓            SSIM ↑
                DAVIS                                   27.4                93.7                2584            20.94                0.318               0.762
                UCF101                                  26.7                92.6                2399            18.63                0.258               0.596
                WebVid-10M                              26.4                92.8                2857            17.95                0.298               0.620

Table 2: Quantitative evaluations about resulting videos in various video datasets: DAVIS (Pont-
Tuset et al., 2017), UCF101 (Soomro et al., 2012), WebVid-10M (Bain et al., 2021).

(CLIP score)          Textual Alignment ↑                      (FVD)          Frame Consistency ↓                      (LPIPS)                   Fidelity ↓
    28                                                         2700                                                     0.33

27.65

 27.3
                                                               2650                                                    0.325
26.95

 26.6
                                                               2600                                                     0.32
26.25

 25.9

25.55                                                          2550                                                    0.315
         19      20              21              22       23          19     20            21            22       23           19       20             21               22   23
                      deterministic score (s*)                                    deterministic score (s*)                                   deterministic score (s*)


                      Figure 11: Sensitivity analysis of PDEdit according to deterministic score s∗ .

Quantitative Results Table 1 provides a concise overview of our experimental results for edited
videos, focusing on three key aspects: textual alignment, frame consistency, and fidelity. We mea-
sure textual alignment by computing the average CLIP score between the target prompt and the
edited video frame. For frame consistency, we consider both the average CLIP score among sequen-
tial frames and the FVD between input and output videos. To assess fidelity to the input videos, we
mask the edited regions in the edited videos and measure PSNR, LPIPS, and SSIM scores. Notably,
across all these metrics, our editing system, PDEdit, demonstrates superior performance compared


                                                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to previous editing systems. Furthermore, in the realm of non-rigid editing, PDEdit exhibits perfor-
mance comparable to traditional rigid-edit methods, even outperforming other models that were not
successful in this context. In Table 2, To validate different types of video domains, we introduce 21
videos from three video datasets (DAVIS, UCF101, and WebVid-10M), where similar performances
show that PDEdit operates generally without being domain dependent. In Figure 4, the discernible
separation is evident between positive and negative pair about similarity score distributions. This
distinction enables the establishment of a deterministic score, which effectively classifies the two
distributions, thereby mitigating unstable editing factors. To investigate the stability of s∗ , in Figure
11, we present editing performances according to deterministic scores s∗ , where the stability region
of 20 < s∗ < 22 is explicitly specified.

Qualitative Results Videos used in additional results are from DAVIS Pont-Tuset et al. (2017) and
materials with free copyright. (i.e., https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P4GB4t8sODU&t=456s,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9V52OxjXQ7A&t=484s)


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A bear sits on the ground”
  [Temporla change]


                      1.0
                      1.0                                                                    Temporal weight (𝜸)
                      0.0


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A walking toy raises a hand and downs”
 [Temporla change]


                      1.0
                      1.0                                                                    Temporal weight (𝜸)
                      0.0


                                          Figure 12: Edited results about temporal change.


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A girl is holding a dog in her arms”
 [Object overlay]


                      Target Text: “A girl is holding a teddy bear in her arms”
 [Object overlay]


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A woman is going down the road on a board”
 [Object overlay]


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A gingerbread man is riding on a snowboard at a ski resort”
   [Object overlay]


                                             Figure 13: Edited results about object overlay.


                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Input video


                     Target prompt: “An astronaut is jumping on the moon”
[Motion change]


                      Input video


                      Target Text: “A black swan is walking on the road”
[Motion change]


                     Input video


                      Target Text: “A man is praying”
   [Motion change]


                                            Figure 14: Edited results about motion change.


                                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Input video


                     Target Text: “A sailing boat is passing over the snowy sea”
 [Style transfer]


                     Target Text: “A LEGO boat is passing over the river”
  [Style transfer]


                     Input video


                     Target Text: “Young boy and young girl take selfies while walking down the forest”
  [Style transfer]


                     Target Text: “Grandmother and granfather take selfies while walking down the street”
 [Style transfer]


                                            Figure 15: Edited results about style transfer.


                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Input video


                   Target prompt: “An astronaut is skiing on the moon”
 [Motion change]


                   Input video


                   Target Text: “A woman is doing yoga”
 [Motion change]


Figure 16: Failure case about motion change. The style of the moon is slightly changed to snow by
the motion-style bias. Pre-trained model does not have much of knowledge about specific motions
such as yoga.


Limitation and Future work As shown in Figure 16, our studies found that some cases of editing
are still challenging. We consider the following two reasons for the insufficient edits: (1) pre-trained
T2I model has no knowledge of the target text and (2) certain motions (e.g., skiing) in pre-trained
knowledge are biased by specific styles (e.g., snow) that usually come up together. Thus, our future
work is to mitigate motion-style bias in editing and regularize edits to incorporate challenging edits.

Further studies about pivotal prompt We performed experimental studies about the editing
when a target prompt is significantly different from the contents provided in the input video. As
shown in Figure 17, for a given video of a woman walking, we prepare two target prompts as (1)
“An astronaut is on the moon” and (2) “goldfish in the water”. The results denote that if a target
prompt aligns with the content of the given video to a certain extent, it is mirrored accordingly. Con-
versely, when the prompt describes a completely different scenario, the model switches to generating
video content based on the textual input rather than editing the existing footage.


                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Input video


   Target prompt: “An astronaut is on the moon”


    Target Text: “A goldfish is in the water”


   Figure 17: Editing results on target prompt that has a low correlation with the original video.


                                                  23
