Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFORMULATING D OMAIN A DAPTATION OF L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS A DAPT-R ETRIEVE -R EVISE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT

             While large language models (LLMs) like GPT-4 have recently demonstrated as-
             tonishing zero-shot capabilities in general domain tasks, they often generate con-
             tent with hallucinations in specific domains such as Chinese law, hindering their
             application in these areas. This is typically due to the absence of training data that
             encompasses such a specific domain, preventing GPT-4 from acquiring in-domain
             knowledge. A pressing challenge is that it’s not plausible to continue training
             LLMs of such scale on in-domain data.
             This paper introduces a simple and effective domain adaptation framework for
             GPT-4 by reformulating generation as an adapt-retrieve-revise process. The ini-
             tial step is to adapt an affordable 7B LLM to the target domain by continuing
             learning on in-domain data. When solving a task, we leverage the adapted LLM
             to generate a draft answer given a task query. Then, the draft answer will be used
             to retrieve supporting evidence candidates from an external in-domain knowl-
             edge base. Finally, the draft answer and retrieved evidence are concatenated into
             a whole prompt to let GPT-4 assess the evidence and revise the draft answer to
             generate the final answer.
             Our proposal combines the advantages of the efficiency of adapting a smaller 7B
             model with the evidence-assessing capability of GPT-4 and effectively prevents
             GPT-4 from generating hallucinatory content. In the zero-shot setting of four Chi-
             nese legal tasks, our method improves accuracy by 33.3% compared to the direct
             generation by GPT-4. When compared to two stronger retrieval-based baselines,
             our method outperforms them by 15.4% and 23.9%. Our code will be released 1 .


1       I NTRODUCTIONS
Recent large language models (e.g., GPT-4) bring remarkable improvements in various general do-
main NLP tasks (Brown et al., 2020a; OpenAI, 2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al.,
2022; Rae et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022). However, in specific domains such as the Chinese
legal domain, the performance of such general LLMs still lags considerably behind. We show a real
example of Chinese LegalQA (Chen et al., 2023) on the left of Figure 1, which requires the model to
generate the corresponding legal provision (i.e., the law name and the clause index) and the rationale
for the judgment, given a brief case description as the query.
We initialize the research with a preliminary examination of utilizing GPT-4 to address the Chinese
LegalQA task, which involves responding with a law clause relevant to a given query case. Fig-
ure 1 reveals the extremely low recall of directly prompting the query case to ask GPT-4 to generate
the corresponding law clause. Though the generated answers are grammatically fluent, they often
consist of non-logical content, factual mistakes, and fail to refer to the correct legal provision (also
known as ”hallucination”). For example, in Figure 2, the direct generation of GPT-4 seems to be
logical but actually has no clues in the Chinese laws. A potential reason is the insufficient Chi-
nese legal domain text during pretraining, leading to a lack of domain knowledge acquisition, and
consequently generating hallucinatory content.
For the LLMs with the scale of GPT-4, it’s generally not feasible for researchers to do learning-based
adaptation. The enormous model size could make the cost of continual learning extremely high, and
    1
        An anonymous link. The domain adapted 7B LLM will be also released.


                                                       1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Query: What are the penalties for parking           GPT-4 Direct Generation            72.4
             violations under the traffic code?                  GPT-4 Retrieval-based Generation
                                                                 Domain-Adapted 7B LLM
             Answer: According to [article 76] clause index of   Ours
             [the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People's
                                                                                          48.8
             Republic of China] law name, [to anyone who
             violates the road traffic safety laws or
             regulations on parking or temporarily parks                         36.0
             motor vehicles, his illegal acts may be pointed
             out, meanwhile he shall be imposed upon the
             penalty of oral warning, and be ordered to
             drive away immediately...... ] rationale                   14.4


Figure 1: Left: A real example of Chinese LegalQA. The square brackets and subscripts are offered
for the purpose of clear demonstration, not actually exist in the ground-truth answer or generation.
Right: The recall on the LegalQA dataset.



meanwhile, the access functions are often limited by APIs. Therefore, recent work (Lewis et al.,
2020b) introduces retrieval-based methods that first use the given query to retrieve relevant evidence
candidates from the external domain-specific knowledge base or the internet and then concatenate
the query and the evidence candidates into the prompt. GPT-4 could implicitly validate the relevance
between the query and the evidence, as well as the correctness of the evidence, before producing
a generation. In our replicated results, the retrieval-based method improves the LegalQA recall
from 14.4% (direct generation) to 36.0%. This suggests that even though GPT-4 may not generate
domain content, it possesses sufficient evidence-assessing capacity to select the correct evidence
from candidates. Nevertheless, the retrieval module is limited by the capability of representation
mapping from query to evidence and is also influenced by the domain issue, leading to a decline in
search quality. GPT-4 still produces hallucinations in responses as the middle answer in Figure 2.
On the other hand, with the rapid development of open LLMs led by LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023),
it becomes affordable to continually train an open LLM tailored to your demands on sufficient
in-domain texts, resulting in a domain-adapted LLM. We therefore conduct the second examing
of continually training Baichuan 7B (Baichuan-inc, 2023), a Chinese foundation model, on over
50B Chinese legal data. Its performance significantly outperforms GPT-4 and even surpasses the
retrieval-based GPT-4 generation on Chinese LegalQA. Hallucinations caused by the lack of domain
knowledge are largely reduced but not completely solved. As shown in the right answer in Figure 2,
adapted LLM generates generally correct responses but still makes errors in certain words. Although
the law name is correct and the rationale part is reasonable, the clause index is a hallucinatory
generation which raises the difficulty in anchoring target clauses. We argue that these fails are
accordingly caused by the limited capability of a 7B size to understand the query and the evidence.
Building upon the observation of the evidence-assessing capability of GPT-4 and the high-quality
domain content generated by the domain-adapted 7B model, this paper proposes a novel approach to
reformulate GPT-4’s domain content generation to an adapt-retrieve-revise process: (1) the domain-
adapted model generates a draft answer given a query; (2) the retrieval module uses the draft answer
as input for searching external evidence candidates because the answer is usually more informative
and semantically similar to the evidence compared to the query as long as the answer quality is
acceptable; (3) GPT-4 assesses retrieved evidence and revises the draft answer to generate the final
answer.
The rest sections of the paper anchor the Chinese legal domain and comprehensively validate the
effectiveness of our proposal. In Section 2, we explain each stage of our adapt-retrieve-revise method
and elaborate on the implementation details. In Section 3 and 4, we conduct the experiments and the
result analysis on four Chinese legal domain tasks. The experimental results show that our proposal
significantly improves the direct generation and the retrieval-based generation baselines. In the final
Section 6, we elicit the conclusion and future work. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to examine the zero-shot performance of LLMs on four Chinese legal benchmarks.


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Query: What are the penalties for parking violations under the traffic code?
        Answer:
        GPT-4’s Direct Generation:                               GPT-4’s Retrieval-based                                  Domain-adapted LLM’s
        In China, the penalties for                              Generation:                                              Generation:
        parking violations may vary                              According to [article 37] of                             According to [article 90] of
        depending on the specific                                [the Road Traffic Safety                                 [the Road Traffic Safety Law
        area and circumstances.                                  Law of the People's                                      of the People's Republic of
        Typically, parking penalties                             Republic of China], [where                               China], [to anyone who
        may include fines, demerit                               a special driveway is                                    violates the road traffic
        points and, in severe                                    delimited on a road, only                                safety laws or regulations on
        cases...                                                 prescribed…]                                             parking or parks...]


Figure 2: Examples of hallucinations of various models. Red denotes the content containing hallu-
cinations. The ground-truth answer is shown in Figure 1

                                                                                                           Instruction 𝑰
           Query: What are the penalties for parking                                                   Please revise the original answer based on the query and the provided
           violations under the traffic code? Please provide                                           evidence.
           evidence in the Chinese law.
                                                                                                             Query 𝒒
                                                                                                       Query: What are the penalties for parking violations under the traffic
                                                   Draft Answer: According to article 90               code? Please provide evidence in the Chinese legal articles.
                              Chinese legal
    Pre-trained                                    of the Road Traffic Safety Law of the
                                domain
    Chinese LLM                                    People's Republic of China, in the                     Draft Answer 𝒅
                              adapted LLM
                                                   event of a violation of the ……                      Draft Answer: According to article 90 of the Road Traffic Safety Law of
                                                                                                       the People's Republic of China, in the event of a violation of the ……
                                                      Sentence Embedding Model E5
                                                                                                           Evidence 𝑬
              Chinese Legal                                       ℎ!"#$%&
                                                                                                       1. Article 76 of the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People's Republic of
              Raw Corpora                                                                                 China: where a motor vehicle meets with a traffic accident……
                                                                                 𝑘NN Retrieval         2. Article 93 of the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People's Republic of
                                                               Retrieval Bank                             China: to anyone who violates the road traffic safety……
                  Draft Answer Generation
                  (Sec. 2.1)                                                                                                                 GPT-4 Revision (Sec. 2.3)
                                                       Sentence Embedding Model E5                        Revised Answer 𝒓
                                                                                                       Revised Answer: According to article 93 of the Road Traffic Safety Law
                                                                                                       of the People's Republic of China, to anyone who violates the road
                                                                Knowledge                              traffic safety laws or regulations on parking or temporarily parks motor
                                                                  Base          Answer-based
                                                                                Retrieval (Sec. 2.2)   vehicles……



                                              Figure 3: Overview of our proposed method.


2       M ETHODOLOGY

Our adapt-retrieve-revise method consists of three steps. In the first step (Section 2.1), we contin-
ually train a Chinese pre-trained LLM on the Chinese legal domain corpora to derive a domain-
adapted legal LLM and given the query, the legal LLM will generate the draft answer. In the second
step (Section 2.2), we use a sentence embedding model to produce embeddings for both the draft
answer and each paragraph in the corresponding knowledge base, then evidence retrieval will be
computed by the similarities between the answer embedding and the paragraph embeddings. In the
third step (Section 2.3), we concatenate the query, the draft answer, and the retrieved evidence in
the prompt for GPT-4 to revise and produce the final response. Figure 3 shows the overview of our
method. In the following sections, we will introduce details of each step.

2.1       G ENERATE THE DRAFT ANSWER BY THE DOMAIN - ADAPTED LLM

Recently, various Chinese pre-trained LLMs have occurred, such as Baichuan 7B, Qwen
7B (Alibaba-inc, 2023), etc. In this paper, we chose Baichuan-7B as the base model for our proposal.
For the Chinese legal raw corpora, we build the continual learning data from two open sources:

           • Chinese law clauses (https://flk.npc.gov.cn/) form the foundation of the judi-
             cial system, containing a wealth of legal terms, provisions, and judicial practices. They are
             essential for the model to understand and generate relevant content.


                                                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Chinese judgments online (https://wenshu.court.gov.cn/) is the largest on-
         line publication platform for legal documents in China. The platform contains judicial
         documents from courts at all levels, covering various legal fields such as civil, criminal, ad-
         ministrative, and enforcement. We believe these documents contain knowledge for LLMs
         to understand the usage of laws in various scenarios, and we collect 100M documents from
         this platform as the training data.

In total, we trained 50B tokens with the input length limit of 16,384 and the batch size of 256 on
32 A100 GPUs, and the time-consuming is 167 hours. After continual learning, we subsequently
supervised fine-tuning our model on 70K instruction examples, including 52K GPT-4 self-instruct
Chinese data (Peng et al., 2023) and 18K legal instructions (See Appendix A.1) for the alignment.
Then, given an input query, we will first prompt the trained 7B legal LLM to generate the draft
answer, which will be used in the next step. For the prompt, we add the instruction ”Please provide
evidence in the Chinese law” at the end of the query to enforce the model to generate related law
clauses, as in Figure 3.

2.2   A NSWER - BASED E VIDENCE R ETRIEVAL

Since the draft answer of the 7B legal LLM is usually more informative and semantically similar to
the evidence than the query. We further use the generated evidence to retrieve ground-truth evidence
from the target knowledge base for the purpose of revision since it contains much more information
than the query, even though the hallucinations can not be totally reduced. We implement this method
with two subsequent steps: knowledge bank construction and retrieval.

Knowledge Bank Construction For the i-th paragraph pi , we construct the key-value pair (pi , pi )
where the key pi is the representation obtained from the sentence embedding model and the value
pi denotes the paragraph. In our experiment, we utilize Multilingual-E5-large (Wang et al., 2022),
a Roberta-based (Liu et al., 2019) sentence embedding model that achieves robust performance on
various tasks. The memory (K, V) = {(pi , pi )|pi ∈ KB} is thus the set of all key-value pairs
constructed from all the paragraphs in the external knowledge base KB.

Retrieval Given the generated draft answer d, the sentence embedding model E5 outputs its rep-
resentation hAnswer . We then query the constructed knowledge bank with hAnswer to retrieve its k
nearest neighbors E according to a distance function by L2 distance.

2.3   GPT-4 R EVISION

To effectively combine the high-quality draft answers generated by the 7B domain adapted model
with GPT-4’s powerful evidence-assessing capability, we propose the following process. As shown
in Figure 3, the whole prompt consists of the following components: (1) the instruction I to require
GPT-4 to revise the draft answer given the query and the evidence candidates; (2) the query q itself;
(3) the draft answer d for GPT-4 to revise; (4) and the retrieved evidence candidates E to provide
related Chinese legal knowledge for GPT-4. Then, the final revised answer r will be outputted by
GP T 4(I, q, d, E).


3     E XPERIMENTS

We conducted a series of experiments to compare our adapt-retrieve-revise method to the baselines
of direct generation and retrieval-based generation on various Chinese legal benchmarks. We find
that our proposal robustly improves performance on all the tasks. We show the task settings and
experimental results in this section.

3.1   C HINESE L EGAL D OMAIN TASKS

We evaluated our Adapt-Retrieve-Revise method on a diversity of tasks in the zero-shot setting, and
we divided these tasks into three categories by the legal knowledge base for retrieval:


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 1: Main Results on four Chinese legal datasets.
                                                            Chinese law articles   Textbooks
  Models                  Retrieval      Revisor                                                Avg.
                                                          LCR    CP     LegalQA     JEC-QA
                                           Direct Generation
  GPT-4                   -             -                 67.6 71.2        14.4       36.2      47.4
  7B legal LLM            -             -                 88.4 84.0        48.8       39.8      65.3
                                      Retrieval-based Generation
  GPT-4                   Query-based   -                 74.4 75.2        36.0       41.6      56.8
  7B legal LLM            Query-based   -                 87.6 82.4        50.2       40.8      65.3
                                       Adapt-Retrieve-Revise
  7B legal LLM            Answer-based 7B legal LLM 88.4 83.6              49.0       40.2      65.3
  7B legal LLM (ours)     Answer-based GPT-4              96.4 87.8        72.4       66.2      80.7



       • Law CLause Recommendation (LCR) and Criminal Prediction (CP) (Xiao et al., 2018)
         are two tasks using the legal report as the input, and let the model generate the most related
         law clause and predict the criminal type based on the law clause. For these two tasks, we
         use the Chinese law clauses as the domain knowledge base for retrieval.
       • LegalQA is a filtered set of EUQALS (Chen et al., 2023) that, given an input query, the
         model should generate an answer based on the most related legal clause. The filtering is
         based on the quality of the questions and we will release the filtered set. We also use the
         Chinese law clauses as the domain knowledge base for retrieval.
       • JEC-QA (Zhong et al., 2020) is the official test for getting a lawyer’s certificate in China.
         We chose the single-choice selection questions in our evaluations with the Legal Textbooks
         (https://github.com/thunlp/jec-qa) as the knowledge base for retrieval.
       • Similar Case Retrieval (Ma et al., 2021) is the task that, given a query legal scenario as the
         input, we aim at selecting similar Legal Judgement Documents from the 100 candidates.
         We conducted this experiment to assess the reliability of our proposed retrieval method in
         Section 4.1.2.

Due to the cost of GPT-4 API and the human evaluation, we randomly sampled a subset of 250 test
examples for each task of LCR, CP, LegalQA, and JEC-QA.

3.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

Since generative models produce diverse formats in the output and the Chinese legal domain has its
own features, checking the evaluation metrics in the experiments is crucial. For tasks LCR, CP, and
LegalQA, our metric is the recall of whether the title of the ground-truth law clause is included in
the generated answer. This is because, in real-world applications, with the correct title, the contents
of the law clause can be easily revised by the rule-based system, indicating that the title is more
important than the content.
For the JEC-QA task, we use accuracy as the metric, but controlling the output into an identical
format for automatic evaluation is difficult, especially for the 7B LLM that has not been fine-tuned
on the JEC-QA task. We select human evaluation to ensure the accuracy of our evaluation.
For the Similar Case Retrieval task, we chose the widely used precision@k and MAP as the evalua-
tion metrics.

3.3   M AIN R ESULTS

We provide the main results as in Table 1. Generally, we compare our proposed method with direct
generations and retrieval-based generations using the query, showing that our method outperforms
all baselines by a large margin. Our main results also provide some ablation results.
First, our 7B legal LLM significantly beats GPT-4, and even compared with the retrieval-based
generation of GPT-4, the 7B legal LLM still outperforms on three tasks and has competitive results


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the JEC-QA task, indicating that our continual learning on Chinese legal raw corpora shows a
fast and effective domain adaptation on various legal tasks.
Then, considering the results of GPT-4 and the GPT-4 retrieval-based generation, we find that af-
ter providing evidence of related legal knowledge, GPT-4 can improve its responses significantly
(+9.92%). This indicates that the retrieval-based method is a proper way to reduce hallucinations
caused by the lack of domain knowledge, and owing to the robust evidence-assessing capacity, GPT-
4 can adapt to the Chinese legal domain well with convincing evidence available.
In our final experiment, using the draft answers generated by the 7B legal model for retrieval and re-
vision, the performance significantly exceeded two query-based retrieval baselines by large margins
of 15.4% and 23.9%. It’s worth noting that the improvement here comes from both the enhanced
answer-based retrieval quality and the revision setup. In the subsequent ablation study, we will fur-
ther examine the quantified improvement of the retrieval quality through an additional retrieving
task.
An interesting observation is that, by comparing the direct generation of the 7B legal model and
the adapt-retrieve-revise method with the revision model as the legal 7B model, we find that with
retrieved evidence, the revised answers seem to be no obvious difference from the direct generation.
This indicates that the 7B legal LLM shows almost zero evidence-assessing capacity.


4     A BLATION S TUDIES & F URTHER A NALYSIS

4.1     A NALYSIS OF R ETRIEVAL M ETHODS

We believe the answer-based approach is more effective due to two reasons. (1) The query-based
retrieval requires a query-to-evidence representation mapping. The answers are usually more se-
mantically similar to the evidence, which avoids the mapping process. (2) A query is often very
brief, while an answer containing the legal provision and rationale is more informative. In this sub-
section, we analyze the retrieval component, including the apple-to-apple comparisons between the
query-based and answer-based performance and the influence of answer quality for the answer-based
retrieval.


               Figure 4: Comparison of retrieval recalls on the LegalQA dataset.


4.1.1    R ETRIEVING A Q UERY OR R ETRIEVING AN A NSWER ?
We ordered the top-similar law clauses in each retrieval and evaluated the recall in top-k, indicating
whether the ground-truth law clause appears in the top-k retrieved law clauses. As shown in Figure 4,
the top-1 retrieved law clause based on the answer competes with the top-5 law clauses based on the
query, and the answer-based retrieval beats the query-based retrieval with a large margin for all k.
This confirms our first reason that the draft answer contains much more information than the query
for retrieval, indicating that LLMs can be intrinsic retrievers.
We further compare the query-based and answer-based retrieval on a public Similar Case Retrieval
task. This task aims to select similar legal judgments based on the query from the candidates with a


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Draft answer w/o retrieval           Query-based retrieval
                          GPT-4's answer-based retrieval       7B legal LLM's answer-based retrieval

              95

              85

              75

              65

              55

              45

              35
                         LCR                       CP                  LegalQA                    JEC-Q



Figure 5: We compare performances of the draft answer of 7B legal LLM and our proposed adapt-
retrieve-revise model using different contents in retrieval.


         Table 2: Results of two retrieval setups on the Similar Case Retrieval dataset.
                  Setup            Precision@5 Precision@10            MAP
                  Query-based          42.08           41.95           47.8
                  Answer-based 45.19 (+3.11) 42.08 (+0.13) 49.49 (+1.69)


query the case brief given. As shown in Table 2, we compare two setups: 1) using the original query
to retrieve, 2) using the legal 7B LLM to complete a whole legal judgment document given the brief
query, and then retrieving. We follow the original task repository for the other settings: https:
//github.com/myx666/LeCaRD. The results show that on each metric, the answer-based
retrieval works better, indicating that using the generated answer provides a more robust retrieval.

4.1.2    D OES THE Q UALITY OF A NSWER M ATTER FOR A NSWER -BASED R ETRIEVAL ?

It’s an intuitive thought that the quality of answers will significantly impact the outcome of answer-
based retrieval. Therefore, we compare the retrieval using the answers of GPT-4 and the 7B le-
gal LLM. We change the contents in retrieval for our proposed adapt-retrieve-revise method. As
shown in Figure 5, by comparing query-based and GPT-4’s answer-based retrievals, we find that
the answer-based retrieval fails on three datasets (LCR, CP, LegalQA), indicating that the lack of
domain knowledge in the GPT-4 responses leads to a more noisy retrieval, which even hurts the
performance of the draft answer (LCR, CP, LegalQA). Meanwhile, after domain adapting, our 7B
legal LLM provides robust answers in retrieval and leads to the best performances, indicating that
the learned Chinese legal domain knowledge improves our answer-based retrieval.

4.2     C ASE ANALYSIS OF THE IMPROVEMENTS AFTER THE GPT-4 REVISION

We conclude the improvements by GPT-4 in three aspects as shown in Figure 6:

        • Adding law clauses for reference: Sometimes, the 7B legal LLM only provides a fluent
          response without following the input instructions to provide the key information of the
          referred law name and clause index. In this case, the faithfulness of the answer remains
          unchecked for the users. However, after the revision, each answer is equipped with the
          referred law clause, which makes it easier to check the accuracy of the responses.
        • Revise hallucinations in the evidence: even the domain-adapted LLM can provide evi-
          dence from its learned legal knowledge; the hallucination remains to some degree, such as
          the wrong clause index, even the law name and rationale are roughly correct. Since the ra-
          tionale content is accurate, the answer-based retrieval will search for the correct evidence,
          and the revision by GPT-4 will solve the hallucination to produce a more robust response.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Query: What are the provisions     Query: What are the penalties for    Query: Which traffic accidents
        regarding the scope of legal       parking violations under the         can be handled according to the
        succession and the order of        traffic code?                        simplified procedure?
        succession?

        Draft answer:                      Draft answer:                        Draft answer:
        1. The spouse, children and        According to article 90 of the       According to article 74 of the
        parents of the decedent are        Road Traffic Safety Law of the       Road Traffic Safety Law of the
        the first order of heirs; 2. The   People's Republic of China, to       People's Republic of China,
        siblings, grandparents and         anyone who violates the road         with respect to a dispute over
        grandparents of the decedent       traffic safety laws or regulations   indemnity for the damage from
        are the second order of heirs…     on parking or parks motor            a traffic accident, the parties
                                           vehicles…                            concerned…



        Revised answer:                    Revised answer:                      Revised answer:
        According to article 1127 of       According to article 93 of the       According to article 70 of the
        Civil Code of the People's         Road Traffic Safety Law of the       Road Traffic Safety Law of the
        Republic of China, 1. The          People's Republic of China, to       People's Republic of China, If
        spouse, children and parents       anyone who violates the road         a traffic accident occurs on
        of the decedent are the first      traffic safety laws or regulations   road, the vehicle driver shall
        order of heirs; 2. The siblings,   on parking or temporarily parks      immediately park the vehicle
        grandparents and…                  motor vehicles…                      and protect the scene…


                              Figure 6: Case studies on the GPT-4 revision.


                       Figure 7: Comparison of iterations on LegalQA dataset.


      • Choose correct evidence: In a more significant scenario, even though the 7B legal model’s
        answers might contain partial hallucinatory content, the retrieval component can still pos-
        sibly identify correct evidence through the partially correct descriptions in the rationale
        generation. During the revision stage, GPT-4 could assess the correct evidence, leading to
        the generation of correct answers.


4.3   D OES THE ITERATION MAKE THE GENERATION BETTER ?

Since our method provides more accurate responses than the original response from the domain
LLM, one question is whether this procedure can be iterated to improve the responses. We can use
the revised response to retrieve related evidence and further improve the response. To verify this
probability, we iteratively test on the LegalQA dataset. As the result is shown in Figure 7, during
the iteration, the retrieval recall does not show consistent improvements compared with the first
revision, leading to the performance nearly unchanged.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     R ELATED W ORK

5.1   TASKS IN THE C HINESE L EGAL D OMAIN

The rapid advancements in LLMs have significantly impacted various domains, including the le-
gal industry. This gives rise to the occurrence of legal datasets, such as the Challenge of AI in
Law (CAIL, http://cail.cipsc.org.cn/index.html), LeCaRD (Ma et al., 2021), JEC-
QA (Zhong et al., 2020) and EQUALS (Chen et al., 2023). These datasets cover document classifi-
cation, summarization, question answering, information extraction, similar document retrieval, and
other popular NLP tasks in the Chinese legal domain. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is
the first work to exam the zero-shot performances on these legal datasets.

5.2   C HINESE L EGAL LLM S

As for Chinese legal LLMs, recent work utilizes a paradigm of continual learning in the legal do-
main, and a substantial number of instruction fine-tuning datasets were constructed to augment the
proficiency in rendering legal advice. Particularly, the series of LaWGPT (Song, 2021) has been de-
veloped by leveraging foundational models such as Chinese-LLaMA-7B (Cui et al., 2023b), Chat-
GLM (Du et al., 2022), and Chinese-alpaca-plus-7B (Cui et al., 2023b). Lawyer LLaMa (Huang
et al., 2023) base on the more advanced Chinese-LLaMa-13B (Cui et al., 2023b), On the other
hand, LexiLaw (Hai, 2023), built on the foundation of ChatGLM-6B (Du et al., 2022), under-
went training through the application of three distinct methods, namely LoRA (Hu et al., 2022),
P-tuning (Liu et al., 2021), and fine-tuning. Furthermore, Chatlaw (Cui et al., 2023a) received train-
ing based on both Ziya-LLaMA-13B-v1 (IDEA-CCNL, 2023) and Anima-33B (lyogavin, 2023).
DISC-LawLLM Yue et al. (2023) adopted legal syllogism prompting strategies to construct super-
vised fine-tuning datasets and fine-tune LLMs with legal reasoning capability. A primary reason
hindering us from utilizing such existing models is that they have often been trained on those pub-
licly legal tasks already. Therefore the zero-shot capabilities can not be truly reflected. We thus
continue training the general Baichuan 7B on legal data by ourselves.

5.3   R ETRIEVAL - AUGMENTED INFERENCE

In scenarios where language models are confronted with tasks necessitating an infusion of external
knowledge, a retriever mechanism can be used to provide evidence. The Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020b) system incorporates a BERT-based (Devlin et al., 2019) Docu-
ment Retrieval Process (DRP) and utilizes BART (Lewis et al., 2020a) for answer generation. Analo-
gously, the EMDR2 (Yu et al., 2023) employs the expectation-maximization algorithm to account for
multiple retrieved documents. The Atlas (Izacard et al., 2022) builds upon the EMDR2 framework,
and by synergistically training the retriever and reader components, it demonstrates few-shot learn-
ing capabilities commensurate with the 540B PalM (Chowdhery et al., 2022). RETRO (Borgeaud
et al., 2022) benefits from retrieval mechanisms on expansive corpora during its pre-training phase
and exhibits performance in close alignment with those of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020b).


6     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE D ISCUSSIONS

In this paper, we reformulate the zero-shot domain content generation of large language models
as an adapt-retrieve-revise procedure. This approach combines the merits of efficiently performing
continual training of a smaller 7B LLM for domain adaptation, robustly retrieving the supporting
evidence from an external knowledge base, and effectively leveraging the evidence-assessing and
revision capabilities of GPT-4. Our method significantly enhances the zero-shot performance of
GPT-4 on four Chinese legal tasks.
While this paper manages to validate the effectiveness of the proposal in the Chinese legal domain,
the adapt-retrieve-revise method itself is a flexible framework, which is expected to be adapted to a
wide range of domains. We leave it as future work. Due to the substantial costs of the GPT-4 API,
we could only sample a subset of test data during the evaluation. Resolving the trade-off between
the growing experimental costs and the validity of evaluation remains a challenge for the GPT-4
research in the future.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alibaba-inc. Qwen-7b. https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen-VL, 2023.
Baichuan-inc.   Baichuan-7b.    https://github.com/baichuan-inc/Baichuan-7B,
  2023.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark,
  Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang,
  Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irv-
  ing, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent
  Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Kamalika Chaud-
  huri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/borgeaud22a.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-
  12, 2020, virtual, 2020b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
  hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Andong Chen, Feng Yao, Xinyan Zhao, Yating Zhang, Changlong Sun, Yun Liu, and Weix-
  ing Shen. EQUALS: A real-world dataset for legal question answering via reading chinese
  laws. In Matthias Grabmair, Francisco Andrade, and Paulo Novais (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Nineteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, ICAIL 2023, Braga,
  Portugal, June 19-23, 2023, pp. 71–80. ACM, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3594536.3595159. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3594536.3595159.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiaxi Cui, Zongjian Li, Yang Yan, Bohua Chen, and Li Yuan. Chatlaw: Open-source legal large
   language model with integrated external knowledge bases, 2023a.
Yiming Cui, Ziqing Yang, and Xin Yao. Efficient and effective text encoding for chinese llama and
  alpaca, 2023b.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. GLM:
  General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 320–335, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/2022.acl-long.26. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.26.
Tao Hai. Lexilaw. https://github.com/CSHaitao/LexiLaw, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models, 2022.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In The Tenth Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
  OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Quzhe Huang, Mingxu Tao, Zhenwei An, Chen Zhang, Cong Jiang, Zhibin Chen, Zirui Wu, and
  Yansong Feng. Lawyer llama technical report, 2023.
IDEA-CCNL. Fengshenbang-lm. https://github.com/pengxiao-song/LaWGPT, 2023.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot learning
  with retrieval augmented language models, 2022.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce
 Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R. Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pp. 7871–7880.
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020a. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703. URL
 https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Na-
  man Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
  and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In
  Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-
  Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020,
  virtual, 2020b.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Abstract.html.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. P-tuning v2:
  Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks. CoRR,
  abs/2110.07602, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07602.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach, 2019.
lyogavin. anima. https://github.com/lyogavin/Anima, 2023.
Yixiao Ma, Yunqiu Shao, Yueyue Wu, Yiqun Liu, Ruizhe Zhang, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma.
  Lecard: A legal case retrieval dataset for chinese law system. In Fernando Diaz, Chirag Shah,
  Torsten Suel, Pablo Castells, Rosie Jones, and Tetsuya Sakai (eds.), SIGIR ’21: The 44th Inter-
  national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Virtual
  Event, Canada, July 11-15, 2021, pp. 2342–2348. ACM, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3404835.3463250.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3463250.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with gpt-4, 2023.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kun-
  coro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Men-
  sch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yu-
  jia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Au-
  relia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger,
  Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol
  Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis insights from training gopher,
  2022.
Pengxiao Song. Lawgpt. https://github.com/IDEA-CCNL/Fengshenbang-LM, 2021.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Vin-
  cent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Pranesh
  Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi,
  Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
  Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee,
  Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton,
  Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak,
  Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient founda-
  tion language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. CoRR,
  abs/2212.03533, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2212.03533. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2212.03533.
Chaojun Xiao, Haoxi Zhong, Zhipeng Guo, Cunchao Tu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yansong
  Feng, Xianpei Han, Zhen Hu, Heng Wang, and Jianfeng Xu. CAIL2018: A large-scale legal


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  dataset for judgment prediction. CoRR, abs/1807.02478, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1807.02478.
Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chenguang Zhu,
 Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models are strong
 context generators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.
 net/pdf?id=fB0hRu9GZUS.
Shengbin Yue, Wei Chen, Siyuan Wang, Bingxuan Li, Chenchen Shen, Shujun Liu, Yuxuan Zhou,
  Yao Xiao, Song Yun, Xuanjing Huang, and Zhongyu Wei. Disc-lawllm: Fine-tuning large lan-
  guage models for intelligent legal services, 2023.
Haoxi Zhong, Chaojun Xiao, Cunchao Tu, Tianyang Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. JEC-
  QA: A legal-domain question answering dataset. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Ar-
  tificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelli-
  gence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artifi-
  cial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, pp. 9701–9708. AAAI
  Press, 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6519. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
  v34i05.6519.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   L EGAL I NSTRUCTION T UNING

We build our legal instruction dataset by human experts. Due to privacy concerns, we are not al-
lowed to disclose the annotated instruction data. However, we will release the instruction annotation
guideline along with our 7B legal LLM. We show a template with a toy example below.

       • Due to the Article x in the law y: [the corresponding content in the law]
       • Considering the fact that [the fact]
       • The judgment is [the conclusion]

A toy example could be:

       • Due to the article 91 of the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People’s Republic of China:
         [Whoever drives a motor vehicle after drinking alcohol shall be imposed upon the penalty
         of temporary seizure of his motor vehicle driving license for not less than 1 month but not
         more than 3 months, and be imposed upon a fine of not less than 200 Yuan but not more
         than 500 Yuan as well; whoever drives a motor vehicle when he is drunk shall be restricted
         by the traffic administrative department of the public security organ until he becomes sober,
         be detained for not more than 15 days, be imposed upon the penalty of temporary seizure
         of his motor vehicle driving license for not less than 3 months but not more than 6 months,
         and be imposed upon a fine of not less than 500 Yuan but not more than 2000 Yuan as
         well. Whoever drives a commercial operating motor vehicle after drinking alcohol shall
         be imposed upon the penalty of temporary seizure of his motor vehicle driving license for
         3 months, and be imposed upon a fine of 500 Yuan as well; whoever drives a commercial
         operating motor vehicle when he is drunk shall be restricted by the traffic administrative
         department of the public security organ until he becomes sober, be detained for not more
         than 15 days, be imposed upon the penalty of temporary seizure of his motor vehicle driving
         license for 6 months, be imposed upon a fine of 2000 Yuan as well. Where anyone is
         penalized for twice or more within one year due to his drunken driving as prescribed in the
         preceding two paragraphs, his motor vehicle driving license shall be canceled, and he shall
         not drive a commercial operating motor vehicle within 5 years.]
       • Considering the fact that [the man was riding a motorbike when drunk.]
       • The judgment is [to be restricted by the traffic administrative department of the public
         security organ until he becomes sober, be detained for not more than 15 days, be imposed
         upon the penalty of temporary seizure of his motor vehicle driving license for not less than
         3 months but not more than 6 months, and be imposed upon a fine of not less than 500 Yuan
         but not more than 2000 Yuan as well.]


                                                 14
