Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HERE DOES I N - CONTEXT M ACHINE T RANSLATION
H APPEN IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Self-supervised large language models have demonstrated the ability to perform
         Machine Translation (MT) via in-context learning, but little is known about where
         the model performs MT with respect to prompt instructions and demonstration ex-
         amples. In this work, we attempt to characterize the region in layer-wise attention
         heads where GPT models transition from in-context learners to translation mod-
         els. Through a series of layer-wise context-masking experiments on GPTNeo2.7B
         and Bloom3B, we demonstrate evidence of a "task recognition" point where the
         translation task is encoded into the input representations and attention to context
         is no longer necessary. Our layer-wise fine-tuning experiments indicate that the
         most effective layers for MT fine-tuning are the layers critical to task recognition.
         Next, we examine redundancy in layers following task recognition, observing that
         masking these later layers does not hurt performance significantly. Finally, we
         train discrete attention head gates with L0 regularisation and find evidence that
         the most pruneable heads occur after task recognition.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In-context learning (ICL) refers to the phenomenon in which large generative pretrained transform-
ers (GPTs) perform novel tasks with no gradient updates when shown task examples or descriptions
in their context (Brown et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021). While in-context learning in GPT
models appears to be generally applicable to any natural language task, machine translation (MT)
has recently received increasing attention in this paradigm due to its potential to rapidly adapt to
different languages and domains. Although in-context MT has yet to reach parity with supervised
neural MT models, it’s off-the-shelf translation performance is comparatively strong and suggests
a promising direction for the future of MT (Hendy et al., 2023; Garcia et al., 2023). Prior work on
in-context MT has focused on prompt-engineering, treating GPT models as black boxes by focusing
on which examples to provide in-context. Agrawal et al. (2022) apply similarity-based retrieval to
select in-context examples, while Sia & Duh (2023) suggest a coherence-based approach. However,
these works apply surface level interventions leaving the internal mechanism of MT in GPT models
largely not understood.
In this work, we ask where does in-context Machine Translation occur in GPT models? We
conduct an initial exploration into locating self-attention layers responsible for in-context MT in two
open-source GPT models. Using causal masking over different parts of the context we demonstrate
that there exists a "task-recognition" point after which attention to the context is no longer necessary.
Next, we observe that very lightweight fine-tuning of LoRA parameters (Hu et al., 2021) are most
effective at the earlier layers of the model, layers we conjecture are responsible for task location,
corroborating prior work on the importance of prompts (Hendy et al., 2023).
Having identified the layers in which "task recognition" occurs, we study the extent to which sub-
sequent layers are redundant. Simple layer-wise masking shows that removing attention around the
"task-recognition" layers can cause the model to fail to perform translation all-together, whereas
layers towards the end of the model are much more redundant. We further investigate the extent
of MT task redundancy using differentiable L0 regularisation to train discrete attention head gates
(Section 6.2). We find that around 10% of the attention heads can be masked, which fundamentally
differs from the literature in supervised NMT where attention heads are highly specialised for MT
(Voita et al., 2019; Michel et al., 2019; Behnke & Heafield, 2021).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       BACKGROUND
In-Context Learning was first demonstrated by Brown et al. (2020) who showed that GPT-3
could be used to perform a huge variety of tasks without any task-specific parameters or training, by
conditioning the model’s generation on a prompt which included a few labeled examples of the task
of interest. Since then, interest in using GPT models for ICL has grown significantly, with several
recent works introducing methods such as instruction-tuning (Sanh et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022)
or chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) to improve downstream ICL accuracy.
Ostensibly, ICL can work for nearly any task that can be defined or described in natural language,
and therefore has potential for incredibly broad impact. However, ICL can often still underperform
supervised fine-tuning (Bhatia et al., 2023), prompting research in analyzing the mechanisms un-
derlying ICL. One line of work studies in-context learning with linear functions, typically linear
regression, characterizing the learnability of these functions with ICL (Li et al., 2023; Garg et al.,
2022) and even the learning algorithm a transformer uses Akyürek et al. (2022); Dai et al. (2023);
von Oswald et al. (2023). A second body of work suggests that in-context learning locates existing
latent concepts (tasks) which have been already learnt during pretraining (Xie et al., 2021; Wies
et al., 2023). Finally, Wei et al. (2023) suggest that model size may change the mechanisms behind
ICL from latent inference to actual learning algorithms as size increases. Our work which focuses
on Machine Translation, fits into this recent chain of work by demonstrating that there exists a point
in the model’s layers where the task has been located.

In-Context Machine Translation While GPT models are strong few-shot learners, their pre-
training data is historically dominated by English, limiting their ability to perform translation
tasks (Hendy et al., 2023). Lin et al. (2022) find that an explicitly multilingual GPT significantly
outperforms traditional english models such as GPT-3, and Garcia et al. (2023) find that such mod-
els can even be competitive with supervised MT models in some settings. However, even with
explicit multilingual pre-training, in-context MT has been found to be very sensitive to the examples
used Liu et al. (2022) and their orders Lu et al. (2022a). In response, recent work focuses on how to
select prompts that elicit the best downstream MT performance (Agrawal et al., 2022; Sia & Duh,
2023). However, further improvement to translation with GPT models is limited by our understand-
ing of how MT emerges in GPT models. Our work directly analyses when, in layer representations, a
GPT model becomes a translation model via in-context learning, and how that may inform decisions
around parameter tuning and redundancy.

3       DATA AND S ETTINGS
Models We use GPTN EO2.7B (Black et al., 2021) (32 layers × 20 heads) and B LOOM3B (Scao
et al., 2022) (30 layers × 32 heads) in all of our experiments. The checkpoints we use are from the
transformers library (Wolf et al., 2019). GPTN EO was trained on The PILE (Gao et al., 2020), an
825GB text dataset which consists of roughly 98% English data. Despite being mostly monolingual,
The PILE contains Europarl which GPTN EO was trained on at a document level (rather than a
sentence level). Conversely, B LOOM was trained on the ROOTS corpus (Laurençon et al., 2022), a
composite collection of 498 datasets that were explicitly selected to be multilingual, representing 46
natural languages and 13 programming languages. To our knowledge, there has not been any reports
of sentence level parallel corpora in the training datasets of these models.

Data We test our models using FLORES (Goyal et al., 2021) en ↔ fr which we report in the
main paper, and en ↔ es in the Appendix, drawing prompt examples from the development set.
To account for example selection and ordering effects,1 all inference runs were repeated with 5 ran-
domly sampled prompt example sets. We evaluate the generations using BLEU scores, following
the implementation from Post (2018). Our prompts may consist of instructions, examples, both,
or none. When no natural language instructions are used we supply the model with language in-
dicators only, e.g. the model input will be {L1}:{source_sentence} {L2}: where L1 =
English and L2 = French if the source and target languages are English and French respec-
tively. Instructions are given in natural language and take the form: Translate from {L1}
to {L2}:{L1}:{source_sentence}{L2}:. See Table 3 for an example.
    1
        In-context learning models have been found to be sensitive to these order effects (Lu et al., 2022b).


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Layer-from context-masking experiments for GPTNeo and BLOOM on en ↔ fr. The
graphs show translation performance when masking the in-context exemplars from the j th layer
onwards. Different lines indicate different treatments of the instruction, as described in Figure 6.
The dashed black line refers to the baseline which sees no instructions and no in-context exemplars.

         Name                 Instr      Ex
            M ask
         Ex                      N        Y    En: · · · Fr: · · · En: · · · Fr:
                     M ask
         Instr, Ex               Y        Y    Translate En to Fr: En: · · · Fr:· · · En: · · · Fr:
                     M ask
         Instr, Ex               Y        Y    Translate En to Fr: En: · · · Fr:· · · En: · · · Fr:

Table 1: For the prompt contexts of Instructions (Instr) and Examples (Ex). The overline corre-
sponds to the yellow highlights. This refers to attention masking from future time steps to previous
time steps in the causal language models. N and Y refer to absence and presence of either Instruc-
tion of Examples. Instr: Instructions and Ex: Examples. See also Figure 6.


4   W HERE DOES I N - CONTEXT MT HAPPEN ?

In-context learning differs from task-specific supervised learning in that, during test time, the desired
task must be identified from the context first, then executed. At what stage in the feed-forward
computation does a GPT-style model transition from an in-context learner to a translation model?
To explore this question, we propose layer-from context-masking, a causal masking method which
masks out all attention weights to the context (instructions or prompts) from a certain layer. All
masks operate from the j-th layer (ℓj ) onwards, i.e. masking from ℓ20 means causally masking out
attention to all context positions from ℓ20:nℓ , where nℓ is the total number of layers.
Under this causal masking treatment, after a certain layer the model must rely on the representations
of the target input sentence only to complete the task; if the target sentence representations do
not already encode the target task (translation into a specific language) then the model will fail to
generate translations. In other words, the goal is to find the layers at which attention over the context
at different layers may help the model "locate” the task of translation. In all experiments we mask


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Layer-from context-masking experiments for GPTNeo and BLOOM on en → fr investi-
                                       M ask
gating number of prompts in the Ex           mask setting (described in Figure 6). The dashed black
line refers to no instructions and no examples.


the examples provided in the context, but to control for the effect of semantic instructions, we ablate
                                                                                        M ask
over different treatments of the instructions by removing instructions entirely (Ex           ), leaving
                            M ask                                                                 M ask
them unmasked (InstrEx            ), or masking them together with the examples (InstrEx                ).
See Table 1 and Figure 6 for a visual description.
The results of our experiment for en → fr and fr → en are shown in Figure 1, and additional
experiments on en → es and es → en are shown in Section A.3. In both models we see a point
in the model layers in which performance plateaus as a function of when the context is masked: in
GPTN EO this point occurs around layer 20, and in BLOOM this point occurs around layer 25.2 At
this point, the models benefits only marginally, if at all, from attending to the context, suggesting
most of the task "location" has already occurred. Prior to this point, around the middle layers of the
models, moving the context mask up a layer results in a significant increase to MT performance; we
conjecture that the model is locating the correct task during processing in these middle layers, after
which the context is no longer necessary to perform the translation task.
For GPTN EO and B LOOM, context masking before a certain level of task-recognition results in a
translation model that is often worse than the baseline which sees no instructions or examples. 3
We find that a series of forward computations are required to process the input, and interrupting this
via our layer from context-masking experiments results in intermediate representations which hinder
performance significantly. The picture differs for the instruction-tuned Llama7b models Touvron
et al. (2023). Masking of the Examples results in little distortion, while masking of instructions
results in very poor intermediate representations Figure 8.
                                                                                                     M ask
Finally, we see that the behavior of the model is similar when no instructions are present (Ex        )
                                                   M ask
and when instructions are masked (Instr,Ex               ). However, if the model is given complete ac-
                                M ask
cess to instructions (InstrEx         ), it can use the intermediate processing of examples to achieve
"task recognition" earlier.


4.1    D OES THE N UMBER OF P ROMPTS A FFECT TASK R ECOGNITION ?

In Section 4 we study context-masking with a fixed number of prompts. However, it is not clear if
the number of prompts affects how fast, layer-wise, the model is able to recognize the task. We plot
these results for en → fr in Figure 2, for both GPTN EO and BLOOM. In general, we find that the
number of prompt examples has little effect on which layer the task is recognized at. While there
is some variation in MT performance when the context is masked around the middle layers of the
model, the final performance plateau occurs at the same layer regardless of the number of prompts.

   2
     We note that BLOOM appears primed to perform translation into English, as it’s baseline fr → en
performance (with no instructions or prompts) achieves high translation accuracy already.
   3
     The baseline results are not 0 because there is some minimal signal to the model based on the separator
tokens e.g., ‘English:’ and ‘French:’.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Performance of no-instructions trained Lora layers for GPTNeo and BLOOM on en↔fr.
The dashed black line refers to training of all layers together, while the orange (test without instruc-
tions) and blue (test with instructions) dashed lines refers to no training. The layers which are most
amenable to lightweight fine-tuning occur in the earlier layers before the "task recognition" point.



Overall, our context-masking experiments suggest a 3-phase process to in-context learning for MT:
in the first phase [0-7 for GPTN EO, 0-12 for BLOOM], moving the mask up makes little difference
in MT performance, which is close to 0, suggesting that the context has not influenced task location
at all; in the second phase [8-19 for GPTN EO, 13-24 for BLOOM], shifting the mask upwards
makes a large difference in MT performance, suggesting that the model has started to locate the task
but can improve significantly with more processing of the context; finally, in the third phase [20-32
for GPTN EO, 25-30 for BLOOM], shifting the mask upwards again has little-to-no effect on MT
performance, suggesting that the model has fully recognized the task as translation and is translation
over the inputs, no longer requiring the context to interpret the task.



4.2   I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY

We highlight the potential of speeding up inference time as a direct consequence of identifying where
task recognition occurs in the model. Our results indicate that we can achieve significant speedups
in inference by removing the processing of context-tokens all-together after a certain point in the
model, with little impact on translation performance. Let ℓr be the rth layer where we can mask out
the attention of the context across subsequent layers without a noticeable fall in performance. Let
k be the number of prompt examples, where each example consists of a pair of parallel sentences.
Then, for a model with nℓ layers, the amount of processing in terms of speed and memory saved is
approximately (nℓ − r)/nℓ × (k/k + 1). Using the example of GPTNeo (32 layers), we see from
Figure 1 that the model is very close to it’s ceiling score after processing the examples at layer 20
(ℓ = 20). If we no longer need to process examples after ℓ = 20, under a prompt size of 5 and 10,
the savings are approximately 17.5% and 35% respectively.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   T HE ADAPTABILITY OF TASK LAYERS

Intuitively, the layers prior to "task recognition" should contain information about locating the MT
task. To test this intuition, we further explore the adaptability of these layers by lightweight fine-
tuning experiments. We trained a single Low-rank Adaptation matrix (LoRA; Hu et al. (2021)) for
each layer of the output projection while keeping the rest of the network frozen.4 The model was
shown parallel sentences as input, and layers were trained with no explicit translation instructions.
We split the dev set of FLORES into 800 training examples and 200 dev examples. Note that this
setup is designed to tune the layers for task location. It is highly unlikely that the model can learn
translation knowledge from this small amount of supervision. The LoRA layers were trained for up
to 10 epochs, with α = 32, r = 32 and dropout= 0.1. The cross-entropy loss was computed only
on the target sentence (see Section A.7 for details) and we used the best checkpoint on the 200 held
out dev examples for evaluation.
We show the results of this experiment in Figure 3; while each layer can be trained to perform
better than no fine-tuning at all, tuning different layers have different impacts on performance. In
particular, we find that high performing layers occur at the earlier to middle parts of the network,
with the peak often occurring near the start of the "task-locating" layers from Section 4. In contrast
to common fine-tuning wisdom, additional tuning on the later layers has a much smaller impact
on final performance for en → fr. One likely explanation why this effect is less prominent for
fr → en is that the model has less difficult locating that task.


5     C HARACTERISING R EDUNDANCY IN I N - CONTEXT MT

Recently, Sajjad et al. (2023) found that many layers in pre-trained transformers can be dropped
with little harm to downstream tasks; moreover, it is well known neural MT transformer models are
known have several redundant heads which are not necessary during test time (Voita et al., 2019;
Michel et al., 2019; Behnke & Heafield, 2021). However, it is not clear if the same trends hold for
in-context MT models, and how that redundancy is related to task location versus task execution.

5.1   H OW CRITICAL ARE INDIVIDUAL LAYERS ACROSS THE NETWORK ?

We study the contributions of individual attention-layers by performing a simple layer-wise masking
of all self-attention heads for a single layer. When we mask layer j, we are masking the attention
mechanism of layer j, that is the MLP of layer j acts directly on the output of layer j − 1, rather
than the output of the attention-head of layer j. Doing so allows us to study how critical each layer
is, individually, to in-context Machine Translation.
We plot results for each layer of both GPTN EO and BLOOM, using all four combinations of {0 or
5} examples and {with or without} instructions in Figure 4. We identify critical layers as those that
have a large negative impact when masked. We observe that the region of critical layers corresponds
to the task locating layers in Section 4. Specifically, for GPTN EO, the largest contiguous set of
layers that significanty decrease MT performance are layers 10-15; for BLOOM, those layers are
13-24. In both cases, these results suggest that the processing done in these middle layers are
critically important to in-context MT.
In Section 4, we observed a very steep incline of MT performance in GPTN EO when moving
context-masking from layers 10 to 15; much steeper than the layer-by-layer increase in BLOOM
at any point. This suggests that the task-locating layers in GPTN EO are fewer, and therefore more
heavily relied upon, whereas BLOOM may have less individually important task-location layers.
This theory is corroborated by the results in Figure 4, which show that BLOOM is relatively robust
to layer masking, even in the middle layers, when compared to GPTN EO, which can reach near
catastrophic levels of MT performance.
Finally, we also note that GPTN EO has several layers which are critical, but not in our identified set
of task-locating layers; specifically, layers 1, 2, 4, and 32 all have a significantly negative impact on

    4
      We also experimented with the training separate Key, Query and Value LoRA Layers but found this to be
less effective.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Layer-wise masking of self-attention heads for GPTN EO2.7B and B LOOM3B. The orange
and blue dotted lines refer to the baselines (without masking) of 0 and 5 prompts with instructions.
We observe critical layers near the middle and redundant layers towards the end of the model.


MT performance in both language directions.5 Conversely, performance for BLOOM layer masking
is robust to nearly unaffected for all layers except those in the 13-24 range.
With regard to redundancy, we find that several layers can be removed without a noticeable loss
in performance. We observe that the model achieves close to baseline performance by layer-wise
masking from ℓ15 for GPTN EO and for ℓ26 for B LOOM. This suggests that these later layers contain
redundancy for translation. This interpretation is supported by inspecting generated output which
does not change much when masking across individual layers (see Table 7 in the Appendix).

5.2    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS OF LAYER - WISE MASKING

It is worth distinguishing between the model failing to translate (failure to locate the task) and
degenerate outputs. When masking critical task recognition layers, there is an increased likelihood
that either no output is produced, or some form of copying occurs. An example is GPTN EO, ℓ11
which copies the test source sentence for the 0-shot test setting, or the most recent sentence from the
prompts for the 5-shot setting. We present examples of this using Test ID 575 and ID 600 in Table 2.
Whereas for layers 1 and 4, we observe degenerate outputs such as "B marriages {" (Generated
outputs for all layers for both GPTNeo and BLOOM are available at Section A.11).

Interpretation of Redundant Layers Clark et al. (2019) identify a phenomena where attention
heads attend almost exclusively to delimiter and separator tokens such as [SEP], periods and com-
mas. This is thought to act as a “no-op" as the value of such tokens in changing the current hidden
representation is very small. Note that it is then possible to mask entire Transformer layers and still
achieve a sensible output due to residual connections in the Transformer architecture at every layer.

    5
      Given the extremely early location of these layers, they are likely related to the critical transformations of
the input representation and we provide examples of these outputs in Section A.11.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    ID     Generated Translation                                                                                 Setting   BLEU
    575    But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur                  0-prompts w Instr    2.3
    600    Hershey and Chase used phages, or viruses, to implant their own DNA into a bacterium       0-prompts w Instr    4.8
    575    I think it’s a good idea to have a little bit of a bird in your pocket.                   0-prompts w/o Instr   2.6
    600    The French have a saying: "The French have a saying: "The French have a saying:.          0-prompts w/o Instr   0.0
    575    Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, ...               5-prompts w Instr    1.3
    600    Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, ...               5-prompts w Instr    1.4
    575    Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, ...              5-prompts w/o Instr   1.3
    600    Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, ...              5-prompts w/o Instr   1.4
    ID     Ground Truth Translation
    575    Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.
    600    Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN..

Table 2: Generated text when applying layer-wise masking for GPTNeo (layer 11) on en→fr. We
show generated text for 0 or 5 prompts, and with or without instructions. The test IDs that were
selected to be displayed were based on highest variance of BLEU score across layers for the 0-
prompt with instruction setting.


5.3       A RE LAYERS COMPLETELY REDUNDANT AFTER TASK RECOGNITION ?

In Section 5.1 we find a number of layers, particularly towards the end of the model, which ap-
pear to be individually redundant to the task of MT; these results might suggest that after the task-
recognition point, additional processing is not necessary for in-context MT and the top layers can be
removed. We conduct layer-from masking of all positions, in contrast to the previous experiments
which masked out attention to the prompt context (instructions and examples). The results are avail-
able in Appendix: Figure 9. We find that translation improves with the inclusion of more layers
cumulatively, indicating that the final layers collectively transform the latent space into the desired
output, i.e. task recognition is not the same successful translation.

6         A RE T HERE S PECIALISED ATTENTION H EADS FOR I N - CONTEXT MT?

In Section 4, we found that the earlier part of the model is critical for task location from the prompt
context, and in Section 5.1 we found both critical and redundant layers to the MT task. In this
section, we increase the level of granularity to that of attention heads instead of layers.
A well established finding for supervised encoder-decoder MT models, is that up to 90% of the
attention heads can be pruned while minimising fall in translation performance (Voita et al., 2019;
Behnke & Heafield, 2020; Michel et al., 2019). We note that asking about the extent of pruning is a
slightly ill-formed research question, as it depends on the type of pruning technique used. However
broad trends of highly prunable models have been observed in the supervised MT paradigm. In the
in-context paradigm, there is no explicit supervision. Thus it is not clear if the task knowledge is
spread across a much larger number of attention heads, or similarly specialised to a few heads; for
instance, recently Bansal et al. (2023) studied attention-head importance for a broader set of ICL
tasks, finding that the most important heads for ICL occur in the middle layers of the model.

6.1       T RAINING ATTENTION H EAD G ATES WITH L0 REGULARISATION

For a scalable approach to pruning, we opt to train self-attention head gates following Voita et al.
(2019) using the technique of differentiable L0 regularization (Louizos et al., 2017). Let the attention
head gates g ∈ Rnh ×nℓ be a set of trainable parameters, where nh is the number of attention heads
per layer, and nℓ is the number of layers. Let the original output of each attention head be vj , gated
outputs ṽj are obtained by elementwise multiplication of the gate value gj , i.e., ṽj = gj ⊙ vj . For
{(x, y)}n source sentence (x) and target sentence (y) training pairs, a model f and loss function
L, Lp regularisation adds a λ weighted penalty associated with the complexity of the parameters.
6
  The L0 loss is non-differentiable as it involves raw counts of parameters. As a work around, g
   6
     L2 regularisation has the effect of reducing the magnitude of all g, L1 regularisation has the effect of reduc-
ing the magnitude of several attention heads to a very small value (but not exactly 0), while L0 regularisation
has the effect of driving g values to exactly 0.


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Visualisation of attention head masks for GPTNeo and BLOOM, learned with L0 (λ =
0.01) regularisation under a 0-prompt train scheme in en → fr. A value of 0 (in black)
indicates that the attention head is effectively masked out by the trained attention gate. Around 10%
of attention heads are masked out i.e., redundant, with a majority of them occuring at the later layers
for GPTNeo and distributed across layers for BLOOM. fr → en is availble in Section A.9


can be approximated with random variables drawn from a Binary concrete distribution (Maddison
et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016).7 We refer the reader to Louizos et al. (2017) for the relevant technical
exposition. Details of training are provided in Section A.8.

6.2   S TUDYING R EDUNDANCY VIA C OMPRESSION

Thus far, we have mainly focused on general patterns across the two models. However we noted
that GPTNeo has some critical differences from BLOOM in terms of having critical layers (see
Section 5.1), and having a steeper task recognition phase with greater redundancy towards the end
layers (Section 4). Considering the redundancy, to what extent are there specialised attention heads
for MT in the GPT-style models? If there were specialised heads, we would expect the model to be
highly compressable/prunable to a select few heads. We plot a grid map of learned attention gate
values for en → fr, where 0 indicates that the head is masked out (Figure 5). We find that most of
the masked heads are distributed at the later layers for GPTNeo and are distributed across layers for
BLOOM. This appears consistent with Section 4’s and Section 5.1’s observations that task-related
layers are more easily isolated in GPTNeo and more distributed in BLOOM.
Although the pattern of distribution differs across the two models, we note that there are no "few"
specialised heads, which directly contrasts with the literature on compression in supervised MT
models (Voita et al., 2019; Michel et al., 2019). Potential reasons for this difference might include
data distribution and model architecture, or cross-entropy loss associated with task tuning for MT.
We leave this as an open question for future work.

7     C ONCLUSION

We demonstrate evidence that GPT models locate, or learn, the translation task at a specific layer
during in-context learning, which can be identified via causal masking of the context. Contrary
to common fine-tuning wisdom, we show that it is sometimes beneficial to target middle layers
of the model which could be associated with task recognition. Section 5.1 further corroborates
this, by demonstrating that these task location layers most negatively impact performance when
masked, while the later layers contain task redundancy. Finally, we trained attention head gates
using differentiable L0 regularisation (Section 6), and found that around 10% of attention heads can
be masked. These are mostly distributed across the later layers of the model, suggesting that, similar
to supervised NMT models, GPT models may contain a lot of redundant attention heads, but only in
the layers of the model that are responsible for executing the translation task.
    7
      The class of Concrete distributions was invented to work around the problem of automatic differentiation
of stochastic computation graphs.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY
The MT dataset that we use, FLORES (Goyal et al., 2021), is fully open-source and well-known in
the community. Models are open-source and freely available on Huggingface (Wolf et al., 2019).
We used models of "reasonable" size (3B parameters) that can be run with consumer grade GPUs,
making our reproducible to most academic institutions. Code to reproduce all the experiments will
be made available subsequently.

9   E THICAL C ONCERNS
There are no known ethical concerns as these are exploratory studies on open-source LLMs. We
also include a section on limitations at Appendix B.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. In-
  context examples selection for machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02437, 2022.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Hritik Bansal, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Saket Dingliwal, Sravan Bodapati, Katrin Kirchhoff, and
  Dan Roth. Rethinking the role of scale for in-context learning: An interpretability-based case
  study at 66 billion scale. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 11833–11856, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.660. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-long.660.
Maximiliana Behnke and Kenneth Heafield. Losing heads in the lottery: Pruning transformer atten-
 tion in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
 in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2664–2674, 2020.
Maximiliana Behnke and Kenneth Heafield. Pruning neural machine translation for speed using
 group lasso. In Proceedings of the sixth conference on machine translation, pp. 1074–1086,
 2021.
Kush Bhatia, Avanika Narayan, Christopher De Sa, and Christopher Ré. Tart: A plug-and-play
  transformer module for task-agnostic reasoning, 2023.
Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large scale autore-
  gressive language modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow, March 2021. URL https://doi.org/
  10.5281/zenodo.5297715.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning. What does BERT
  look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop Black-
  boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 276–286, Florence, Italy,
  August 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-4828. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W19-4828.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can
  gpt learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers.
  In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models,
  2023.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The Pile: An 800GB dataset of diverse
  text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Xavier Garcia, Yamini Bansal, Colin Cherry, George Foster, Maxim Krikun, Fangxiaoyu Feng,
  Melvin Johnson, and Orhan Firat. The unreasonable effectiveness of few-shot learning for ma-
  chine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01398, 2023.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da Ju, San-
  jana Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan. The flores-101 eval-
  uation benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine translation. 2021.

Amr Hendy, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf, Vikas Raunak, Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Mat-
 sushita, Young Jin Kim, Mohamed Afify, and Hany Hassan Awadalla. How good are gpt models
 at machine translation? a comprehensive evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09210, 2023.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.

Philipp Koehn. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
  machine translation summit x: papers, pp. 79–86, 2005.

Hugo Laurençon, Lucile Saulnier, Thomas Wang, Christopher Akiki, Albert Villanova del Moral,
  Teven Le Scao, Leandro Von Werra, Chenghao Mou, Eduardo González Ponferrada, Huu Nguyen,
  et al. The bigscience roots corpus: A 1.6 tb composite multilingual dataset. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:31809–31826, 2022.

Shuai Li, Zhao Song, Yu Xia, Tong Yu, and Tianyi Zhou. The closeness of in-context learning and
  weight shifting for softmax regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13276, 2023.

Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Mikel Artetxe, Tianlu Wang, Shuohui Chen, Daniel Simig, Myle
  Ott, Naman Goyal, Shruti Bhosale, Jingfei Du, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Sam Shleifer, Punit Singh
  Koura, Vishrav Chaudhary, Brian O’Horo, Jeff Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer, Zornitsa Kozareva,
  Mona Diab, Veselin Stoyanov, and Xian Li. Few-shot learning with multilingual generative
  language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
  ral Language Processing, pp. 9019–9052, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.616. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.616.

Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for GPT-3? In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (Dee-
   LIO 2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning Archi-
   tectures, pp. 100–114, Dublin, Ireland and Online, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.deelio-1.10. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   deelio-1.10.

Christos Louizos, Max Welling, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning sparse neural networks through
  l_0 regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01312, 2017.

Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022a. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.556. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.556.

Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022b. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.556. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.556.

Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
  relaxation of discrete random variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771, 2018.
Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and Preslav Nakov. On the effect of dropping layers of
  pre-trained transformer models. Computer Speech & Language, 77:101429, 2023.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
  Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
  bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
  Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
  Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le
  Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.
Suzanna Sia and Kevin Duh. In-context learning as maintaining coherency: A study of on-the-fly
  machine translation using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03573, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
  self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5797–5808, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1580. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1580.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent, 2023.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, Eshaan
  Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson, Kirby
  Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Maitreya Patel, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Parmar, Mi-
  rali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri, Rushang
  Karia, Savan Doshi, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy A, Sumanta Pa-
  tro, Tanay Dixit, and Xudong Shen. Super-NaturalInstructions: Generalization via declarative
  instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5085–5109, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.340. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.340.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao
   Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Larger language models do in-context learning
   differently, 2023.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.07895, 2023.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Graphical explanation of Masking the Attention over Instructions and Examples. The
                                                              M ask
leftmost picture has no instructions and masks examples (Ex         ), the middle picture has instruc-
                                       M ask
tions and masks examples (Instr, Ex          ), and the rightmost picture masks both instructions and
                         M ask
examples (Instr, Ex            ).


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   G RAPHICAL V IEW OF C ONTEXT M ASKING E XPERIMENTS

A.2   E XAMPLE OF P ROMPT F ORMAT

 Translate English to French.
 English: A discomfort which lasts ..                       French:   Un malaise qui dure
 English: HTML is a language for formatting                 French:   HTML est un langage de formatage
 ...                                                                  ...
 English: After you become comfortable with formatting ..   French:


Table 3: A single continuous input sequence presented to the model for decoding a single test source
sentence “After you become comfortable with formatting..”. Given the entire sequence as input, the
model proceeds to generate the target sequence.


A.3   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON E NGLISH & S PANISH

In addition to the language pairs en → fr and fr → en, we also run experiments on English and
Spanish language pairs, both en → es and es → en. Due to space limitations, we plot the results
of those experiments here. Overall, we see largely identical trends on both directions of English and
Spanish to what we observe on Enlish and French translation tasks, leading us to conclude that our
conclusions generalize across different translation tasks.

A.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON L LAMA 7B-C HAT

We run context masking experiments on Llama7B-Chat Touvron et al. (2023) which is an
instruction-tuned model. In contrast to GPTNeo and Bloom, the Llama model has no diffi-
culty performing translation when the examples are masked, as long as instructions are present
            M ask                                                        M ask
(InstrEx          ). However, when instructions are masked (InstrEx            ), the model suffers
from catastrophic failure. This can be explained by the reliance on Instructions for an Instruction-
tuned model (Figure 8).

A.5   I S ATTENTION TO THE I NPUT STILL NECESSARY ?

One possible explanation for the results in Figure 1 is that, rather than identifying the point at which
the task is recognized, we have identified the point at which the model no longer requires attending
to any other tokens to encode it’s input successfully. To explore this, we run experiments in the
en → fr direction where we mask attention to all inputs from a certain layer onwards, rather than
just the context; in this scenario, the representations of each token cannot attend to any other token
past the specified.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Context-masking and Layer-masking results on the English to Spanish translation task.
Critically, we see nearly identical trends to what we see in Figure 1 and Figure 4 on the English to
French translation task, suggesting our results generalize across language pairs.


We plot the results in Figure 9; we find that, for both GPTNeo and BLOOM, the layer at which
attention can be fully removed is much higher than the layer at which we can remove attention to
the context. In both models, removing attention before layer 20 results in catastrophic failure of the
model, after which translation performance slowly improves; in GPTNeo, translation performance
is never comparable to the baseline with no masking. Conversely, when masking only the context,
translation performance improves as early as layer 10 and plateaus at the no-mask baseline much
earlier. This suggests that the curves we observe in Figure 1 are due to the model having sufficiently
attended to the context but still requiring attention to the input.

A.6   AUTOREGRESSIVE D ECODER ONLY T RANSFORMER

The transformer consists of stacked blocks of self-attention, which itself consists of smaller units of
self-attention heads that are concatenated before being fed through a fully connected layer. In au-
toregressive decoder-only transformers, training and inference adopts a causal mask, where current
positions are only able to attend to previous timesteps, instead of being able to attend to the entire


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Context masking experiments for Instruction-tuned L LAMA7B on en ↔ fr when mask-
ing out from layer j onwards.


Figure 9: Layer-from experiments for GPTN EO2.7B and B LOOM3B on en → fr when masking
out from layer j onwards. Orange and blue dashed lines refer to the baselines (without masking) of
0 and 5 prompts with instructions.


input sequence. Unlike encoder-decoder NMT models where source and target sentence have sepa-
rate processing transformer blocks, decoder-only means that the same model weights are both used
to “encode" the source sentence and “decode" the target sentence in a single continuous sequence.


A.7   T RAINING WITH AUTOREGRESSIVE T RANSLATION

The original language modeling objective in GPT training involves predicting the entire input token
sequence which consists of both the source and target sentence (shifted by 1 position). We found
this to produce slightly worse results than only minimising the negative log likelihood of predicting
the target sentence to be translated, and not the entire sequence. We consider this autoregressive
translation training.


A.8   L0 ATTENTION G ATE T RAINING D ETAILS

Training Details For Section 6.2, We train using Adam Optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) with
a batch size of 32, and learning rate of 0.001, early stopping patience of 10 and threshold of 0.01.
We initialise attention head gates to be 1 instead of random or 0.5 as this leads to faster conver-
gence. We experiment with two different training settings, the 0-prompts Train setting and
the 5-prompts Train setting. As described in Section A.7, we train the model by predicting
only the target sentence, conditioned on the context. In the 0-prompt setting, the context consists of
the instructions and the source sentence to be translated. In the 5-prompt setting, the context consists
of the instructions, 5 prompt examples, and the source sentence to be translated.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the 0-prompt setting, the conditional prefix consists of the instructions and the source sentence
to be translated. In the 5-prompt setting, the conditional prefix consists of the instruction, 5
source target sentence pairs, and the source sentence to be translated.

Data We used the first 10,000 lines of en → fr from WMT06 Europarl Koehn (2005) for train-
ing.8 To test the generalisability of trained attention head gates, we use a different test domain,
FLORES Goyal et al. (2021) to reflect the scarcity of in-domain data. We also test an additional
language direction en → pt in FLORES to see if training can generalise across languages.

Training Details We train using Adam Optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) with a batch size of 32,
and learning rate of 0.001. We use a large early stopping patience of 10 and threshold of 0.01, and
train for up to 100 epochs. This is due to the nature of L0 training; we do not expect performance to
improve over many iterations and would like the attention gates to keep training as long as there is
no large loss in performance. We initialise attention head gates to be 1 instead of random or 0.5 as
this leads to much faster convergence and better performance. For the regularisation weight λ, we
search over a hyperparameter set of {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001} and found 0.01 performs best on the
validation set.

A.9      L0 HEAD MASKING EXPERIMENTS .

Additional experiments on L0 head masking in the fr→ en and es→ en direction.


Figure 10: Visualisation of attention head masks for GPTNeo and BLOOM, learned with L0 (λ =
0.01) regularisation under a 0-prompt train scheme. A value of 0 (in black) indicates that the
attention head is effectively masked out by the trained attention gate. A majority of them occuring
at the later layers for GPTNeo and distributed across layers for BLOOM.


A.10      G ENERALISABILITY OF L0 GATE TRAINING

We experiment with 0-prompts and 5-prompts in training and using λ = 0 (no regularisation)
and λ = 0.01. L0 training for the 0-prompts shows some gains for the 0-prompts test case, and
   8
       Data available from https://www.statmt.org/europarl/


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Base    0-prompts         5-prompts           Base     0-prompts         5-prompts
                      λ = 0 λ = .01     λ = 0 λ = .01                λ = 0 λ = .01     λ = 0 λ = .01
  0-prompts    18.3   21.4      20.1    18.9      19.3        6.7    15.7      8.6     13.2       6.4
  5-prompts    24.3    24.5      24.1   23.6       24.2      25.9    19.6      25.8    24.3      26.0
              Train: en → fr, Test: en → fr                     Train: en → fr, Test: en → pt

Table 4: Performance when using trained attention head gates for L0 with regularisation λ = .01.
λ = 0 refers to training without regularisation. 0 and 5 prompts were used in the context for training.
We highlight values which are greater or worse than 0.5 BLEU points from baseline. Note that
as these are compression experiments, we do not expect L0 to perform better than baseline.


with no loss on the 5-prompts test case (Table 4). Notably, this persists in en → pt, a different
language direction from training.
The robustness of translation performance under multiple testing conditions (number of prompts,
datasets, language directions) gives some confidence that the trained discrete attention head gates
from L0 support a general ability to translate (Table 4). In contrast, the soft attention head gates
without regularisation (λ = 0) appear to overfit as they perform well on some conditions but deteri-
orate in others.
We observe that 0-prompt training for L0 (λ = 0.01) also outperforms 5-prompts which is
slightly suprising since 5-prompts has more information in the prefix to locate the translation
task. One possibility is that the model overfit to the Europarl domain where the training prompts
were drawn from.

A.11    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS OF L AYER - WISE M ASKING

GPTN EO Masking ℓ4:8 results in a drop in performance for the 0-prompt setting but not the
5-prompt setting (Figure 4), which suggests that ℓ4:8 are not related to the processing of prompt
examples. We emphasise that this interpretation mostly holds at an aggregate level and is not strictly
for each instance. For Test Instance ID 575, the model still generates a copy of the English source
sentence up to the masking of ℓ25 for the 0-prompts without instructions setting (Table 6). This
suggests that uncertainty over the task is maintained across layers even though the contributions
towards task location may be greater from specific layers.

B LOOM is observed to be more robust to masking of layers; suggesting that task location is more
distributed. For the 5-prompt setting, the performance only decreases very slightly. For the 0-
prompt setting, we observe that similar to GPTN EO, performance drops when masking out the
middle layers. At the aggregate level, B LOOM appears to still be translating (> 0 BLEU) even when
layers are masked. However we observe that the drop in performance is due to around 40 to 50%
of the test sentences scoring < 5 BLEU points. There is a clear failure to translate, not simply
producing poorer translations.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 layer    id     lang   BLEU    text

    1    600     cy      0.00   uffose
    1    575     ca      0.00   B marriages{

    2    600     et      0.00   sses room ( I
    2    575     no      0.00   NaN

    3    600     fr      1.90   C’est la même chose que l’on a fait avec les virus.
    3    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    4    600     no      0.00   NaN
    4    575     no      0.00   NaN

    5    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
    5    575     fr     72.98   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaur.

    6    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
    6    575     fr     60.29   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    7    600     fr     13.94   Hershey et Chase ont implanté leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
    7    575     fr     72.98   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaur.

    8    600     no      0.00   NaN
    8    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosau.

    9    600     no      0.00   NaN
    9    575     fr     82.82   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaure.

   10    600     no      0.00   NaN
   10    575     en      2.73   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.

   11    600     en      4.78   Hershey and Chase used phages, or viruses, to implant their own DNA into a bacterium.
   11    575     en      2.73   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.

   12    600     no      0.00   NaN
   12    575     no      0.00   NaN

   13    600     no      0.00   NaN
   13    575     fr     35.75   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses que je ne comprends pas.

   14    600     en      4.78   Hershey and Chase used phages, or viruses, to implant their own DNA into a bacterium.
   14    575     en      2.73   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.

   15    600     fr     76.48   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacillus.
   15    575     en      2.73   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.

   16    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   16    575     fr     70.18   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours comme un dinosaurof.

   17    600     fr     82.32   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans une bactérie.
   17    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   18    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre génome dans un bactérie.
   18    575     fr     66.38   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui aussi ressemble à un dinosaures.

   19    600     fr     59.33   Les héritiers de Hershey et de Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   19    575     fr     47.91   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaur.

   20    600     fr     48.82   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   20    575     en      2.73   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.

   21    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   21    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   22    600     fr     48.82   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   22    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaurof.

   23    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   23    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   24    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre génome dans un bactérie.
   24    575     fr     62.72   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   25    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   25    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   26    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   26    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   27    600     fr     66.28   Hershey et Château ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   27    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   28    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   28    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   29    600     fr     59.33   Les héritiers de Hershey et de Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   29    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaurof.

   30    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   30    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   31    600     fr     78.78   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   31    575     fr     88.44   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   32    600     fr      6.44   Les héritiers de Hershey et de Chase ont été capables de l’implanter dans un bactérie.
   32    575     fr     51.52   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux que sont encore aussi vus comme un dinosaures.


               Table 5: 0-prompts with instructions, masking layer by layer of GPTN EO2.7B


                                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 layer    id   lang   BLEU    text

    1    575   no       0.0   NaN
    1    600   no       0.0   NaN

    2    575   NaN      0.0   ,
    2    600   no       0.0   NaN

    3    575   fr       2.3   C’est pas un oiseau, c’est un dinosaur.
    3    600   fr       0.8   [phare] Phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, phare, ...,

    4    575   en       2.7   "I think it’s a dinosaur, I think it’s a dinosaur."
    4    600   fr       2.6   Les virus, c’est-ce qu’on dit? C’un mot? C’est pas un mot? C’un mot? C’un’un? ...

    5    575   fr      42.9   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours comme un dinosaur.
    5    600   fr      73.6   L’Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

    6    575   fr      53.8   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaure.
    6    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

    7    575   fr      76.2   Et il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaure.
    7    600   fr      83.8   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.

    8    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosau.
    8    600   fr      83.8   L’usine Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.

    9    575   en       1.5   The bird is a dinosaur.
    9    600   fr      33.9   Les hémoglobine et Chase utilisent les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   10    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   10    600   fr      11.4   Les phages, ou virus, ont implanté leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   11    575   en       2.6   I think it’s a good idea to have a little bit of a bird in your pocket.
   11    600   en       0.0   The French have a saying: "The French have a saying: "The French have a saying: "The French have a saying:...

   12    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   12    600   en       1.7   The bacterium was then able to use the phage to infect other bacteria.

   13    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   13    600   fr      18.7   L’entreprise Hershey a utilisé des phages pour implanter leur propre DNA dans leur bactérie.

   14    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   14    600   en       4.8   Hershey and Chase used phages, or viruses, to implant their own DNA into a bacterium.

   15    575   fr       3.0   C’est pas un truc de poulet, c’est un truc de poulet.
   15    600   fr      35.7   L’université de Paris-Sud a utilisé des phages, ou viraux, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacillus.

   16    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   16    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre génome dans un bactérie.

   17    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   17    600   fr      82.3   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans une bactérie.

   18    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   18    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre génome dans un bactérie.

   19    575   fr      44.2   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaur.
   19    600   fr      59.3   Les héritiers de Hershey et de Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   20    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   20    600   fr      46.4   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   21    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   21    600   fr      74.9   L’usine Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   22    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   22    600   fr      56.3   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.

   23    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   23    600   fr      82.9   L’Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.

   24    575   fr      60.3   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.
   24    600   fr      37.0   L’usine Hershey et Chase utilisaient les phages, ou les virus, pour implanter leur propre génome dans un bactérie.

   25    575   en       2.7   But there are a lot of things about birds that still look like a dinosaur.
   25    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   26    575   fr      71.6   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.
   26    600   fr      73.6   L’Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   27    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaurof.
   27    600   fr      63.0   Les Hershey et Château ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   28    575   fr      44.2   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaur.
   28    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   29    575   fr      87.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaurofrench:
   29    600   fr      53.4   L’entreprise de la filière Hershey a utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   30    575   fr      82.8   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaure.
   30    600   fr      74.9   Les Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   31    575   fr      82.8   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent toujours à un dinosaure.
   31    600   fr      59.3   Les hémoglobins de Hershey et de Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.

   32    575   fr      67.5   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui aussi ressemblent à un dinosaurof.
   32    600   fr       6.7   L’Hershey et le Chase ont été capables de l’implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.


          Table 6: 0-prompts without instructions, masking layer by layer of GPTN EO2.7B


                                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 layer    id     lang   BLEU    text

    1    902     en       0.0   : of
    1    575     en       0.0   of

    2    902     en       0.0   of(n, very very- of S First
    2    575     da       0.0   f(

    3    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
    3    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    4    902     en       0.0   the, the French, the French, the English, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the,
    4    575     no       0.0   NaN

    5    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
    5    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    6    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
    6    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    7    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
    7    575     fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

    8    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
    8    575     fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

    9    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
    9    575     fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   10    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   10    575     fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   11    902     fr       1.4   Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, arpenterez les quais, ...
   11    575     fr       1.3   Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, arpenterez les quais, ...

   12    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   12    575     fr      42.5   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses qui ressemblent à un dinosaur.

   13    902     fr      34.5   Les scènes sont déclarées sur les pyramides et les pyramides sont déclarées sur les pyramides.
   13    575     fr       5.5   Les oiseaux sont des animaux, mais ils sont aussi des êtres humains.

   14    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   14    575     fr      73.3   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent à un dinosauresque.

   15    902     fr      64.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les pyramides différents sont éclairés.
   15    575     fr      26.7   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de la façon dont les oiseaux se ressemblent, même si c’est un peu plus tard.

   16    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   16    575     fr      76.7   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore comme un dinosaures.

   17    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   17    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   18    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   18    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosauresque.

   19    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont illuminés.
   19    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   20    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   20    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   21    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   21    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   22    902     fr      64.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les pyramides différents sont éclairés.
   22    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosauroide.

   23    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   23    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   24    902     fr      78.3   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairées.
   24    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   25    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   25    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   26    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   26    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   27    902     fr     100.0   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différentes pyramides sont éclairées.
   27    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   28    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   28    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   29    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   29    575     fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   30    902     fr      78.3   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairées.
   30    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   31    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont éclairés.
   31    575     fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   32    902     fr      65.9   Les scènes sont affichées sur les pyramides et les différents pyramides sont illuminées.
   32    575     fr      67.5   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui aujourd’hui ressemblent à un dinosauro.


               Table 7: 5-prompts with instructions, masking layer by layer of GPTN EO2.7B


                                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 layer    id   lang   BLEU    text

    1    600   tl       0.0   *- ing
    1    575   en       0.6   fl.of,

    2    600   en       1.6   in " " - ( –, -, - (es," " " so " whats " whats" " between whats –what e,
    2    575   en       2.3   " ",what awaited ico " " " "_, .

    3    600   fr      86.6   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans une bactérie.
    3    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    4    600   en       0.3   the, etc.
    4    575   ro       0.0   are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: are: ...

    5    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacille.
    5    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    6    600   fr      88.1   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.
    6    575   fr      62.7   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

    7    600   fr      88.1   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.
    7    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

    8    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacillus.
    8    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

    9    600   fr      78.8   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
    9    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   10    600   fr      30.1   En gros, vous mettre en place des phages, ou viraux, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   10    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   11    600   fr       1.3   Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, arpenterez les quais, aborderez les personnes nettoyant leurs yachts, ...
   11    575   fr       1.4   Fondamentalement, vous afficherez des annonces pour proposer votre aide, arpenterez les quais, aborderez les personnes nettoyant leurs yachts, .

   12    600   fr      12.4   Les phages sont utilisés pour implanter leur propre gène dans un virus.
   12    575   fr      36.8   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses qui semblent être des dinosaures.

   13    600   fr       4.3   Les phages sont des virus qui sont implantés dans la cellule d’un organisme.
   13    575   fr       5.5   Les oiseaux sont des animaux, mais ils sont aussi des êtres humains.

   14    600   fr      74.4   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.
   14    575   fr      73.3   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent à un dinosauresque.

   15    600   fr      62.6   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacille.
   15    575   fr      26.7   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses à propos de la façon dont les oiseaux se ressemblent, même si c’est un peu plus tard.

   16    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacillus.
   16    575   fr      76.7   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore comme un dinosaures.

   17    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacille.
   17    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosauresque.

   18    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacille.
   18    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosauresque.

   19    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacille.
   19    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   20    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacillus.
   20    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   21    600   fr      88.1   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.
   21    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   22    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacille.
   22    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosauro.

   23    600   fr      88.1   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bactérie.
   23    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   24    600   fr      85.7   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre ADN dans un bacille.
   24    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   25    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacillus.
   25    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   26    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacille.
   26    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   27    600   fr      55.9   Hershey et Château utilisaient des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   27    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   28    600   fr      76.5   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bacillus.
   28    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   29    600   fr      78.8   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   29    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   30    600   fr      78.8   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   30    575   fr      88.4   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaur.

   31    600   fr      78.8   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   31    575   fr     100.0   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux qui ressemblent encore à un dinosaure.

   32    600   fr      78.8   Hershey et Chase ont utilisé des phages, ou des virus, pour implanter leur propre gène dans un bactérie.
   32    575   fr      57.2   Mais il y a beaucoup de choses sur les oiseaux que pourraient encore ressembler à un dinosaures.


          Table 8: 5-prompts without instructions, masking layer by layer of GPTN EO2.7B


                                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    L IMITATIONS
This section describes limitations associated with this work.

      • Although we have studied three models of two different sizes, 3B and 7B parameters,
        the 7B parameter model is an instruction-tuned model. Therefore it is not fair to draw
        any conclusions based on size, but we can draw interesting comparisons between raw and
        instruction-tuned models.
      • We did not identify syntatic or semantic attention heads, or neuron level functionality as
        is common in interpretability studies. Our research question is on locating rather than
        analysing individual head’s functionality, and decomposing the prompt context.
      • We did not conduct multiple rounds of training attention head gates with L0 and results
        may be slightly different across different random seeds, although we believe the overall
        conclusion should largely be the same.
      • We did not study low-resource language translation, document level translation or other
        sequence to sequence tasks.


                                                 24
