Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NDERSTANDING PARAMETER S ALIENCY
VIA E XTREME VALUE T HEORY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Deep neural networks are being increasingly implemented throughout society in
         recent years. It is useful to identify which parameters trigger misclassiﬁcation in
         diagnosing undesirable model behaviors. The concept of parameter saliency is
         proposed and used to diagnose convolutional neural networks (CNNs) by rank-
         ing convolution ﬁlters that may have caused misclassiﬁcation on the basis of pa-
         rameter saliency. It is also shown that ﬁne-tuning the top ranking salient ﬁlters
         efﬁciently corrects misidentiﬁcation on ImageNet. However, there is still a knowl-
         edge gap in terms of understanding why parameter saliency ranking can ﬁnd the
         ﬁlters inducing misidentiﬁcation. In this work, we attempt to bridge the gap by an-
         alyzing parameter saliency ranking from a statistical viewpoint, namely, extreme
         value theory. We ﬁrst show that the existing work implicitly assumes that the
         gradient norm computed for each ﬁlter follows a normal distribution. Then, we
         clarify the relationship between parameter saliency and the score based on the
         peaks-over-threshold (POT) method, which is often used to model extreme values.
         Finally, we reformulate parameter saliency in terms of the POT method, where this
         reformulation is regarded as statistical anomaly detection and does not require the
         implicit assumptions of the existing parameter-saliency formulation. Our experi-
         mental results demonstrate that our reformulation can detect malicious ﬁlters as
         well. Furthermore, we show that the existing parameter saliency method exhibits
         a bias against the depth of layers in deep neural networks. In particular, this bias
         has the potential to inhibit the discovery of ﬁlters that cause misidentiﬁcation in
         situations where domain shift occurs. In contrast, parameter saliency based on
         POT shows less of this bias.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning models can perform a variety of tasks in computer vision with high accuracy. Despite
their adoption in many applications, we usually do not have an understanding of the model’s decision
making process. This means there is a potential risk when we use deep learning models for high-
stakes applications. Conventional research on the explainability of deep learning models in computer
vision has focused on generating a saliency map that highlights image pixels inducing a strong
response from the model(Selvaraju et al., 2017; Simonyan et al., 2013; Sundararajan et al., 2017;
Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Petsiuk et al., 2018). Although this kind of visualization often makes intuitive
sense for humans and partly explains the model behavior, a saliency map is helpless for ﬁxing an
incorrect classiﬁcation result because it is not linked with the parameter space. Recently, Levin
et al. (2021) proposed ranking convolutional ﬁlters according to a score called parameter saliency
for exploring the cause of CNN misclassiﬁcations. The parameter saliency reﬂects strong ﬁlter
importance determined by the normalized gradient, and the top-ranked ﬁlters are shown to have
a greater relationship with the classiﬁcation result when modifying the ﬁlters. However, there is
a knowledge gap as to why parameter saliency ranking can ﬁnd ﬁlters inducing misidentiﬁcation.
Additionally, we found in our preliminary experiments that the ranking algorithm has a bias against
the depth of layers in deep neural networks, which can lead to the model yielding mediocre outcomes
in certain situations.
To address the bias problem, we elucidate the concept of parameter saliency from a different perspec-
tive. We ﬁrst formulate the problem of ranking salient ﬁlters in terms of statistical anomaly detection
for parameter-wise saliency proﬁles. We then analyze the relationship between salient ﬁlter ranking


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the peaks over threshold (POT) (Pickands III, 1975; Grimshaw, 1993) method based on extreme
value theory (EVT) (Haan & Ferreira, 2006) and show that the existing method can be viewed as
a special case of our formulation based on EVT under appropriate assumptions on the gradient dis-
tribution. EVT, a branch of statistics that emerged to handle the maximum and minimum values of
a sequence of data, enables us to estimate the probability of extreme events observed in the tail of
probability distributions.
For the experiments in this work, we compared the effects of modifying salient ﬁlters detected by
the existing method and the POT-based method using the same metrics as the original work(Levin
et al., 2021). To further investigate the properties of our reformulaiton, we used datasets such as
MNIST and SVHN in which domain shift occurs and analyzed the top-ranked ﬁlter distribution to
clarify the relationship between salient ﬁlters and insufﬁcient feature extraction.
In summary, we have made the following contributions.

       • We reformulate salient ﬁlter ranking as statistical anomaly detection in which parameter
         saliency is interpretable as the probability of observing an event.
       • We clarify the relationship between salient ﬁlter ranking and the POT method in EVT.
       • We demonstrate that the POT method operates well even when domain shift occurs, while
         an intrinsic bias in the baseline method prevents consistent performance.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Interpretability and Explainability of Machine Learning Models There are two main ap-
proaches to understanding machine learning models: using intrinsically interpretable models or us-
ing post hoc methods(Molnar, 2022). Models of the ﬁrst type have a restricted form of architectures,
e.g., decision trees(Frosst & Hinton, 2017) and linear models, that make it possible to interpret the
calculation process. In contrast, the second type of methods are open to arbitrary models and ex-
plain why the model behaves in a speciﬁc manner. Counterfactual explanation(Verma et al., 2020)
and LIME(Ribeiro et al., 2016) are two representative examples of this type.

Deepening the Understanding of CNNs CNNs(Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016)
have shown an outstanding performance in various computer vision tasks, but they are innately black
boxes. To alleviate this problem, many saliency map generation methods have been proposed to visu-
alize which image pixels are sensitive to the models. Some methods make maximum use of gradient
information(Selvaraju et al., 2017; Simonyan et al., 2013; Sundararajan et al., 2017), while others
perturb or blur the original image to quantify the effect of pixels on classiﬁcation(Fong & Vedaldi,
2017; Petsiuk et al., 2018). Various criteria have been proposed to evaluate the quality and guar-
antee the validity of saliency maps including sanity check(Adebayo et al., 2018), relevance to the
output score(Samek et al., 2016), and user experience(Alqaraawi et al., 2020). Another line of work
focuses on the roles of convolutional layers and shows that CNNs work as a feature extractor(Bau
et al., 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014).

Importance in parameter-space Pruning for CNN model compression is closely related to the
importance of convolutional ﬁlters. Filter importance is estimated via the activation response(He
et al., 2022), the l1 norm of the ﬁlter weights (Li et al., 2016), group lasso regularization(Wen et al.,
2016), neuron importance score propagation(Yu et al., 2018), and the mean gradient criterion(Liu &
Wu, 2019). Alternative directions using the importance include updating only a subset of parame-
ters with top-N importance(Sun et al., 2017) and retraining a model by referencing possibly better
parameters(Zhang & Chan, 2019). This kind of work is not limited to computer vision. For example,
in natural language processing, the linguistic roles of neurons have been explored(Bau et al., 2018).

3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   PARAMETER S ALIENCY

In this section, we brieﬂy review parameter saliency proposed by Levin et al. (2021). Let (x, y) ∈
(X , Y) be a pair of a sample and its ground-truth label in a dataset, where X is the input space and


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 1: Distributions of gradient magnitude from different layers in ResNet-50.


Y is the corresponding set of classes. A model with parameters θ can be deﬁned as a function fθ :
X → Y. In most cases, a model is trained so that fθ minimizes a loss function L : F × X × Y → R,
where F is the set of models f : X → Y. Our goal is to identify which subset of θ caused the
model’s misclassiﬁcation. Although there are various model architectures for different tasks, we
mainly discuss how things work on CNNs.
On the hypothesis that parameters with a large gradient magnitude are important, the parameter-wise
saliency proﬁle is deﬁned by sθi (x, y) := |∇θi L(fθ , x, y)|, where θi ∈ R is the i-th element of the
parameter. Each convolutional ﬁlter is a subset of the parameters involved in feature extraction, so
averaging the parameter-wise saliency proﬁle within each convolutional ﬁlter gives us the ﬁlter-wise
saliency proﬁle:
                                                1 ∑
                                  s̄(x, y)j :=           sθi (x, y),                               (1)
                                               |Ij |
                                                        i∈Ij

where Ij is the index set of the parameters in the j-th convolutional ﬁlter.
Finally, we obtain the parameter saliency, or ﬁlter saliency in the case of CNN, by performing the
z-score normalization. This normalization aims to ﬁnd data-speciﬁc salient ﬁlters and avoid ﬁnding
universally important ﬁlters. More precisely, we obtain ﬁlter saliency computed with µj and σj
which are the mean parameter-wise saliency proﬁle and the standard deviation for the j-th ﬁlter over
the validation set of a dataset such as ImageNet:
                                                    s̄(x, y)j − µj
                                     ŝ(x, y)j :=                  .                               (2)
                                                           σj
A higher value is considered to make a greater contribution to the misclassiﬁcation and the ranking
is formed by ordering ﬁlters so that ﬁlter saliency is in decreasing order. We can attribute misclas-
siﬁcation results to parameters, and ﬁnding these parameters gives us a chance to diagnose a model
and correct the model behavior.

3.2   I NTRODUCTION OF T HEOREM OF P ICKANDS -BALKEMA - DE H ANN

In this section, we explain the essential concept underlying EVT. We included a tutorial in Ap-
pendix C to supplement the minimum necessary knowledge of EVT.
EVT focuses on extreme values and the behavior of tail event and is useful for assessing the prob-
ability of rare events. It is often used to evaluate risks such as once-in-a-century ﬂood risks or the
probability of extreme losses in ﬁnancial markets. The basic idea behind EVT is that the distribution
of the largest observations from a large dataset converges to one of several speciﬁc types of extreme
value distributions. Since using only the maximum value and ignoring the rest of the data result in
the loss of information, the POT method was proposed as a common approach to investigating the
relationship between the frequency and magnitude of extreme events where data points exceeding a
certain threshold are considered to estimate the distribution of extremes.
The Pickands-Balkema-de Haan theorem(Pickands III, 1975; Balkema & De Haan, 1974) is the
most relevant theorem to this paper.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1 (Pickands-Balkema-de Haan). For a large class of random variables X, there exists a
function β(t) : R → R such that
                     lim    sup     |P(X − t ≤ x|X > t) − G(x|α, β(t))| = 0,                        (3)
                     t→τ 0≤x<τ −t

where τ ∈ R is the ﬁnite or inﬁnite right endpoint, and G(x|α, β(t)) is the generalized Pareto
distribution (GPD).

Given a scale parameter α ∈ R and a shape parameter β ∈ R, a GPD is deﬁned as follows:
                                                   (        )− β1
                                              
                    G(x|α, β) = P(X ≤ x) =      1 −   1 + βx
                                                          α        β ̸= 0,                          (4)
                                              1 − exp(− x )       β = 0.
                                                                α

This theorem is called the second theorem in EVT and lays the foundation of the POT method.
The method ﬁts a GPD to the tail of the probability distribution with a sufﬁciently large thresh-
old T , estimating P(X − T ≤ x|X > T ). More speciﬁcally, suppose we have N observations
X1 , X2 , . . . , XN , where Xi ∈ R, and n out of N observations exceed the threshold T . We
denote their indices by JT and let Y be the set of excesses over T . Mathematically, we have
JT = {i | Xi > T } and Y = {Xi − T | i ∈ JT }. We use maximum likelihood estimation with
this Y for ﬁnding the GPD. We also approximate P(X > T ) with the empirical distribution func-
tion, i.e., P(X > T ) ≈ n/N . As a result, we can estimate the probability of an observed value that
is larger than the threshold T :
                                                                    n
              P(X − T > x) = P(X > T )P(X − T > x|X > T ) ≈           {1 − G(x|α, β)} .          (5)
                                                                   N

4     A CLOSER LOOK AT PARAMETER S ALIENCY THROUGH THE L ENS OF EVT
First, we describe the motivation for statistically interpreting the existing method. Next, we explain
the reformulation of parameter saliency ranking as statistical anomaly detection. Finally, we provide
a general formulation of parameter saliency ranking based on EVT.

4.1   M OTIVATION

In this work, we explore the following three questions.

      1. Does the distribution of each ﬁlter’s saliency follow a normal distrbution? It assumes in
         the z-score normalization that the data follow a normal distribution. However, the gradient
         norm may not be assumed to be normally distributed.
      2. Can each ﬁlter’s saliency be used as a ranking score in the same line when each ﬁlter
         may follow a different distribution? The normalized values from different distributions as
         in ﬁg. 1 are used for sorting ﬁlters. However, different distributions have different probabil-
         ities of obtaining the same value; thus, the rankings can not necessarily reﬂect the authentic
         relation of anomalies among the ﬁlters.
      3. What bias would occur in the above case? If the distribution is heavy-tailed, large data
         points occur relatively frequently. This signiﬁcantly affects the sample mean and variance,
         which can be extremely large for certain samples due to these outliers and induce bias.

In seeking answers to the questions, we explain below how parameter saliency ranking can be un-
derstood in terms of statistical anomaly detection and EVT.

4.2   S TATISTICAL I NTERPRETATION

We provide a novel interpretation of parameter saliency ranking in terms of statistical abnormal
detection where our goal is to identify the ﬁlters that have statistically more abnormal ﬁlter-wise
saliency proﬁles. We ﬁrst consider the statistical meaning of parameter saliency because it is rea-
sonable to assume that an unusual saliency proﬁle is formulated by the rarity of the value, i.e., the
probability of taking the value of the saliency proﬁle. More formally, we assume that ﬁlter-wise


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


saliency proﬁle for the j-th ﬁlter S̄j follows a probability distribution S̄j ∼ Pj (S̄j ). Given an input
that the model classiﬁed incorrectly, we compute the saliency proﬁle for the j-th ﬁlter and obtain s̄j .
Then, we construct a ranking of ﬁlters so that ﬁlters with a smaller value of P(S̄j > s̄j ) are higher
in the ranking.
We show below that comparing ﬁlter saliency is equivalent to comparing the probability of the
observed ﬁlter-wise saliency proﬁle under the assumption that the ﬁlter-wise saliency proﬁle follows
a normal distribution.
Proposition 1. Suppose S̄j is a random variable that follows the normal distribution N (µj , σj ) for
any j, where µj ∈ R and σj ∈ R equal to the mean and the standard deviation respectively. We
deﬁne Ŝj by Ŝj = (S̄j − µj )/σj . Let s̄j be a sample from each distribution and ŝj be the normalized
value of s̄j , i.e., ŝj = (s̄j − µj )/σj . Then, for any pair of the normalized values (ŝj , ŝj ′ ), the
following holds:
                               ŝj ≤ ŝj ′ ⇐⇒ P(S̄j > s̄j ) ≤ P(S̄j ′ > s̄j ′ ).                        (6)

The proof is in Appendix B. Proposition. 1 tells us that the baseline method compares the proba-
bility of a ﬁlter-wise saliency proﬁle and becomes one solution in our formulation. However, the
assumption required here might be too strong and unrealistic in practice, so we want to weaken the
assumption.

4.3   PARAMETER S ALIENCY E STIMATION VIA POT

In revisiting our primary objective, we aim to identify the ﬁlters in a CNN that induce misclas-
siﬁcation. To achieve this, we need a method that can quantitatively evaluate the ﬁlters inducing
misclassiﬁcation. Ideally, the metrics should (i) be comparable across different layers using the
same criteria, (ii) have few assumptions behind them, and (iii) be easily interpreted. Here we
seek an evaluation method that embodies these three ideal properties.
We assume that ﬁlters inducing misclassiﬁcation for a particular image have unique characteristics
speciﬁc to that image. These characteristics can be formulated as a higher probability of being
an anomalous ﬁlter compared to other correctly classiﬁed images. This probabilistic representation
seems rational for expressing abnormality and useful in terms of interpretability. Furthermore, when
formalizing abnormality in terms of probability, it is common in statistical anomaly detection to use
a tail probability, i.e., the probability that exceeds a speciﬁc threshold. In this case, EVT is more
useful than traditional statistical methods.
EVT is designed to derive detailed insights about extreme values and their stochastic behavior from
data with a limited sample size, in contrust to traditional statistical methods that require large sam-
ples to capture such features. Since extreme events, by their nature, are rarely observed, amassing
a large amount of these events for analysis can be difﬁcult. Similarly, the anomalous behavior of
ﬁlters causing misclassiﬁcation can also be considered a rare event. Furthermore, the POT method
focuses on data points that surpass a speciﬁc threshold within a dataset. This enables us to estimate
the probability of extreme events without using all the data points, thus maximizing the information
extracted from a restricted sample.
In this work, we reformulate the rarity of each Require: (x1 , y1 ) . . . (xN , yN ), (xw , yw )
ﬁlter’s saliency proﬁle according to the prob- Ensure: Salient Filter Ranking
ability P(X > x) by using the POT method, 1: S̄ ← []
which we call POT-saliency.                      2: for i ← 1 to N do
Since EVT provide results for the tail behav- 3:       Calculate s̄i for (xi , yi ) by Eq. 1
ior of various probability distributions, we can 4:    S̄.append(s̄i )
evaluate extreme value probabilities without as- 5: end   for
suming a speciﬁc distribution. Therefore, the    6: Estimate  α, β from S̄ using (Siffer et al.,
most important advantage of this method is that     2017)
it does not require the assumption of a normal   7: Calculate s̄w for (xw , yw ) by Eq. 1
distribution for the distribution when calculat- 8: Calculate pw for s̄w using (α, β) and Eq. 5
ing a score for each ﬁlter, which allows for a   9: salient_ﬁlter_ranking ← argsort(pw )
uniﬁed analysis even among different strata us-
ing the same criteria.                            Figure 2: Detecting Salient Filters with POT


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2 shows our salient ﬁlter ranking algorithm with POT. Let R be a real space and L be the
total number of convolution ﬁlters. The bold variables in Fig. 2 are all L-dimensional real vectors,
i.e., s̄i , α, β, p ∈ RL , where the j-th element in each vector is the value corresponding to the j-th
convolution ﬁlter. Denote by N the number of images in the validation set in the dataset. First,
we calculate the saliency proﬁles for convolution ﬁlters, s̄j (j = 1, . . . , N ), according to Eq. 1 for
each image in the validation set, (x1 , y1 ) . . . (xN , yN ). Then, we perform the maximum likelihood
estimation of the GPD parameters, α and β in Eq. 4 , using the proﬁles (s̄1 , . . . , s̄N ). When a
misclassiﬁed input is discovered, where xw and yw denote the misclassiﬁed input and its true label,
we calculate the saliency proﬁle of each ﬁlter for xw and store the saliency proﬁles that exceed the
corresponding threshold. Then we compute the probability according to Eq. 5 for the ﬁlters with
their saliency proﬁle above the threshold. Finally, we can obtain the desired ranking by sorting these
probabilities in ascending order. For the ﬂowchart of the algorithm, please refer to the Fig. 6 in the
Appendix. We used the maximum likelihood estimation of GPD parameters from the work by (Siffer
et al., 2017) for our implementation and the threshold for each ﬁlter was set to the 90-th percentile
value of the observed saliency proﬁles on the validation set of the dataset.


5     E XPERIMENT

In this section, we empirically analyzed the differences between POT-sailency and existing methods.
In particular, we investigated what biases might occur and what problems the existing method might
cause.
Levin et al. (2021) proposed two evaluation methods for quantitatively measuring the effect of de-
tected ﬁlters: pruning and ﬁne-tuning. For the pruning-based evaluation, we set all values in the ﬁlter
to zero instead of actually modifying the model architectures. These removed ﬁlters will no longer
affect the classiﬁcation result because convolution is performed through the sum of the Hadamard
product between the window of an input and the convolutional ﬁlters. In contrast, in the ﬁne-tuning-
based evaluation, we update the salient ﬁlters where it is assumed that if we correctly identify the
ﬁlters causing misclassiﬁcation, ﬁne-tuning them would improve performance. For these experi-
ments, we used the pretrained ResNet-50 provided by PyTorch framework as in Levin et al. (2021).
The results of VGG and ViT are also shown in the Appendix.

5.1     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS IN I MAGE N ET

We analyzed the original saliency and POT-saliency ranking methods in terms of two evaluation
methods. We applied them to the ImageNet validation set. This experiment follows the one in Levin
et al. (2021).

5.1.1    F ILTER -P RUNING - BASED E VALUATION
Starting from the top of the ranking of ﬁlters, we gradually turned off the ﬁlter and measured model
performance according to the metrics by pruning up to 50 ﬁlters. After all the incorrectly classiﬁed
samples in the ImageNet validation set were processed, we average the results and the values are
reported for each metric. We made comparisons among the original saliency ranking method, the
POT-saliency ranking method, and a random-selection method in which we randomly chosed the
convolution ﬁlters.
As shown in Fig. 3, both the original and POT-saliency methods share the same tendency to re-
duce the incorrect class conﬁdence and increase correct class conﬁdence and have almost the same
ability to identify salient ﬁlters. Incorrect class conﬁdence dropped by 25% when 50 salient ﬁlters
were turned off, although choosing random ﬁlters did not decrease the conﬁdence much. Also, we
observed that the correct class conﬁdence rose faster when salient ﬁlters were eliminated. These
results suggest that the wrong classiﬁcation is more or less due to these salient ﬁlters. The percent-
age of corrected samples for the POT-saliency method is higher than the random method as well,
reaching 12%.
It is worth noting that zeroing out random ﬁlters helps the model classify well, and there are a couple
of possible reasons for this. First, randomly chosen ﬁlters can include salient ﬁlters and these salient
ﬁlters have an inﬂuence on the output. this hypothesis is consistent with the experiment conducted


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Comparisons on metrics among three methods. The POT method and baseline method
have show the ability to drop incorrect class conﬁdence.


Figure 4: The POT method and baseline method have almost the same ability to detect malfunction-
ing ﬁlters in terms of one step ﬁne-tuning.


by Levin et al. (2021), where neither correct nor incorrect class conﬁdence changed when the least
salient ﬁlters found by the baseline method were removed. Second, convolutional ﬁlters whose
values are set to 0 could begin to equally contribute to the output for all the classes, leading to more
evenly distributed conﬁdence.

5.1.2   F ILTER F INE - TUNING E VALUATION

We performed one step ﬁne-tuning of ResNet-50 and observed the behavior change. For one step
ﬁne-tuning, we set the learning rate to 0.001 and multiplied this value to the gradients and subtracted
the values from the original parameter values. We used the same metrics to measure the effect as
in the ﬁlter pruning. One step ﬁne-tuning may seem odd at ﬁrst sight; however, we argue that ﬁne-
tuning for one step has several advantages over usual ﬁne-tuning. Firstly, salient ﬁlter ranking will
change after the modiﬁcation of model parameters. Once the parameters in a ﬁlter are updated, the
distributions of the gradient magnitude will be different. This forces us to compute the parameters
for new GPDs and redo the whole process again. Therefore, one step ﬁne-tuning can reduce the com-
putation and is more practical. Secondly, the use of one step ﬁne-tuning provides greater ﬂexibility
in selecting the number of ﬁlters for the model, thus enabling us to ﬁnd the best conﬁguration. After
we compute the gradients and save them, we can easily increase or decrease the number of ﬁne-
tuned ﬁlters, because each parameter can be expressed by θi or θi − λ∇θi L(fθ , x, y), where λ is the
learning rate. In contrast, if we perform normal ﬁne-tuning, which needs several update operations,
the gradient after the ﬁrst update is dependent on the number of ﬁne-tuned ﬁlters, and therefore we
would need to start ﬁne-tuning from scratch if we want to change the number of ﬁne-tuned ﬁlters.
We conducted the experiment on the ImageNet validation set using the same GPD parameters com-
puted previously for each ﬁlter, and compared our method to the baseline method. Figure 4 shows
the result for the original and POT-saliency methods on the ImageNet validation set. It is clear that
both methods transfer the conﬁdence in the originally misclassiﬁed class to that of the correct class.
In addition, we can see that half of the misclassiﬁed images is correctly classiﬁed after performing
one step ﬁne-tuning to 25 ﬁlters.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Comparison among three methods when ResNet-18 is trained using MNIST and used on
SVHN. We evaluate them with the same metrics as before.


5.1.3    D ISCUSSION : I S IT REASONABLE TO EVALUATE RANKING USING I MAGE N ET ?
Considering the results of the experiments in the previous section, we can see that original and POT-
saliency ranking successfully detects the ﬁlters inducing misclassiﬁcation and that modifying these
ﬁlters works positively for each input. However, we can also guess that manipulating parameters
in the latter part of the convolutional layers is more likely to yield better changes in the results
compared with manipulating the parameters of the former part. In fact, Kirichenko et al. (2022)
showed that retraining the last layer can help ImageNet-trained models perform well on spurious
correlation benchmarks. Although the last layer of CNNs is a linear layer, we presume that the same
phenomenon would occur if we retrain the ﬁlters that belong to the convolutional layers in the latter
half.
The ResNet architecture consists of ﬁve groups of convolutional layers: conv1, conv2_x, conv3_x,
conv4_x, and conv5_x(He et al., 2016). The numbers of ﬁlters in these groups are listed in the
following table. From tab. 3 in the appendix, we decided to focus on conv5_x, which contains nearly
half of the ﬁlters. We constructed a simple algorithm: when a model makes a misclassiﬁcation, we
choose ﬁlters with higher gradient from conv5_x and perform one-step ﬁne-tuning on them.
To evaluate the conv5_x ﬁne-tuning approach, we conducted an experiment using the same setup
as in sec. 5.1.2. Interestingly, the performance after ﬁne-tuning ﬁlters in conv5_x outperforms both
the original and POT-saliency methods by 5 to 10% for all the metrics as shown in Fig. 4. For this
result, we hypothesized that, when training on ImageNet, which is huge in size and consists of a
wide variety of classes, useful feature extractors are learned, so that ﬁne-tuning can be reconciled by
simply ﬁne-tuning the the ﬁlters in conv_5, rather than by the ﬁlters in the feature extractors. Even
if some ﬁlters in the feature extractor actually need to be modiﬁed, it is not possible in this situation
to clarify whether they have been found. Therefore, in the next section, we propose evaluating each
method in the domain shift problem setting, where the feature extractor ﬁlters clearly need to be
modiﬁed.

5.2     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS IN D OMAIN S HIFT

To ﬁnd out whether conv5_x ﬁne-tuning can operate well under any condition, we used datasets that
show domain shift to ensure that CNNs as a feature extractor can only perform poorly. Domain
shift is a common challenge in machine learning when the source domain and the target domain
differ signiﬁcantly. There are multiple possible triggers that give rise to the problem, one of which
is the different feature space for the source and target domains. For example, we can intuitively
understand that most models trained only with the MNIST dataset cannot extract useful features
when they are used on the SVHN dataset as shown in Fig. 7 in Appendix. Since convolutional layers
are involved in different types of feature extraction(Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), we expect the cause of
misclassiﬁcations to be distributed among various convolutional layers.
We conducted our experiments with the MNIST and SVHN datasets. We trained ResNet-18 from
scratch with MNIST dataset and applied our method to the SVHN training set to approximate the
distributions of ﬁlter saliency. Then we analyzed where the top ranking ﬁlters are from. We did not
use the pretrained model so as to avoid using models that already have a decent feature extractor.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5 shows how the performance changed on incorrectly classiﬁed images after ﬁne-tuning. As
we can see, modifying the ﬁlters in conv5_x only was not effective at all, changing almost nothing
across all of the metrics. Interestingly, the POT method showed a better performance than the base-
line method, which is a different result from that in Fig. 4. Especially, the POT method decreased
the incorrect class conﬁdence by up to 6%, whereas the baseline achieves only 2%, showing superior
capability of discovering ﬁlters that contribute to misclassiﬁcations.

5.3   B IAS BEHIND SALIENT FILTERS : WHAT CAUSES PERFORMANCE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
      POT- SALIENCY AND ORIGINAL SALIENCY ?

In previous section, we explored the performance difference among various approaches. Now, we
want to ﬁgure out where it comes from. For this purpose, we analyze the distribution of the chosen
ﬁlters. More speciﬁcally, we counted how many times each ﬁlter ranked in the top 20 or 25, aggre-
gated the results within the ﬁve groups, and calculated the proportion to clarify the general trends.
As we can see from the results in Tables 1 and 2, POT-saliency ranking chose ﬁlters that belong to
a wide range of layers, while original saliency ranking mainly chose conv5_x ﬁlters. This indicates
that our method successfully reveals the fact that the model trained with MNIST is not capturing
important features.

Table 1: Rate (%) of top-20 salient ﬁlters         Table 2: Rate (%) of top-25 salient ﬁlters
of ResNet-18 from each group on SVHN.              of ResNet-50 from each group on ImageNet.

                    baseline   POT                                     baseline   POT
         conv1         0        7.5                         conv1         0.1      7.2
        conv2_x       0.5       2.3                        conv2_x        0.6     24.8
        conv3_x       1.0      19.8                        conv3_x        1.5      2.1
        conv4_x       2.5      31.0                        conv4_x       24.2     15.1
        conv5_x       96.0     40.0                        conv5_x       73.6     50.8

These ﬁndings suggest that the baseline method is biased to choose ﬁlters from later groups such as
conv5_x. To illuminate what causes this bias, we go back to the original saliency ranking method
itself. The score for ranking generation is computed by performing the z-score normalization to pa-
rameter saliency, or ﬁlter saliency in the case of CNNs. Since ResNet adopts ReLU as an activation
function, the gradient accumulates and grows bigger during the course of backpropagation unless
the norm of weights is restricted to be small. Thus, the mean gradient is larger for conv1 and smaller
for conv5_x, and the larger the mean value, the more likely it is to increase the standard deviation.
In fact, as Fig. 10 in the appendix shows, the mean and std of the gradient gradually decreases from
conv1 to conv5_x for ResNet-50. We divide the saliency proﬁle by std when calculating the score,
and this operation is presumably what introduces the bias.

6     C ONCLUSION
We explored the parameter saliency for a CNN through the lens of EVT and provided POT-saliency.
We analyzed the property of the original and POT-saliency ranking methods and found that the
POT-saliency ranking method chooses from a wide range of convolutional layers while the baseline
method has a bias to choose from the later part of the layers. We believe that this novel application
of EVT in deep learning has the potential to open up new ﬁelds.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim. San-
  ity checks for saliency maps. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ahmed Alqaraawi, Martin Schuessler, Philipp Weiß, Enrico Costanza, and Nadia Berthouze. Evalu-
  ating saliency map explanations for convolutional neural networks: a user study. In Proceedings
  of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 275–285, 2020.
August A Balkema and Laurens De Haan. Residual life time at great age. The Annals of probability,
  2(5):792–804, 1974.
Anthony Bau, Yonatan Belinkov, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass.
  Identifying and controlling important neurons in neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.01157, 2018.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017.
Ruth C Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful pertur-
  bation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 3429–3437,
  2017.
Nicholas Frosst and Geoffrey Hinton. Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1711.09784, 2017.
Scott D Grimshaw. Computing maximum likelihood estimates for the generalized pareto distribution.
  Technometrics, 35(2):185–191, 1993.
Laurens Haan and Ana Ferreira. Extreme value theory: an introduction, volume 3. Springer, 2006.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Zhiqiang He, Yaguan Qian, Yuqi Wang, Bin Wang, Xiaohui Guan, Zhaoquan Gu, Xiang Ling,
  Shaoning Zeng, Haijiang Wang, and Wujie Zhou. Filter pruning via feature discrimination in
  deep neural networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv,
  Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXI, pp. 245–261. Springer, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12261, 2019.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufﬁcient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.
Roman Levin, Manli Shu, Eitan Borgnia, Furong Huang, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein.
  Where do models go wrong? parameter-space saliency maps for explainability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01335, 2021.
Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  5542–5550, 2017.
Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan Samet, and Hans Peter Graf. Pruning ﬁlters for
  efﬁcient convnets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08710, 2016.
Congcong Liu and Huaming Wu. Channel pruning based on mean gradient for accelerating convo-
  lutional neural networks. Signal Processing, 156:84–91, 2019.
Christoph Molnar. Interpretable Machine Learning: A Guide for Making Black Box Mod-
  els Explainable.  2nd edition, 2022.    URL https://christophm.github.io/
  interpretable-ml-book.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. Rise: Randomized input sampling for explanation
  ofblack-box models. In British Machine Vision Conference, 2018.
James Pickands III. Statistical inference using extreme order statistics. the Annals of Statistics, pp.
  119–131, 1975.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i trust you?" explaining the
 predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Wojciech Samek, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, and Klaus-Robert
 Müller. Evaluating the visualization of what a deep neural network has learned. IEEE transactions
 on neural networks and learning systems, 28(11):2660–2673, 2016.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Alban Siffer, Pierre-Alain Fouque, Alexandre Termier, and Christine Largouet. Anomaly detection
  in streams with extreme value theory. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1067–1075, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
  sualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.
Xu Sun, Xuancheng Ren, Shuming Ma, and Houfeng Wang. meprop: Sparsiﬁed back propagation
  for accelerated deep learning with reduced overﬁtting. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 3299–3308. PMLR, 2017.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Sahil Verma, Varich Boonsanong, Minh Hoang, Keegan E. Hines, John P. Dickerson, and Chirag
  Shah. Counterfactual explanations and algorithmic recourses for machine learning: A review,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.10596.
Wei Wen, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. Learning structured sparsity in
 deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ruichi Yu, Ang Li, Chun-Fu Chen, Jui-Hsin Lai, Vlad I Morariu, Xintong Han, Mingfei Gao, Ching-
  Yung Lin, and Larry S Davis. Nisp: Pruning networks using neuron importance score propagation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9194–
  9203, 2018.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.
Hao Zhang and WK Chan. Apricot: A weight-adaptation approach to ﬁxing deep learning models.
  In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE),
  pp. 376–387. IEEE, 2019.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Figure 6: A ﬂowchart illustrating how POT-saliency method works.


Figure 7: Visualization of digits in MNIST dataset (left) and SVHN dataset (right). SVHN digits
come with colors, diverse computer fonts and various background from streets, while MNIST digits
have black background only.


A    A RCHITECTURAL D IFFERENCES
We performed one-step ﬁne-tuning for multiple CNN architectures such as VGG19. For this task,
we set the learning rate to be 0.001 just as Sec. 5.1.2. The results are shown below. Figure 8 tells us
that our method is effective for not only the ResNet architecture, but also other CNN architectures.


                           Figure 8: Comparisons on metrics for VGG19.

We also conducted this experiment on Vision Transformer. Since its architecture fundamentally
differs from CNN, we needed to determine parameters corresponding to convolutional ﬁlters. We
considered the parameters Wk , Wq , and Wv , which perform linear transformations to the input to
obtain vectors of query, key, and value, to be particularly relevant to feature extraction. We treated
the average magnitude of gradients for these parameters as parameter saliency. Similar to previous


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 3: The number of ﬁlters in each group of convolutional layers for ResNet architecture.

                model name      conv1    conv2_x       conv3_x   conv4_x     conv5_x
                ResNet-18         64        256           512      1024        2048
                ResNet-50         64       1152          3072      9216        9216



experiments, we conducted experiments using the ImageNet validation set and used a learning rate
of 0.001. The architecture is ViT-B-16. The results shown in Fig. 9 tell us that the POT-saliency
method is not limited to CNNs only.


                     Figure 9: Comparisons on metrics for Vision Transformer.



B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Since we have S̄j ∼ N (µj , σj ), Ŝj follows the standard normal distribution:

                                            Ŝj ∼ N (0, 1).                                         (7)

The standard normal distribution has the following complementary error function erfc : R → [0, 1]:
                                                   ∫ ∞
                                                2
                                                       e−t dt,
                                                          2
                                   erfc(x) = √                                                 (8)
                                                 π x

and we have P(Ŝj > x) = erfc(x) for any j. The derivative of the complementary error function
with respect to x is
                                  d erfc          2
                                         (x) = − √ e−x .
                                                         2
                                                                                            (9)
                                    dx             π

The function erfc(x) is monotonically decreasing, and therefore if ŝj ≤ ŝj ′ holds true, we also have
P(Ŝj > ŝj ) ≤ P(Ŝj ′ > ŝj ′ ) and vice versa. Lastly, we have
                                             (                    )
                                                S̄ − µ     s̄ − µ
                            P(Ŝ > ŝ) = P             >            = P(S̄ > s̄),                   (10)
                                                   σ          σ
and this concludes the proof.


C    T UTORIAL FOR E XTREME VALUE T HEORY

For those who are unfamiliar with the extreme value theory, we give a summary of (a) the motivation,
(b) two main theorems, and (c) some methods to model extreme values. It would be especially
helpful to understand the assumption necessary for the POT method.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Figure 10: The mean and std of parameter saliency for ResNet-50 on ImageNet validation set.


C.1   T WO MAIN THEOREMS

As described before, we try to model the maximum value of sequential data Mn =
max{X1 , X2 , ..., Xn }, where the data points are i.i.d.. To measure the potential value of it, we
want to know the probability P(Mn ≤ z) for some large value z ∈ R. The value can be transformed
with the distribution function F as follows:
                           P(Mn ≤ z) = P(X1 ≤ z) × · · · × P(Xn ≤ z)
                                     = {F (z)}n .                                                (11)

If the distribution F is well-known and can be expressed by an equation, we achieve our goal.
However, in most of the case, this is not true. Thus, we need to approximate F n . One problem
arising here is that as n increases, {F (z)}n converges 0 if z < τ , where τ is the right end point of
the distribution F . Avoiding this problem requires the linear normalization with two sequences of
constants {an > 0} and {bn }:
                                                 Mn − bn
                                           Mn∗ =           ,                                      (12)
                                                    an
and we analyze Mn∗ instead.
The ﬁrst theorem handles possible distributions for P(Mn∗ ≤ z) to converge as n → ∞.
                                                          (              )
Theorem 2. If there exists {an > 0} and {bn } such that P Mna−b n
                                                                  n
                                                                    ≤  z   converges in law to G(z)
as n → ∞, Then G is one of the following three distribution functions:
                              [ (      )]
     1. G(z) = exp {− exp − z−b     a     };
                 {
                   0 {                     z ≤ b,
     2. G(z) =              ( z−b )−α }
                   exp − a                 z > b;
                  {      { [ (    )α ]}
                      exp − − z−b
                               a             z < b,
      3. G(z) =
                      1                      z ≥ b,

where a > 0 and α > 0.

These distributions are the families of Gumbel, Fréchet, and Weibull distributions. The three classes
of distributions are together called extreme value distributions (EVD). These families are known to
be represented uniformly and is called generalized extreme value (GEV) distributioin:
                                          { [         (       )]−1/ξ }
                                                        z−µ
                              G(z) = exp − 1 + ξ                       ,                         (13)
                                                          σ


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 (     )
where z is constrained on 1 + ξ z−µ σ    > 0. The Gumbel distribution corresponds to ξ → 0, and
ξ > 0 and ξ < 0 are the cases for the Fréchet, and the Weibull distributions, respectively.
Now, we know that the unknown distribution for Mn∗ can be approximated by a GEV distribution,
so we have reduced the approximation problem to the parameter estimation problem. We originally
want to know the behavior of max Mn , but we can achieve this if we can estimate parameters
because Mn also follows the GEV distribution:
                    P(Mn ≤ z) = P(Mn∗ ≤ (z − bn )/an ) ≈ G((z − bn )/an ).                     (14)

One popular method is called the block maxima method, where we divide a sequence of data into
several blocks, obtain the maximum value in each block, and ﬁts the GEV distribution. we do not
introduce the parameter estimation techniques because it is beyond scope of this paper, but many
approaches, such as maximum likelihood estimation, have been developed so far.
A shortcoming of block maxima is that the method does not necessarily use extreme values, which
are inherently scarce. The threshold-based method arises to avoid such a problem. In this case,
values that exceeded a high threshold T are considered to be extreme. The target of analysis changes
to the probability:
                                                        1 − F (T + x)
                             P{X > T + x|X > T } =                     ,                        (15)
                                                           1 − F (T )
where x > 0 is the exceedance from the threshold. Again, we deals with the unknown distribution
F . The second main theorem is Thm. 1 as described in Sec. 3.2, but we can now state the theorem
more clearly with Thm. 2.
Theorem 3. Let X1 , X2 , ... be a sequence of i.i.d. random variables with the same distribution F ,
and Mn = max {X1 , ..., Xn }. Suppose F satisﬁes Thm. 2:
                                           { [          (      )]−1/ξ }
                                                          z−µ
                       P(Mn ≤ z) = exp − 1 + ξ                           ,
                                                           σ

for some µ, σ > 0 and ξ.
Then, for sufﬁciently large T , we have
                                               (       )− ξ1
                                                    ξx
                                     H(x) = 1 − 1 +          ,                                 (16)
                                                    σ̂
where x ∈ {x > 0 and (1 + ξx/σ̂) > 0} and σ̂ = σ + ξ(T − µ).

The distribution of Eq. 16 is called the generalized pareto distribution. We can observe the close
relationship between the GEV distribution and the generalized pareto distribution: they share the
same ξ, and σ̂ can be calculated from µ and σ of the GEV distribution.
An outline proof is the following.

Proof. From the assumption, we have
                                             { [      (       )]−1/ξ }
                                                        z − µ
                   P(Mn ≤ z) = {F (z)}n = exp − 1 + ξ                  .                       (17)
                                                          σ

Taking the logarithm of the right equation gives
                                              [     (     )]−1/ξ
                                                      z−µ
                              n log F (z) ≈ − 1 + ξ              .                             (18)
                                                       σ
Considering Taylor expansion around F (z) = 1, where z is large enough, we obtain the equation
log F (z) ≈ −{1 − F (z)}. Substitution into Eq. 18 yields
                                            [      (      )]−1/ξ
                                          1           z−µ
                            1 − F (z) ≈       1+ξ                .                        (19)
                                          n             σ

                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, from Eq. 15 and Eq. 19, we obtain
                                                 [ (         )]−1/ξ
                                             1 + ξ T +x−µ
                                                       σ
                     P{X > T + x|X > T } ≈ [         (     )]−1/ξ
                                              1 + ξ T −µ
                                                       σ
                                                    (     )        −1/ξ
                                            1 + ξ T −µσ     +  ξ x
                                                                  σ
                                         =             (      )
                                            1 + ξ T −µ             
                                                           σ
                                           [         ]−1/ξ
                                                 ξx
                                         = 1+              ,                                     (20)
                                                  σ̂
where σ̂ = σ + ξ(T − µ).

C.2   M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD E STIMATION

we have described the connection between the two main theorems. In this section, we will explain
how we can estimate the parameters for a generalized pareto distribution with maximum likelihood
estimation. The probability density function for it is in the form:
                                                 (          )− 1+ 1
                                              1         ξx ( ξ )
                                f (x|ξ, σ̂) =      1+               .                        (21)
                                              σ̂         σ̂
The likelihood function is deﬁned as L(ξ, σ̂) = ΠN i=1 f (xi |ξ, σ̂), where Nt is the number of data
                                                     t

points that exceed the threshold. Therefore, we want to maximize
                                                (       ) Nt         (         )
                                                       1 ∑                 ξxi
                     log L(ξ, σ̂) = −Nt log σ̂ − 1 +            log 1 +          .              (22)
                                                       ξ i=1                σ̂
For the maximum likelihood estimation, it is necessary to have its partial derivatives with respect to
ξ and σ̂ equal to 0:
                                             ∂L
                                                  = 0,                                           (23)
                                             ∂ σ̂
                                             ∂L
                                                  = 0.                                           (24)
                                             ∂ξ
Solving this problem requires numerical optimization, so the answers can be numerically unstable.
One technique called the Grimshaw’s trick mitigates this problem.

                         (     ) Nt               (        )
        ∂L        Nt          1 ∑         1           ξxi
             =−       − 1+                          − 2
        ∂ σ̂       σ̂         ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂        σ̂
                         (     ) ∑  N
                  Nt          1 1 t ξxi /σ̂ + 1 − 1
             =−       + 1+
                   σ̂         ξ σ̂ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂
                       (      ) Nt
               Nt            1 1∑         1
             =       − 1+                          = 0;                                          (25)
               ξ σ̂          ξ σ̂ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂
                           (        ) (           ) Nt
               1 ∑                             1 ∑
                    Nt
        ∂L                      ξxi                         xi /σ̂
             = 2       log 1 +        − 1+
        ∂ξ     ξ i=1             σ̂            ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂
                           (        ) (           ) Nt
               1 ∑                             1 1∑
                    Nt
                                ξxi                        ξxi /σ̂ + 1 − 1
             = 2       log 1 +        − 1+
               ξ i=1             σ̂            ξ ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂
                           (        )   (         )        (        ) Nt
               1 ∑                                                 1 1∑
                    Nt
                                ξxi            1 Nt                            1
             = 2       log 1 +        − 1+                + 1+                         = 0.      (26)
               ξ i=1             σ̂            ξ     ξ             ξ ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Multiplying σ̂ to Eq. 25 and ξ to Eq. 26 yields

                                               (    ) Nt
                                           Nt      1 ∑       1
                                              − 1+                   = 0,                         (27)
                                           ξ       ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂
                         (        )            (    ) Nt
                1∑                                 1 ∑
                   Nt
                              ξxi          Nt                1
                      log 1 +       − Nt −    + 1+                   = 0.                         (28)
                ξ i=1          σ̂          ξ       ξ i=1 1 + ξxi /σ̂


Adding the two equations gives:

                                                    (        )
                                          1 ∑
                                              Nt
                                                         ξxi
                                     ξ=          log 1 +       .                                  (29)
                                          Nt i=1          σ̂


Here we use the change of variables by the equation θ = σ̂ξ . Note that both ξ and σ̂ can be calculated
through:


                                             1 ∑  tN
                                      ξ=            log (1 + θxi ),                               (30)
                                             Nt i=1
                                             ξ
                                      σ̂ =     .                                                  (31)
                                             θ

Therefore, our goal becomes ﬁnding the optimal θ. The ﬁrst step is to transform the log of likelihood
function log L(ξ, σ̂) with θ:

                                       (        ) Nt     (          )
                                              1 ∑               ξxi
           log L(ξ, σ̂) = −Nt log σ̂ − 1 +            log 1 +
                                              ξ i=1              σ̂
                                       (        )
                                  ξ           1
                        = −Nt log − 1 +           Nt ξ      (∵ Eq. 30)
                                  θ           ξ
                                  (                          ) N
                                     1 1 ∑                       ∑
                                           Nt                       t

                        = −Nt log              log (1 + θxi ) −       log (1 + θxi ) − Nt .       (32)
                                     θ Nt i=1                     i=1


The derivative of this function with respect to θ is:

                                ∑Nt                           ∑N t xi
            dL        − θ12 N1t i=1    log (1 + θxi ) + θ1 N1t i=1   1+θxi
                                                                             ∑Nt
                                                                                   xi
               = −Nt                       ∑Nt                             −
            dθ                       1 1
                                            i=1 log (1 + θxi )               i=1
                                                                                 1 + θxi
                                     θ Nt
                              ∑Nt 1 θxi +1−1
                 Nt              i=1
                                                     ∑Nt
                                                          1 θxi + 1 − 1
               =     − Nt ∑Nt θ 1+θxi              −
                  θ            i=1 log (1 + θxi )    i=1
                                                          θ 1 + θxi
                                      ∑               (                      )
                                                               1∑
                            Nt     1    Nt    1                   Nt
                 Nt          θ + θ      i=1 1+θxi        Nt              1
               =     − Nt ∑ N t                    −         −
                  θ             i=1 log (1 + θxi )
                                                         θ     θ i=1 1 + θxi
                               ∑Nt
                                                 1∑
                                          1         Nt
                   Nt Nt + i=1 1+θxi                        1
               =−     ∑Nt                     +                 .                                 (33)
                    θ     i=1 log (1 + θxi )
                                                 θ i=1 1 + θxi


Here, we assume that Nt is a positive number. Otherwise, we cannot estimate the probability dis-
tribution because no values exceed the threshold. The optimal θ should satisfy dL
                                                                               dθ = 0, which


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


yields:
                                                  ∑Nt
                                                                    1∑
                                                           1           Nt
                                        Nt Nt + i=1 1+θxi                    1
                                     −     ∑Nt                   +                 =0              (34)
                                         θ    i=1 log (1 + θxi )
                                                                    θ i=1
                                                                          1 + θxi
                                           (N             )( N                   )
                        ∑Nt
                               1        1 ∑    t
                                                     1        ∑  t

                   Nt +             −                              log (1 + θxi ) = 0              (35)
                        i=1
                            1 + θxi    Nt i=1 1 + θxi         i=1
                                   (N            )(                              )
                                    ∑ t
                                            1              1 ∑
                                                               Nt
                             Nt −                     1−           log (1 + θxi ) = 0              (36)
                                    i=1
                                         1 + θxi           Nt i=1
                          (                 )(                             )
                             1 ∑                       1 ∑
                                Nt                        Nt
                                       1
                                                 1−          log (1 + θxi ) − 1 = 0.               (37)
                            Nt i=1 1 + θxi            Nt i=1
Calculating the GPD parameters ξ, σ̂ is now reduced to solving the Eq. 37. This is the full picture
of the Grimshaw’s trick. It can be shown that the equation has at least one solution other than θ = 0
if the derivative of the left hand side of Eq. 37 equals to 0 at θ = 0.
The lower bound for θ is given by
                                                   1
                                            θ>−         ,                                          (38)
                                                maxi xi
because 1 + θxi should be positive for any i. Grimshaw shows the upper bound for θ:
                                              2(x̄ − mini xi )
                                         θ<                    ,                                   (39)
                                                (mini xi )2
where x̄ is the mean of x1 , · · · , xNt . Therefore, the implementation must ﬁnd all the possible roots
for the Eq. 37 and choose the optimal value according to log L(θ).

D     ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

We conducted two additional domain-shift experiments. One is the ImageNet-C(Hendrycks & Diet-
terich, 2019) where various generated corruptions are applied to the ImageNet validation set. The
other is PACS dataset. The PACS dataset consists of images from 7 classes, where P stands for
photo, A for art, C for cartoons, and S for sketch. The dataset has 9,991 images in total.

D.1       I MAGE N ET- C

For this experiment, we used the same pretrained ResNet50 as Sec. 5.1.2, and also the POT param-
eters are identical. The results are shown in Fig. 11. For the types of corruption, we chose gaussian
noise, snow, pixelate, and contrast. In this scenario, We can see similar performance across all the
corruptions. Since the ImageNet dataset is such a large dataset, the pretrained model is likely to
have a good feature extractor. Thus, the bias of choosing ﬁlters from the latter part of convolutional
layers behind (Levin et al., 2021)’s method has less inﬂuence.

D.2       PACS DATASET

In addition to the MNIST and SVHN datasets, we also used the PACS dataset(Li et al., 2017) to
examine the behavior of ResNet-18 when the ﬁlters were ﬁne-tuned according to the POT-saliency
method, the (Levin et al., 2021)’s method and the conv5_x method. We again started from non-
pretrained ResNet18 and trained with 0.001 of learning rate with Adam. When training, we choose
three source domains from P, A, C, and S and split images into training and validation set. Then,
we used the remaining domain to conduct the evaluation. Henceforth, We will represent the domain
used for evaluation in the last letter. For example, when we write PCSA, it means that we use art
images for evaluation and train a model with photo, cartoon, and sketch images. The following four
ﬁgures show the results.
In PACS and PASC, we can clearly see the difference between the POT method and (Levin et al.,
2021)’s method, while PCSA and ACSP show the similar tendency. One possible reason for this


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       (a) gaussian noise


                                           (b) snow


                                          (c) pixelate


                                          (d) contrast

                  Figure 11: The results of evaluation on ImageNet-c dataset.


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            (a) PACS


                                            (b) PASC


                                            (c) PCSA


                                            (d) ACSP

                    Figure 12: The results of evaluation on PACS permutation.


tendency can be found in the feature distribution of the PACS images in Fig. 13. We see photo and
art painting images share the feature distribution, but cartoon and sketch images are independent
and distant from the rest. When sketch and cartoon images are used for evaluation (i.e., PACS and
PASC), the feature extractor must be changed so that they can successfully classify the images. In
this case, the POT method shows less bias and outperforms the (Levin et al., 2021)’s method.


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure 13: Distribution of features in PACS photos from (Li et al., 2017)
                                                 .


                                               21
