Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ON ’ T P LAY FAVORITES :
M INORITY G UIDANCE FOR D IFFUSION M ODELS
 Soobin Um, Suhyeon Lee & Jong Chul Ye
 KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
 {sum,suhyeon.lee,jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr



                                            A BSTRACT
         We explore the problem of generating minority samples using diffusion mod-
         els. The minority samples are instances that lie on low-density regions of a
         data manifold. Generating a sufficient number of such minority instances is
         important, since they often contain some unique attributes of the data. How-
         ever, the conventional generation process of the diffusion models mostly yields
         majority samples (that lie on high-density regions of the manifold) due to their
         high likelihoods, making themselves ineffective and time-consuming for the mi-
         nority generating task. In this work, we present a novel framework that can
         make the generation process of the diffusion models focus on the minority sam-
         ples. We first highlight that Tweedie’s denoising formula yields favorable re-
         sults for majority samples. The observation motivates us to introduce a met-
         ric that describes the uniqueness of a given sample. To address the inherent
         preference of the diffusion models w.r.t. the majority samples, we further de-
         velop minority guidance, a sampling technique that can guide the generation
         process toward regions with desired likelihood levels. Experiments on bench-
         mark real datasets demonstrate that our minority guidance can greatly improve
         the capability of generating high-quality minority samples over existing gener-
         ative samplers. We showcase that the performance benefit of our framework
         persists even in demanding real-world scenarios such as medical imaging, fur-
         ther underscoring the practical significance of our work. Code is available at
         https://github.com/soobin-um/minority-guidance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Conventional large-scale datasets typically exhibit long-tailed distributions, where the majority of
samples are concentrated in high-probability regions of a data manifold (Ryu et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2019). While in low-likelihood regions, there are instances called minority samples, which con-
tain unique attributes rarely observed in the majority of the data. The ability to generate minority
data holds substantial relevance in critical real-world applications, particularly in enhancing the
predictive capabilities of medical diagnosis models by introducing additional instances of rare con-
ditions. This augmentation is also significant in promoting fairness, aligning with social vulnera-
bilities often associated with minority instances. Furthermore, the unique features contained within
low-likelihood instances are pivotal in applications like creative AI (Han et al., 2022), where the
generation of samples with exceptional creativity is an essential component of the task.
One challenge is that generation focused on such minority samples is actually difficult to per-
form (Hendrycks et al., 2021). This holds even for diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-
Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) that provide strong coverage for a given data distribution (Se-
hwag et al., 2022). The generation process of the diffusion models can be understood as simulating
the reverse of a diffusion process that defines a set of noise-perturbed data distributions (Song &
Ermon, 2019). The principle guarantees their generated samples to respect the (clean) data distribu-
tion, which naturally makes the sampler become majority-oriented, i.e., producing higher likelihood
samples more frequently than lower likelihood ones (Sehwag et al., 2022), when deployed on the
long-tail-distributed data. Consequently, collecting even a handful number of minority samples us-
ing diffusion models often requires meticulous curation and substantial investments in terms of time
and computational resources (Sehwag et al., 2022).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Biased denoising on CelebA (Liu et al., 2015)               (b) Geometric intuition

Figure 1: Inherent bias of Tweedie-based denoiser toward majority features. (a) (Left column)
Clean images x0 from CelebA; (Middle column) Noised samples xt made by the DDPM per-
turbation (i.e., Eq. (1)) with t = 0.9T on the clean versions in the left column; (Right col-
umn) Denoised samples x̂0 using Tweedie’s formula (i.e., Eq. (6)) on the perturbed ones. The
top (bottom) row represents the perturbation-denoising sequence performed on majority (minor-
ity) featured samples. (b) Geometric interpretation of the bias based on optimal score expression
s∗θ (xt , t) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ) [∇xt log qαt (xt |x0 )].

Contribution. In this work, we propose a novel framework to counteract the majority-focused
nature of diffusion models. Our approach begins with the development of a new metric to describe
the uniqueness of features in a given sample. Our metric, which we call minority score, is based
on Tweedie’s formula (Robbins, 1992) that yields the posterior mean of a clean sample given a
noise-corrupted one (Kim & Ye, 2021; Chung et al., 2022a). We emphasize that given a pretrained
diffusion model trained on long-tailed data, Tweedie’s formula leads to biased denoising against
minority samples. Specifically for strong noise-perturbation, it often incurs significant information
loss for low-likelihood minority samples (see Figure 1a for instance). This motivates us to define
our metric as a discrepancy between clean samples and its reconstructed versions via Tweedie’s
formula. We highlight that the proposed metric is efficient to compute, requiring fewer network
evaluations than other diffusion-based outlier metrics (Wolleb et al., 2022; Wyatt et al., 2022; Teng
et al., 2022). We also establish a connection to the noise-matching error of diffusion models, offering
an additional insight on the effectiveness of our metric for detecting low-density instances.
Given the proposed metric at hand, we develop a sampling technique that can be used for encour-
aging diffusion models to produce minority-featured samples. Our sampler, which we call minority
guidance, conditions the sampling process on a desired level of minority score using the classifier
guidance technique (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). One key advantage of minority guidance lies in
its label-agnostic nature, which is contrary to existing minority samplers that rely upon the use of
labeled data (Yu et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022; Sehwag et al., 2022).
To validate the efficacy of our proposals, we conduct comprehensive experiments across a diverse
range of real-world benchmarks, which encompasses both unconditional and conditional datasets.
Specifically to highlight the practical importance of our work, we also explore the domain of medical
imaging where generating minority instances is a demanding issue in the area (e.g., synthesis of
highly-distinctive lesion images). To that end, we first demonstrate that minority score is effective
for identifying low-density instances, sharing similar trends with existing criteria like Average k-
Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN) and Local Outlier Factor (LOF) (Breunig et al., 2000). We also exhibit
that our minority guidance can serve as an effective knob for controlling the uniqueness of features
for generated samples. We further demonstrate that our sampler greatly improves the ability to
generate high-quality minority samples on the considered real benchmarks including the medical
imaging dataset, as demonstrated by high values of outlier measures (such as AvgkNN and LOF)
and better quality metrics like Fréchet Inception Distance (Heusel et al., 2017).
Related work. Generating minority samples that contain novel features has been explored under
a number of different scenarios (Sehwag et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2020; Lin et al.,
2022; Qin et al., 2023). The closest instance to our work is Sehwag et al. (2022) wherein the authors
propose a sampling technique for diffusion models, which can encourage the generation process to
move toward low-density regions w.r.t. a specific class using a class-predictor and a conditional


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model. The key distinction w.r.t. ours is that their method is limited to class-conditional settings and
therefore does not work with unlabeled data. Another notable work that bears an intimate connection
to ours is Lee et al. (2022). As in Sehwag et al. (2022), they also leverage diffusion models yet for
a different modality, graph data (e.g., lying in chemical space). The key idea therein is to produce
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples via a customized generation process designed for maintaining
some desirable properties w.r.t. the focused data space (e.g., plausible chemical structures). Since
it is tailored for a particular modality which is inherently distinct from our focus (e.g., image data),
hence not directly comparable to our approach. The authors in (Yu et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022;
Qin et al., 2023; Huang & Jafari, 2023) focus on improving data coverage for low-density instances
via the use of labels that indicate minority instances. A distinction w.r.t. ours is that their methods
require the knowledge on the minority labels. Samuel et al. (2023) develops a sampler for text-to-
image (T2I) diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) to specifically enhance the quality of generated
samples prompted with unique concepts (e.g., shaking hands). However, their method is confined to
text-paired datasets and not applicable to more general benchmarks like unconditional data.
Leveraging diffusion models for identifying uncommon instances (e.g., OOD samples) has recently
been proposed, especially in the context of medical imaging (Wolleb et al., 2022; Wyatt et al., 2022;
Teng et al., 2022). Their methods share a similar spirit as ours: measuring discrepancies between
the original and reconstructed images. However, their focus is for the anomaly detection for a given
data by generating the majority (normal) samples, which is different from our focus.


2     BACKGROUND

Before delving into details of our work, we briefly review several key concepts related to diffusion-
based generative models. We provide an overview of diffusion models with a particular focus on
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020) that our framework is based
upon. Also, we cover Tweedie’s denoising formula (Robbins, 1992) that plays an important role in
developing our metric. We review the classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) which provides
a basic principle for our sampling technique.

2.1   D IFFUSION - BASED GENERATIVE MODELS

Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019) are latent
variable models defined by a forward diffusion process and the associated reverse process. The
forward process is a Markov chain with a Gaussian transition where data is gradually corrupted
by Gaussian
       √      noise in accordance with a (positive) variance schedule {βt }Tt=1 : q(xt | xt−1 ) :=
N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I) where {xt }Tt=1 are latent variables having the same dimensionality as
data x0 ∼ q(x0 ). One notable property is that the forward process enables one-shot sampling of xt
at any desired timestep t:
                                                       √
                               qαt (xt | x0 ) = N (xt ; αt x0 , (1 − αt )I),                      (1)
              Qt
where αt := s=1 (1 − βs ). The variance schedule is designed to respect αT ≈ 0 so that xT be-
comes approximately distributed as N (0, I). The reverse process is another Markov Chain that is
parameterized by a learnable Gaussian transition: pθ (xt−1 | xt ) := N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), βt I).
One way to express µθ (xt , t) is to employ a noise-conditioned score network sθ (xt , t) :=
∇xt log pθ (xt ) that approximates the score function ∇xt log qαt (xt ). Then, we have µθ (xt , t) =
√ 1    (xt + βt sθ (xt , t)) (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b). The score network is trained
  1−βt
with a weighted sum of denoising score matching (DSM) (Vincent, 2011) objectives:
                       T
                       X
                 min         wt Eq(x0 )qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ],   (2)
                  θ
                       t=1

where wt := 1 − αt . Notably, this procedure is equivalent to building a noise-prediction network
ϵθ (xt , t) that regresses noise added on clean data x0 through the forward process in Eq. (1) (Vin-
cent, 2011; Song et al., 2020b).
                            √      This establishes an intimate connection between the two networks:
sθ (xt , t) = −ϵθ (xt , t)/ 1 − αt , implying that the score model is closely related to a denoiser.
Once obtaining the optimal model via the DSM training, data generation can be done by starting


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from xT ∼ N (0, I) and following the reverse Markov Chain down to x0 :
                                1
                   xt−1 = √          (xt + βt s∗θ (xt , t)) + βt z, z ∼ N (0, I),                 (3)
                              1 − βt
which is often called ancestral sampling (Song et al., 2020b). This process corresponds to a
discretized simulation of a stochastic differential equation that defines {pθ (xt )}Tt=0 (Song et al.,
2020b), which guarantees to sample from pθ (x0 ) ≈ q(x0 ).

2.2   T WEEDIE ’ S FORMULA FOR DENOISING

Given a perturbed sample with exponential family noise, a classic result of Tweedie’s formula gives
the Bayes optimal solution for denoising (i.e., the posterior mean) using the score function (Robbins,
                                                                                2
1992; Kim & Ye, 2021). Under Gaussian perturbation
                   2
                                                      R qσ (x̃|x) = N (x̃; x, σ I), the formula reads:
E[x | x̃] = x̃ + σ ∇x̃ log qσ (x̃) where qσ (x̃) := qσ (x̃|x)q(x) dx. Tweedie’s formula can be
extended to our focused DDPM perturbation (i.e., Eq. (1)) (Chung et al., 2022a;b):
                                       1
                       E[x0 | xt ] = √ (xt + (1 − αt )∇xt log qαt (xt )) .                         (4)
                                       αt
Notice that once having the optimal score model s∗θ (xt , t) = ∇xt log qαt (xt ), we can implement
the formula and get the posterior mean by using the optimal model in place of the score function
in Eq. (4).

2.3   C LASSIFIER GUIDANCE FOR DIFFUSION MODELS

Suppose we have access to auxiliary classifier pϕ (y|xt ) that predicts class y given perturbed input
xt . The main idea of the classifier guidance is to construct the score function of a conditional density
w.r.t. y by mixing the score model sθ (xt , t) and the log-gradient of the auxiliary classifier:
                      ∇xt log p̃θ (xt | y) = ∇xt {log pθ (xt ) + log pϕ (y|xt )w }
                                           = sθ (xt , t) + w∇xt log pϕ (y|xt )                          (5)
                                           =: s̃θ (xt , t, y),
where w is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the classifier guidance. Employing the
mixed score s̃θ (xt , t, y) in place of sθ (xt , t) in the generation process (e.g., in Eq. (3)) enables the
conditional sampling w.r.t. p̃θ (xt |y) ∝ pθ (xt )pϕ (y|xt )w . Increasing the scaling factor w affects
the curvature of pϕ (y|xt )w around given y to be more sharp, i.e., gives more strong focus on some
noticeable features w.r.t. y, which often yields improvement of fidelity w.r.t. the corresponding class
at the expense of diversity (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).

3     M ETHOD
We present our framework herein that specifically focuses on generating minority samples lying
on low-density regions of a data manifold. To this end, we start by pinpointing the inherent bias
of Tweedie’s denoising formula against low-density samples. In light of this, we come up with a
measure for describing the uniqueness of features. We subsequently develop a sampler that can
guide the generation process of diffusion models toward minority regions. Throughout the section,
we follow the setup and notations presented in Section 2.

3.1   I NHERENT BIAS OF T WEEDIE - BASED DENOISER

Consider data distribution q(x0 ) where unique features of data are contained in low-density regions1 .
Suppose we have access to diffusion model s∗θ (xt , t) trained on dataset x0 ∼ q(x0 ) via DSM (in
Eq. (2)). Then for Gaussian-perturbed sample xt ∼ qαt (xt | x0 ), one can obtain the posterior mean
x̂0 by implementing Tweedie’s formula in Eq. (4):
                                              1
                        x̂0 := E[x0 | xt ] = √ (xt + (1 − αt )s∗θ (xt , t)) .                      (6)
                                               αt
   1
     We note that such long-tailed property is common in conventional large-scale benchmarks (Ryu et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2019; Sehwag et al., 2022).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Real samples with the smallest (left column), moderate (middle column), and the highest
(right column) minority score, our proposed metric for identifying minorities.

While it is the best effort in a statistical sense, this denoising has a critical downside in terms of fair-
ness (Choi et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2021). The issue is that the expectation induced by the formula
makes the denoising process strongly affected by majority samples (that mostly contribute to the
average), thereby yielding biased results against low-likelihood minority instances. The discrimina-
tion is often severe under strong perturbation (e.g., t ≈ T ) where denoised outputs become close to
dataset mean (Karras et al., 2022).
Figure 1a illustrates an example of this observation for groups of majority and minority samples in
CelebA (Liu et al., 2015). As we can see, the denoiser based on Tweedie’s formula successfully
restores some key structural properties (e.g., pose and gender) when perturbation is made upon ma-
jority samples. However, it fails to do so for minority-featured samples. Instead, the Tweedie-based
denoiser embeds some common features in place of the unique attributes that are originally con-
tained in the clean minority samples, exhibiting its inherent bias toward majority features. Figure 1b
gives geometric illustration of the phenomenon. In the figure, we employ another expression for the
optimal score function provided in the following proposition:
Proposition 1. Consider the DSM optimization in Eq. (2). Assume that a given noise-conditioned
score network sθ (xt , t) have enough capacity. Then for each timestep t, the optimality of the score
network is achievable at:
                           s∗θ (xt , t) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )] .

See Section A.1 for the proof. Observe in Figure 1b that the optimal score function gives the aver-
aged conditional score over the data distribution (conditioned on noised input xt ), thereby producing
directions being inclined to the manifold w.r.t. the majority samples.

3.2   M INORITY SCORE : MEASURING THE UNIQUENESS

Inspired by the discriminative treatment against minority features, we develop a metric that quan-
tifies the uniqueness of features of a given data instance. Remember that Tweedie’s formula often
incurs significant loss of information for minority samples (as seen in Figure 1a). Hence, we employ
a distance between original clean sample x0 and its denoised version x̂0 :
                                 l(x0 ; s∗θ ) := Eqαt (xt |x0 ) [d(x0 , x̂0 )],                  (7)
where d(·, ·) denotes a discrepancy measure (e.g., Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (Zhang
et al., 2018), squared-error loss), and t is a timestep used for perturbation; see Sections C and D.1
for details on our choices of d(·, ·) and t. The expectation is introduced for randomness that comes
from the DDPM perturbation2 . We call this metric minority score, since it would yield high values
for minorities that contain novel attributes.
Figure 2 visualizes the effectiveness of minority score on several benchmarks that have diverging
characteristics. Notice that the samples in the left column exhibit features that are commonly ob-
served in the corresponding datasets (e.g., frontal-view faces in CelebA (Liu et al., 2015)). On the
   2
     We empirically found that the metric performs well even when the expectation is computed with a single
sample from qαt (xt |x0 ). See Figure 2 for instance, where the computations are based on such single-sampling.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


other hand, we see some unique features in the right column, such as “Eyeglasses” and “Wear-
ing Hat” that are famously known as minority attributes of CelebA (Amini et al., 2019; Yu et al.,
2020). We found that minority score shares similar trends with existing outlier metrics, exhibiting
its effectiveness for identifying minorities; see Section D.2 for empirical evidence. Thanks to the
one-shot reconstruction offered by Tweedie’s formula, minority score is more efficient to compute
than previous methods that rely upon iterative forward and reverse diffusion processes so requiring a
number of evaluations of models (Wolleb et al., 2022; Wyatt et al., 2022; Teng et al., 2022). In con-
trast, our metric requires only a few number of function evaluations. Given a conditional model and
labeled data, minority score can be extended to class-conditional settings for identifying low-density
samples w.r.t. a specific class; see Section B for details.
Connection to noise-prediction error. We found that minority score bears an intimate connection
to the noise-estimation error of diffusion models. Specifically with the squared-error distance loss,
minority score is equivalent (up to scaling) to the noise-matching error for timestep t. This offers
additional insights on why low-density instances could yield high minority scores, e.g., since they
would experience significant error in noise-estimation (compared to the majorities) due to their
scarcity in data. Below we provide a formal statement of the claim. See Section A.2 for the proof.
Corollary 1. Minority score, when defined with the squared-error distance loss ∥ · ∥22 , is equivalent
to the noise prediction error w.r.t. timestep t up to scaling:
                              l(x0 ; s∗θ ) = w̃t Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ∗θ (xt , t) − ϵ∥22 ,


where w̃t := (1 − αt )/αt .

3.3    M INORITY GUIDANCE : TACKLING THE PREFERENCE

Here a natural question arises. Given minority score at hand, what can we do for tackling the
majority-focused generation of diffusion models so that they become more likely to generate the
novel-featured samples? To address this question, we take a conditional generation approach3 where
we incorporate minority score as a conditioning variable into the generation process, which can then
serve to produce the unique-featured samples by conditioning w.r.t. high minority score values. To
condition the given framework with minimal effort, we employ the classifier guidance (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021) that does not require re-building of class-conditional models. Below we describe
in detail how we develop the conditional generation framework for minority score based on the
classifier guidance technique.
                                  (1)         (N )       i.i.d.
 Let us consider dataset x0 , . . . , x0                   ∼
 q(x0 ) and pretrained diffusion model s∗θ (xt , t).
 For each sample, we compute minority score
 via Eq. (7) and obtain l(1) , . . . , l(N ) where
                    (i)
 l(i) := l(x0 ; s∗θ ), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }. We pro-
 cess the (positive-valued) minority scores as or-
 dinal data with L categories by thresholding
 them with L − 1 levels of minority score. This                                                               ˜
 yields the ordinary categorized minority scores Figure 3: Impacts of minority class l (left) and
˜l(1) , . . . , ˜l(N ) ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1} where ˜l = 0          classifier scale w (right)  on   the  density of Local
                                                                  Outlier  Factor  (LOF).  The     other  parameters are
 and ˜l = L − 1 indicate the classes w.r.t. the
                                                                  fixed: w = 2.0 (left) and ˜l = 0 (right).
 most common and the rarest features, respec-
 tively (see Section C for details on the categorization). The ordinal minority scores are then coupled
                                                                                 (1)                 (N ) ˜(N )
 with the associated data samples to yield a paired dataset (x0 , ˜l(1) ),                . . . , (x0 , l ) which is
 subsequently used for training a (noise-conditioned) classifier pψ ˜l|xt that predicts ˜l for input xt
 (perturbed via Eq. (1)). After training, we blend the given score model with the log-gradient of the
 classifier as in Eq. (5) to yield a modified score:
                                     ŝθ xt , t, ˜l := s∗ (xt , t) + w∇x log pψ ˜l | xt ,

                                                     θ                t
                                                                                                                     (8)
where ψ indicates parameterization for the classifier, and w is a scaling factor for the guidance;
see Figure 3 for details on its impact. Incorporating this mixed score into the sampling process
   3
     We also explored another natural strategy that concerns sampling from q̂(x0 ) ∝ q(x0 )l(x0 ; sθ ). See
Section D.5 for details.


                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Sample comparison on LSUN-Bedrooms. Generated samples by StyleGAN (Karras et al.,
2019) (left), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sampling (middle), and minority guid-
ance (right) are exhibited. We use the same random seed for the diffusion-based samplers.


Figure 5: Sample comparison on the brain MRI data. Generated samples by StyleGAN2-ADA (Kar-
ras et al., 2020) (left), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sampling (middle), and
minority guidance (right) are exhibited. We use the same seed for the diffusion-based samplers.
                                                                                        w
(in Eq. (3)) then enables conditional generation w.r.t. p̂θ (xt |˜l) ∝ pθ (xt )pψ ˜l|xt . We call our
technique minority guidance, as it gives guidance w.r.t. minority score in the generation process.
 Generating unique-featured samples is now immediate with minority guidance, e.g., by condition-
 ing an arbitrarily high ˜l with a properly chosen w to incorporate the strength of the associated class
˜l. Even more, our sampler enables a free control of the uniqueness of features for generated sam-
 ples, which has never been offered in literature so far to our best knowledge. This uniqueness-
 controllability could be particularly instrumental in many practical scenarios including medical
 imaging; see Figure 14 in Section D.7 for one such instance. We found that minority guidance
 is not confined to the unconditional setting we explored thus far, and can be extended to the class-
 conditional context for producing low-density samples w.r.t. a specific class. See Section B for de-
 tails on the extension. This broad applicability that encompasses both unconditional and conditional
 settings is a key advantage of our approach compared to existing methods for minority generation,
 which are limited to supervised (i.e., annotation-available) settings only (Yu et al., 2020; Lin et al.,
 2022; Sehwag et al., 2022).

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide empirical demonstrations that validate our proposals and arguments
through the image generation task, considering both unconditional and class-conditional scenarios.
To this end, we first clarify the setup used in our demonstrations (see Section C for more details) and
then provide results for our approach in comparison with existing frameworks. A comprehensive
collection of our experimental results can be found in Section E.

4.1   S ETUP

Datasets. Our experiments are conducted on six real benchmarks: four unconditional and two
class-conditional datasets. For the unconditional settings, we employ CelebA 642 (Liu et al., 2015),


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Comparison of neighborhood density on LSUN-Bedrooms. “Real” refers to the training set
of LSUN-Bedrooms. “DDPM (standard)” indicates ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral
sampling, while “DDPM (ours)” is ours. The higher values, the less likely samples for all measures.

CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and LSUN-Bedrooms 2562 (Yu et al., 2015). In addition to
the three unconditional natural image benchmarks, we employ a medical dataset to demonstrate the
practical importance of our work. Specifically, we consider an in-house (IRB-approved) brain MRI
dataset containing 13,640 axial slice images, where minorities are instances that exhibit degenerative
disease like cerebral atrophy. The MRI images are standard 3T T1-weighted with 2562 resolution.
We use ImageNet 642 and 2562 (Deng et al., 2009) for the class-conditional generation. To further
investigate the performance on long-tailed data, we additionally incorporate a famous benchmark
specifically manipulated to exhibit long-tailed characteristics: CIFAR-10-LT (Cao et al., 2019).
Baselines. We consider three prominent GAN-based frameworks for the unconditional cases: (i)
BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019); (ii) StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019); (iii) StyleGAN2-ADA (Karras
et al., 2020). In addition to the GAN baselines, we employ a standard sampler for diffusion models,
ancestral sampling (a.k.a. the DDPM sampling) (Ho et al., 2020), which we implement with the
pretrained diffusion models used in each benchmarks (e.g., ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) on
CelebA). The BigGAN models are employed for CelebA and CIFAR-10, and we use StyleGAN for
LSUN-Bedrooms, while StyleGAN2-ADA is compared in our brain MRI experiments. The DDPM
sampling is employed in all three unconditional datasets. To explore potential benefits that may
come from the use of minority labels, we incorporate an additional baseline on the CelebA dataset,
which conditionally generates minority instances using the classifier guidance and minority annota-
tions available in the data (e.g., “Eyeglasses”) (Yu et al., 2020). We also incorporate an unconditional
version of Sehwag et al. (2022) on CelebA, which we specifically tailor the original method (devel-
oped for class-conditional datasets) for the use in unconditional data. For LSUN-Bedrooms, we
additionally consider LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), a famous latent-based framework extensively
used in various applications. For the class-conditional ImageNet, we consider two baselines, the
standard DDPM sampler and Sehwag et al. (2022). On CIFAR-10-LT, our approach is compared
with Qin et al. (2023) and ancestral sampling.
Evaluation metrics. For the purpose of evaluating the generation capability of low-density sam-
ples, we incorporate three distinct measures for describing the density of neighborhoods: (i) Average
k-Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN); (ii) Local Outlier Factor (LOF) (Breunig et al., 2000); (iii) Rarity
Score (Han et al., 2022). For all three measures, a higher value indicates that a given sample is less
likely than its neighboring samples (Sehwag et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022). Additionally to investi-
gate fidelity and diversity of generated samples, we employ a set of quantitative metrics: (i) Clean
Fréchet Inception Distance (cFID) (Parmar et al., 2022); (ii) Spatial FID (sFID) (Nash et al., 2021);
(iii) Improved Precision & Recall (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019). Since we are interested in producing
high-quality diverse samples close to real low-density data, we use the most unique samples (e.g.,
yielding the highest AvgkNNs) as baseline real data for computing these quality metrics.

4.2   R ESULTS

Validation of the roles of ˜l and w. Figure 3 illustrates the impacts of the control parameters of
minority guidance on likelihood distributions of generated samples. Observe in the left plot that
increasing the minority class ˜l yields the LOF density shifting toward high-LOF (i.e., low-likelihood)
regions, demonstrating the capability of our sampler to encourage generations of minorities. On the
other hand, the right plot of Figure 3 exhibits that an increase of the classifier scale w makes the
density squeezing toward high likelihood regions. This showcases the controllability of minority


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Method         cFID     sFID    Prec    Rec        Method          cFID     sFID    Prec    Rec

    CelebA 64×64                                       LSUN Bedrooms 256×256
    ADM           75.05     16.73    0.97   0.23       ADM        62.83 7.49            0.89    0.16
    ADM-ML        51.66     13.04    0.94   0.31       LDM        63.61 7.19            0.90    0.13
    BigGAN        80.41     16.51    0.97   0.19       StyleGAN   56.45 5.96            0.87    0.13
    Sehwag et al. 27.97     10.17    0.82   0.42       Ours       41.52 6.67            0.87    0.10
    Ours          26.98     8.23     0.89   0.34

    ImageNet 256×256                                   Brain MRI 256×256
    ADM           17.41     12.85    0.87   0.35       ADM          21.71      14.30    0.82    0.37
    Sehwag et al. 13.43      9.88    0.85   0.42       StyleGAN2a 22.69        23.07    0.53    0.28
    Ours          13.83      7.82    0.85   0.45       Ours         19.73      13.36    0.84    0.47

Table 1: Comparison of sample quality and diversity for generating minority samples. “ADM-
ML” refers to a classifier-guided sampler implemented on ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which
conditions on Minority Labels. The best results are marked in bold.

guidance on the strength of features associated with the selected minority class (e.g., ˜l = 0 in
Figure 3), which also aligns with the well-known role of w emphasized in Dhariwal & Nichol
(2021). See Figures 15 and 16 (in Section E) for generated samples that visualize these impacts.
Comparison with the baselines. Figure 4 compares generated samples on LSUN-Bedrooms. Ob-
serve that our sampler produces more exquisite and unique images than the two baseline methods.
Notably, it often encourages some monotonous-looking features generated by the standard DDPM
sampler to be more novel, e.g., with inclusions of additional objects. We found that such sophisti-
cated attributes are in fact novel features that yield high minority score values in LSUN-Bedrooms
(see Figure 2 for instance). Figure 5 exhibits generated samples on the brain MRI benchmark. We
see that our sampler are more likely to generate minority instances of the dataset (e.g., containing
severe brain atrophy) compared to the baseline methods (see Figure 13 for visualizations of the
minorities). We highlight that the minority-generating capability of our sampler persists even on
this particular type of data containing distinctive visual aspects, further demonstrating the practical
significance of our method. We leave the generated samples on the other datasets in Section E.
Figure 6 compares our focused density measures on LSUN-Bedrooms. Note that minority guidance
outperforms the baselines in generating unique samples for all three measures, which corroborates
the visual inspections made on Figure 4. We leave the density results on the other datasets in Sec-
tion E. Table 1 exhibits quality and diversity evaluations on four challenging benchmarks (see Ta-
ble 7 for the results on the CIFAR-10 settings and ImageNet-64). For baseline real data, we employ
the most unique samples that yield the highest AvgkNN values. Additional evaluations using other
criteria for collecting baseline data can be found in Section E; see Table 8 therein. Observe that
our sampler yields better (or comparable) results than the baselines in all metrics, demonstrating
its ability to produce realistic and diverse samples close to the real minorities. For a more robust
evaluation on the MRI data containing distinctive features (hence may not be interpretable in the
ImageNet-based feature space), we provide evaluations based on a domain-specific feature space
that could admit our MRI data; see Section E for details.

5     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
We emphasized that Tweedie-based denoiser is inherently biased to produce high-likelihood major-
ity samples. In light of this, we introduced a novel metric to evaluate the uniqueness of features
and developed a sampling technique that can serve to generate novel-featured minority samples. We
demonstrated that the proposed sampler greatly improves the capability of producing high-quality
minority samples even on high-stake applications like medical imaging.
One disadvantage is that our approach requires the construction of a minority classifier, which is
often computationally expensive when the size of a given dataset is huge. Hence, we believe one
promising future direction is to push the boundary towards the challenging scenarios that are data-
restricted while addressing the computation issue.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

The brain MRI images employed in our experiments were obtained exclusively for in-house pur-
poses and are not publicly accessible. We emphasize that our MRI dataset has been rigorously
reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB), ensuring strict compliance with
ethical standards. This includes meticulous attention to informed consent procedures and robust
data anonymization protocols.
A potential risk due to our sampler is that it could be used maliciously to suppress the generation of
minority-featured samples. This could be achieved, for instance, by using low values of ˜l in Eq. (8),
i.e., focusing on producing instances containing majority features. It is important to be aware of
this risk and to ensure that our proposed framework is used responsibly to promote fairness and
inclusivity in generative modeling.


R EPRODUCIBILITY

To ensure the reproducibility of our experiments, we provide a thorough description regarding our
four publicly available benchmark real datasets: CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009), LSUN-Bedrooms (Yu et al., 2015), and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). For our in-
house brain MRI dataset which is unable to open to the public, we describe in detail on its char-
acteristics and the way of gathering. All these settings including the choices of hyperparameters
are presented in Section C. We also provide the average running time of our algorithm together
with specific computer configuration details in the same section. Lastly, to facilitate replication,
we make our code available in a public repository: https://github.com/soobin-um/
minority-guidance.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by National Research foundation of Korea (NRF) (No. RS-2023-
00262527), by Field-oriented Technology Development Project for Customs Administration through
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT and Korea
Customs Service (No. NRF-2021M3I1A1097938), by the Korea Medical Device Development Fund
grant funded by the Korea government (the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Ministry of Trade, In-
dustry and Energy, the Ministry of Health & Welfare, the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety) (Project
Number: 1711137899, KMDF PR 20200901 0015), by Culture, Sports and Tourism R&D Program
through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and
Tourism in 2023, and by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2019-0-00075 Artificial Intelligence Graduate
School Program (KAIST)).


R EFERENCES
Alexander Amini, Ava P Soleimany, Wilko Schwarting, Sangeeta N Bhatia, and Daniela Rus. Un-
  covering and mitigating algorithmic bias through learned latent structure. In Proceedings of the
  2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 289–295, 2019.

Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T Ng, and Jörg Sander. Lof: identifying density-
 based local outliers. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
 Management of data, pp. 93–104, 2000.

Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Kaidi Cao, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, Nikos Arechiga, and Tengyu Ma. Learning imbalanced
  datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Kristy Choi, Aditya Grover, Trisha Singh, Rui Shu, and Stefano Ermon. Fair generative modeling
  via weak supervision. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML). PMLR, 2020.
Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion
  posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14687, 2022a.
Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, Dohoon Ryu, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving diffusion models for
  inverse problems using manifold constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00941, 2022b.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Izrail Moiseevitch Gelfand, Richard A Silverman, et al. Calculus of variations. Courier Corporation,
   2000.
Jiyeon Han, Hwanil Choi, Yunjey Choi, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jaesik Choi. Rarity
   score: A new metric to evaluate the uncommonness of synthesized images. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2206.08549, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Natural adver-
  sarial examples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15262–15271, 2021.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Gaofeng Huang and Amir Hossein Jafari. Enhanced balancing gan: Minority-class image genera-
  tion. Neural computing and applications, 35(7):5145–5154, 2023.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training
  generative adversarial networks with limited data. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00364, 2022.
Dongjun Kim, Yeongmin Kim, Wanmo Kang, and Il-Chul Moon. Refining generative process with
  discriminator guidance in score-based diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.17091, 2022.
Kwanyoung Kim and Jong Chul Ye. Noise2score: tweedie’s approach to self-supervised image
 denoising without clean images. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:864–
 874, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Tuomas Kynkäänniemi, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Improved
  precision and recall metric for assessing generative models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Seul Lee, Jaehyeong Jo, and Sung Ju Hwang. Exploring chemical space with score-based out-of-
  distribution generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07632, 2022.
Zinan Lin, Hao Liang, Giulia Fanti, Vyas Sekar, Rahul Anand Sharma, Elahe Soltanaghaei, Anthony
  Rowe, Hun Namkung, Zaoxing Liu, Daehyeok Kim, et al. Raregan: Generating samples for rare
  classes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10674, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Ziwei Liu, Zhongqi Miao, Xiaohang Zhan, Jiayun Wang, Boqing Gong, and Stella X Yu. Large-
  scale long-tailed recognition in an open world. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2537–2546, 2019.
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Seong Joon Oh, Youngjung Uh, Yunjey Choi, and Jaejun Yoo. Reliable
 fidelity and diversity metrics for generative models. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 7176–7185. PMLR, 2020.
Charlie Nash, Jacob Menick, Sander Dieleman, and Peter W Battaglia. Generating images with
  sparse representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03841, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Gaurav Parmar, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. On aliased resizing and surprising subtleties in
  gan evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 11410–11420, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yiming Qin, Huangjie Zheng, Jiangchao Yao, Mingyuan Zhou, and Ya Zhang. Class-balancing
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00562, 2023.
Herbert E Robbins. An empirical bayes approach to statistics. In Breakthroughs in statistics, pp.
  388–394. Springer, 1992.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Hee Jung Ryu, Hartwig Adam, and Margaret Mitchell. Inclusivefacenet: Improving face attribute
  detection with race and gender diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00193, 2017.
Dvir Samuel, Rami Ben-Ari, Simon Raviv, Nir Darshan, and Gal Chechik. It is all about where you
  start: Text-to-image generation with seed selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14530, 2023.
Vikash Sehwag, Caner Hazirbas, Albert Gordo, Firat Ozgenel, and Cristian Canton. Generating high
  fidelity data from low-density regions using diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11492–11501, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yapeng Teng, Haoyang Li, Fuzhen Cai, Ming Shao, and Siyu Xia. Unsupervised visual defect
  detection with score-based generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16092, 2022.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Deep image prior. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9446–9454, 2018.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Julia Wolleb, Florentin Bieder, Robin Sandkühler, and Philippe C Cattin. Diffusion models for
  medical anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04306, 2022.
Julian Wyatt, Adam Leach, Sebastian M Schmon, and Chris G Willcocks. Anoddpm: Anomaly
  detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using simplex noise. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 650–656, 2022.
Zhisheng Xiao, Karsten Kreis, and Arash Vahdat. Tackling the generative learning trilemma with
  denoising diffusion gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07804, 2021.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.03365, 2015.
Ning Yu, Ke Li, Peng Zhou, Jitendra Malik, Larry Davis, and Mario Fritz. Inclusive gan: Improving
  data and minority coverage in generative models. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 377–393. Springer, 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.
Yue Zhao, Zain Nasrullah, and Zheng Li. Pyod: A python toolbox for scalable outlier detec-
  tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(96):1–7, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/
  papers/v20/19-011.html.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS

A.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1. Consider the DSM optimization in Eq. (2). Assume that a given noise-conditioned
score network sθ (xt , t) have enough capacity. Then for each timestep t, the optimality of the score
network is achievable at:

                            s∗θ (xt , t) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )] .


Proof. Since the score network sθ (xt , t) is assumed to be large enough, it can achieve the
global optimum that minimizes the DSM objectives for all timesteps regardless of their weights
in Eq. (2) (Song et al., 2020a). Hence, we can safely ignore the weighted sum and focus on the
DSM objective for a specific timestep t to derive s∗θ (xt , t):

           s∗θ (xt , t) = arg min Eq(x0 )qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ],   (9)
                              sθ ∈S

where we consider the optimization over function space sθ ∈ S instead of the parameter space
θ ∈ Θ for the ease of analysis. The objective function in Eq. (9) can be rewritten as:

             Eq(x0 )qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ]
             Z Z
           =        q(x0 )qαt (xt | x0 )∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 dxt dx0
             Z Z
           =        qαt (xt )qαt (x0 | xt )∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 dx0 dxt .
                |                                     {z                              }
                                                  =:L(sθ ,xt )

Since the objective function in Eq. (9) is a functional and convex w.r.t. sθ , we can apply the Euler-
Lagrange equation (Gelfand et al., 2000) to come up with a condition for the optimality:
                     Z
      ∂L
          =0 ⇒          qαt (xt )qαt (x0 | xt ) · 2 {s∗θ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )} dx0 = 0.
     ∂sθ
Rearranging the RHS of the arrow gives:
             Z
               qαt (xt )qαt (x0 | xt ) · 2 {s∗θ (xt , t) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )} dx0 = 0
                        Z                          Z
         ⇒ s∗θ (xt , t) qαt (x0 | xt ) dx0 = qαt (x0 | xt )∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 ) dx0

          ⇒ s∗θ (xt , t) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )] .

This completes the proof.

A.2   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1

Corollary 1. Minority score, when defined with the squared-error distance loss ∥ · ∥22 , is equivalent
to the noise prediction error w.r.t. timestep t up to scaling:

                              l(x0 ; s∗θ ) = w̃t Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ∗θ (xt , t) − ϵ∥22 ,


where w̃t := (1 − αt )/αt .


Proof. We start from the definition of minority score in Eq. (7):

                                  l(x0 ; s∗θ ) := Eqαt (xt |x0 ) [d(x0 , x̂0 )].


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Plugging the squared-error loss and further manipulations then yield:
                   l(x0 ; s∗θ ) := Eqαt (xt |x0 ) [d(x0 , x̂0 )] = Eqαt (xt |x0 ) [∥x0 − x̂0 ∥22 ]
                                                   "                                                 #
                                                                                                   2
                                                                1           √
                                 = Eqαt (xt |x0 ) x0 − √ {xt − 1 − αt ϵ∗θ (xt , t)}
                                                                αt                                 2
                                          " √                                 2
                                                                                #
                                                 1 − αt ∗
                                 = Ep(ϵ)         √        {ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵ}
                                                    αt                        2
                                   1 − αt             ∗                 2

                                 =         Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵ∥2
                                      αt
                                 = w̃t Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ∗θ (xt , t) − ϵ∥22 ,

                                                                                                           (10)

where w̃t := (1 − αt )/αt . The second equality is due to the Tweedie’s  √ formula (i.e., Eq. (4)) to-
gether with the noise-predicting expression s∗θ (xt , t) = −ϵ∗θ (xt , t)/ 1 − αt , and the third equality
follows from the DDPM forward process in Eq. (1)). This completes the proof.


B     E XTENSION TO C LASS -C ONDITIONAL S ETTINGS

We continue from Section 3 of the main paper and explore how to extend our proposed framework
toward class-conditional settings. To this end, we first provide a brief background on conditional
diffusion models that will be used throughout this section. After that, we elaborate extensions of our
metric and guided sampler to our interested class-conditional context.

B.1   BACKGROUND ON CONDITIONAL DIFFUSION MODELS

Consider joint density q(x0 , c) = q(c)q(x0 |c) where c is a random variable (or vector) that in-
dicates a specific condition w.r.t. data (e.g., “Water tower” in ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)).
The reverse process to model conditional density q(x0 |c) can be defined as pθ (xt−1 |xt , c) :=
N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t, c), βt I) where {βt }Tt=1 is the same noise schedule as in Section 2. Similar to
the unconditional setting, we can express the mean of the reverse conditional density by employ-
                                             1
ing a score network: µθ (xt , t, c) = √1−β       (xt + βt sθ (xt , t, c)). The score network is designed
                                               t
to approximate class-conditional score function ∇xt log qαt (xt |c) and therefore parameterizable as
sθ (xt , t, c) := ∇xt log pθ (xt |c). The conditional score network can be trained with a variant of
denoising score matching similar to the unconditional case:
                     T
                     X
             min           wt Eq(c)q(x0 |c)qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ].   (11)
               θ
                     t=1

where wt := 1 − αt . Given the optimal score network s∗θ (xt , t, c) obtained via Eq. (11), the same
ancestral sampling can be used for producing samples from pθ (x0 |c) ≈ q(x0 |c):
                                      1
                      xt−1 = √             (xt + βt s∗θ (xt , t, c)) + βt z, z ∼ N (0, I).                 (12)
                                    1 − βt

B.2   E XTENSION OF MINORITY SCORE

Our first step is extending Tweedie’s formula to the class-conditional setting that we described
in Section B.1. Let us consider labeled sample (x0 , c) ∼ q(x0 , c) and its noised version
xt ∼ qαt (xt |x0 ). For denoising, one can naturally think of using a variant of Tweedie’s formula by
replacing s∗θ (xt , t) in Eq. (6) with s∗θ (xt , t, c):
                                              1
                                  x̂0 (c) := √ (xt + (1 − αt )s∗θ (xt , t, c)) .                           (13)
                                              αt
In fact, this natural extension yields the posterior mean of the clean sample E[x0 |xt , c]; see the
following proposition for a formal description and the proof.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Real samples with the smallest (left column), moderate (middle column), and the highest
(right column) minority score. An extended version of minority score (i.e., Eq. (16)) is used on the
class-conditional ImageNet 64 × 64. We employ Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (Zhang
et al., 2018) for d(·, ·) in Eq. (16). The considered classes are as follows: water tower (top row),
bald eagle (top-middle row), joystick (middle-bottom row), and espresso maker (bottom row).


Proposition 2. Suppose that the optimal score network s∗θ (xt , t, c) trained via the DSM optimiza-
tion in Eq. (11) is available. Then for a given labeled sample (x0 , c) ∼ q(x0 , c) and its noised
version xt ∼ qαt (xt |x0 ), the posterior mean E[x0 |xt , c] is achievable at:
                                                 1
                     x̂0 (c) := E[x0 |xt , c] = √ (xt + (1 − αt )s∗θ (xt , t, c)) .
                                                 αt

Proof. As a first step, we obtain an analytic form of the optimal score network s∗θ (xt , t, c) via the
following lemma which is in fact an extension of Proposition 1 into the class-conditional context:
Lemma 1. Consider the DSM optimization in Eq. (11). Assume that a given noise-conditioned
score network sθ (xt , t, c) have enough capacity. Then for each timestep t and a given condition c,
the optimality of the score network is achievable at:
                          s∗θ (xt , t, c) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ,c) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )] .         (14)

Proof. The proof techniques are essentially the same as the ones used in Proposition 1. Since we
assume the score network sθ (xt , t, c) to have enough capacity, the global optimal point for all
timesteps and classes is achievable regardless of {wt }Tt=1 in Eq. (11). Therefore, we can focus on
the DSM optimization w.r.t. a specific timestep t and a particular class c to obtain s∗θ (xt , t, c):
      s∗θ (xt , t, c) = arg min Eq(x0 |c)qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ].   (15)
                           sθ ∈S
Note that we consider the optimization over function space sθ ∈ S rather than the parameter space
θ ∈ Θ for simplicity. Rewriting the objective function in Eq. (15) gives:
         Eq(x0 |c)qαt (xt |x0 ) [∥sθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 ]
          Z Z
       =        q(x0 | c)qαt (xt | x0 )∥sθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 dxt dx0
          Z Z
       =        qαt (xt | c)qαt (x0 | xt , c)∥sθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )∥22 dx0 dxt .
            |                                          {z                                  }
                                                  =:L(sθ ,xt )



                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As in Proposition 1, we employ the Euler-Lagrange equation for L(sθ , xt ) to come up with a con-
dition for the optimality:
                  Z
  ∂L
       =0 ⇒         qαt (xt | c)qαt (x0 | xt , c) · 2 {s∗θ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )} dx0 = 0.
 ∂sθ
The RHS of the arrow can be rewritten as:
        Z
           qαt (xt | c)qαt (x0 | xt , c) · 2 {s∗θ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )} dx0 = 0
                      Z                             Z
          ∗
     ⇒ sθ (xt , t, c) qαt (x0 | xt , c) dx0 = qαt (x0 | xt , c)∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 ) dx0

        ⇒ s∗θ (xt , t, c) = Eqαt (x0 |xt ,c) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )] .
This completes the proof of Lemma 1.

The remaining part is straightforward. Plugging the optimal score formula (i.e., Eq. (14)) into the
RHS of Eq. (13) yields:
                         1
                        √ (xt + (1 − αt )s∗θ (xt , t, c))
                          αt
                         1
                      =√       xt + (1 − αt )Eqαt (x0 |xt ,c) [∇xt log qαt (xt | x0 )]
                          αt
                                                                       √
                                                                 xt − αt x0

                         1
                      =√        xt + (1 − αt )Eqαt (x0 |xt ,c) −
                          αt                                         1 − αt
                      = Eqαt (x0 |xt ,c) [x0 ]
                      = E [x0 | xt , c] .
This completes the proof of Proposition 2. Note that when considering the case where c applies to
all data, this also serves as a formal proof of Eq. (4), confirming that Tweedie’s formula yields a
posterior mean (Chung et al., 2022a).

Then by employing the same intuition as in the unconditional setting, we develop a variant of mi-
nority score tailored for the class-conditional context:
                                 l(x0 , c; s∗θ ) := Eqαt (xt |x0 ) [d(x0 , x̂0 (c))],                          (16)

where s∗θ now indicates the class-conditioned score model s∗θ (xt , t, c). Notice that when geared
with this conditional version, one can figure out whether a given sample x0 is minority regarding a
specific class c, thus being capable to serve as an outlier metric in the class-conditional context. See
Figure 7 for visualization of the effectiveness of the extended minority score.

B.3    E XTENSION OF MINORITY GUIDANCE

As in the unconditional case, we employ the classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) for
imposing the condition on the uniqueness. A distinction here is that now we have to handle two
conditioning variables, i.e., c and l, which involves careful consideration and coordination to en-
sure effective guidance and control over the sampling process. Below we describe in detail on our
approach to attain this.
                                 (i)              i.i.d.                                              ∗
Consider labeled dataset {(x0 , c(i) )}Ni=1 ∼ q(x0 , c) and conditional diffusion model sθ (xt , t, c)
pretrained on that dataset. Similar to the unconditional case, one can compute minority score for
                                                                              (i)
each paired sample via Eq. (16) and get l(1) , . . . , l(N ) where l(i) := l(x0 , c(i) ; s∗θ ), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
For categorizing minority score values, we take an intra-class approach to better capture the unique-
ness of features associated with each individual class-condition. Specifically for each class c ∈ C
(available in the dataset), we first aggregate the associated minority score values {l(i) }i∈Sc where
Sc := {i : c(i) = c}. We then categorize them by applying L − 1 distinct threshold levels where


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Generated samples by the extended minority guidance over various minority classes. Three
different minority classes are considered: ˜l = 0 (left column), ˜l = 12 (middle column), and ˜l = 24
(right column). The same ImageNet classes as in Figure 7 are considered for generation: water
tower (top row), bald eagle (top-middle row), joystick (middle-bottom row), and espresso maker
(bottom row). We share the same random seed for each row.


L is shared across all classes c ∈ C 4 . This yields the categorized minority scores w.r.t. condi-
tion c: ˜l(c(1) ), . . . , ˜l(c(N ) ) ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1} where ˜l(c) = 0 and ˜l(c) = L − 1 indicate the
minority classes w.r.t. the most common and the rarest features regarding condition c, respec-
tively. We then couple the ordinal minority scores with the associated paired samples to construct
                         (1)                            (N )
a tripled dataset (x0 , c(1) , ˜l(c(1) )), . . . , (x0 , c(N ) , ˜l(c(N ) )). We employ this dataset for training
a (class-conditioned) minority predictor pψ ˜l|xt , c that classifies ˜l for perturbed input xt given
class-condition c. After training, we mix the given score model s∗θ (xt , t, c) with the log-gradient of
the classifier as in Eq. (5) to yield a modified score:
                             ŝθ xt , t, c, ˜l := s∗θ (xt , t, c) + w∇xt log pψ ˜l | xt , c .

                                                                                                             (17)
Using this blended score as a drop-in replacement of s∗θ (xt , t, c) in Eq. (12) then implements con-
                                                                                                      w
ditional generation w.r.t. both c and ˜l, e.g., according to p̂θ (xt |c, ˜l) ∝ pθ (xt |c)pψ ˜l|xt , c . For
hyperparameters ˜l and w in Eq. (17), we provide visualizations on their respective influences in
Figures 8 and 17; see details therein. We empirically found that our extended minority guidance
offers better (or comparable) performance to existing class-conditional low-density samplers such
as Sehwag et al. (2022). See Sections 4.2 and E for explicit details.

C    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Categorization strategy. For the threshold levels to compart the raw minority scores (i.e., ones
that are used to turn l(i) into ˜l(i) in Section 3.3), we observed that a naive equally-spaced thresh-
olds yield significant imbalance in the size of classes (e.g., extremely small numbers of samples in
highly unique classes), which would then yield negative impacts in the performance of the classifier
especially against the small-sized classes. Hence, we resort to splitting the minority scores based on
their quantiles. When L = 10 for instance, we categorize the minority scores such that ˜l = 9 (˜l = 0)
   4
     We may assign different numbers of thresholds for distinct classes, say L(c), especially when a given
dataset contains highly imbalanced distributions of classes.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


becomes the samples with the top (bottom) 10% of the uniquely-featured samples. For the number
of classes L, using ones that yield benign numbers of samples per each class (e.g., over 50 samples)
chosen based on the size of a given dataset usually offers good performances. See Section D.3 for
demonstration. We also found that L can serve as a control knob for balancing the faithfulness of
the guidance with the controllability over the uniqueness of features; see Section D.3 for details.
Medical imaging dataset. The brain MRI benchmark used in our experiments is a subset of an IRB-
approved volumetric dataset that consists of 236,288 2D images with 923 volumes (i.e., images from
923 distinct subjects). All volumes are in the shape of 256 × 256 × 256 cube and standard 3T T1-
weighted images with 1mm thickness. The raw (volumetric) dataset has two different data sources,
where 482 (out of 923) volumes are from Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
dataset, comprising 271 subjects with probable dementia and 211 subjects with normal cognition.
The remaining 441 volumes were collected from a university hospital’s voluntary health screening
program, with a group of participants that have normal cognition. For the use of this volumetric data
in our experiments, we chose 20 specific slice positions (per each volume) that prominently exhibit
abnormal features in the dataset (e.g., brain atrophy). We extracted these selected 20 slices from all
652 volumes with normal features, while for the 271 abnormal volumes, we deliberately restricted
our selection to only 30 volumes to ensure a low likelihood of encountering the abnormal features.
The selected 13,640 slice images are normalized to fall within the range of [0, 1] (per slice).
Pretrained models. The backbone diffusion model for the CelebA results is constructed using the
architecture and the training setting used for ImageNet 64×64 in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021)5 . For the
unconditional CIFAR-10 model, we employ the checkpoint provided in Nichol & Dhariwal (2021)6
without fine-tuning or modification. The pretrained models for LSUN-Bedrooms and ImageNet
were taken from Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) and used without modifications. For the brain MRI
results, we train the backbone model by employing the same architecture and the setting used for
LSUN-Bedrooms in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021).
Classifiers for minority guidance. The classifiers used for minority guidance are based on the
encoder architecture of U-Net used in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). Except for LSUN-Bedrooms, we
employ all training samples for constructing the minority classifiers (e.g., N = 50000 for CIFAR-
10). On the other hand, only a 10% of the training samples are used for LSUN-Bedrooms7 . For the
number of minority classes L, we take L = 100 for the three unconditional natural image datasets
and L = 25 for ImageNet and CIFAR-10-LT. We use L = 50 for the brain MRI experiments.
We construct the minority classifier used on LSUN-Bedrooms by employing a 10% of the training
samples provided in a publicly available Kaggle repository8 . Specifically for the LSUN-Bedrooms
and ImageNet classifiers, we employ pretrained feature extractors to encourage efficient training as
in (Kim et al., 2022). More precisely, we put (xt , t) to a feature extractor, and extract the latent zt of
xt from the last pooling layer of the extractor network. We then feed (zt , t) to a minority classifier
and predict its minority class ˜l. For the feature extractors, we employ the pretrained ImageNet
classifiers provided in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) and freeze them during training (as in (Kim et al.,
2022)). The classifier architecture for LSUN-Bedrooms is the same as the shallow U-Net used for
ImageNet 256 × 256 in (Kim et al., 2022). For ImageNet, we employ the shallow U-Net architecture
used for CelebA in (Kim et al., 2022) with class-conditioning (to incorporate c in Eq. (17)). The
classifier architecture for the brain MRI experiments is the same as the one used in Wolleb et al.
(2022). See Table 2 for explicit details.
Baselines. The BigGAN model for the CIFAR-10 experiments are trained with the setting provided
in the author’s official project page9 . For the CelebA model, we respect the architecture used in Choi
et al. (2020)10 and follow the same training setup as the CIFAR-10 model. We employ StyleGAN
for LSUN-Bedrooms using the checkpoint provided in Karras et al. (2019)11 . To obtain the baseline

   5
      https://github.com/openai/guided-diffusion
   6
      https://github.com/openai/improved-diffusion
    7
      We found that the performance of minority guidance is indeed affected by the number of samples employed
for constructing the minority classifier. See Section D.4 for details.
    8
      https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jhoward/lsun_bedroom
    9
      https://github.com/ajbrock/BigGAN-PyTorch
   10
      https://github.com/ermongroup/fairgen
   11
      https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           CelebA       CIFAR-10          LSUN          ImageNet        Brain MRI
 Feature extractor
 Model                     Unused         Unused           ADM             ADM            Unused
 Input shape                 ✗              ✗          (B,256,256,3)    (B,64,64,3)         ✗
 Output shape                ✗              ✗           (B,8,8,512)     (B,8,8,512)         ✗

 U-Net encoder architecture
 Input shape             (B,64,64,3)    (B,32,32,3)     (B,8,8,512)     (B,8,8,512)    (B,256,256,1)
 Output shape              (B,100)        (B,100)         (B,100)         (B,25)           (B,50)
 Diffusion steps             1000           4000           1000            1000             1000
 Noise schedule             cosine         cosine          linear         cosine           linear
 Channels                     64             32             128             128              32
 Depth                         2              2               2               4               4
 Channels multiple         1,2,3,4        1,2,2,4             1               1         1,1,2,2,4,4
 Heads channels               64             64              64              64              64
 Attention resolution      32,16,8          16,8              8               8           32,16,8
 BigGAN up/down               ✓              ✓                ✗              ✗               ✓
 Attention pooling            ✓              ✓               ✓               ✓               ✓
 Class-conditional            ✗              ✗                ✗              ✓                ✗

 Training setup
 Weight decay               0.05           0.05            0.05             0.2             0.05
 Batch size                 256            128             256             1024             256
 Iterations                 20K            12K             60K             60K               5K
 Learning rate              3e-4           3e-4            3e-4            6e-4             3e-4

 Sampling
 Minority class (˜l)     U{90, 99}      U {85, 99}           99              24         U{45, 49}
 Classifier scale (w)      4.0             8.0              3.5             2.5           1.5
 NFE                       250             250              250             250           250


Table 2: Training and sampling configurations for our proposed sampler, minority guidance. “ADM”
is the diffusion model framework proposed in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). “cosine” refers to noise
schedule proposed in Nichol & Dhariwal (2021), and “linear” indicates linearly-spaced noise sched-
ule used in the original DDPM (Ho et al., 2020).


StyleGAN2-ADA model for our MRI experiments, we respect the settings provided in the official
codebase12 and train the model by ourselves. The DDPM baseline and Sehwag et al. (2022) share the
same pretrained diffusion models as ours. Since there is no open codebase for Sehwag et al. (2022),
we implement their method by ourselves by following the descriptions provided in the original pa-
per (Sehwag et al., 2022). More specifically, we employ the same pretrained diffusion model as ours,
i.e., the ImageNet checkpoint provided in (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). The classifier used in their
sampler is imported from Dhariwal & Nichol (2021), and the real-fake discriminator is constructed
via the same architecture and the training setting used in Sehwag et al. (2022). For the additional
CelebA baseline that uses the classifier guidance targeting minority annotations, we construct a pre-
dictor that classifies four minority attributes: (i) “Bald”; (ii) “Eyeglasses”; (iii) “Mustache”; (iv)
“Wearing Hat”. During inference time, we produced samples with random combinations of the four
attributes (e.g., bald hair yet not wearing glasses) using the classifier guidance. We use the same
pretrained model as DDPM and ours for the additional CelebA baseline.
Evaluation metrics. We employ implementation from PyOD (Zhao et al., 2019)13 to compute Av-
erage k-Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN) and Local Outlier Factor (LOF) (Breunig et al., 2000). We
respect the conventional choices for the numbers of nearest neighbors for computing the measures:
  12
       https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan2-ada-pytorch
  13
       https://pyod.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5 (AvgkNN) and 20 (LOF). As in (Sehwag et al., 2022), the two metrics are computed in the feature
space of ResNet-50. We compute Rarity Score (Han et al., 2022) with k = 5 using implementation
provided in the official project page14 . To evaluate the three neighborhood measures for the brain
MRI dataset whose modality is distinctive (from that of natural images), we employ a random em-
bedding space which has been demonstrated as being particularly instrumental when interpreting
data type different from that of natural images (Ulyanov et al., 2018; Naeem et al., 2020). More
specifically, we employ a randomly-initialized feature space of ResNet-50. Additionally to the ran-
dom embedding space, we further investigate the neighborhood measures on an adapted feature
space which is constructed by fine-tuning a pretrained DINO (Caron et al., 2021) on our brain MRI
dataset. The fine-tuning is performed on ViT-B/16 architecture respecting the same training setting
provided in the official codebase15 yet with decreased learning rate by tenth.
The computations of clean Fréchet Inception Distance (cFID) (Parmar et al., 2022) are due to the
official implementation16 . For computing spatial FID (Nash et al., 2021), we modify the official
pytorch FID (Heusel et al., 2017)17 to use spatial features (i.e., the first 7 channels from the inter-
mediate mixed 6/conv feature maps), rather than the standard pool 3 inception features. The
results of Improved Precision & Recall (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019) are obtained with k = 5 based
on the official codebase of (Han et al., 2022). For the brain MRI data, we additionally report the
quality metrics evaluated in the DINO fine-tuned feature space (see the above paragraph for de-
tails on the fine-tuning). In an effort to evaluate the closeness to our focused low-density data, we
employ the most unique samples as baseline real data for computing the quality metrics. More pre-
cisely, we employ the 10K and 5K real samples yielding the highest AvgkNN values for CelebA and
CIFAR-10, respectively. For LSUN-Bedrooms and ImageNet, the most unique 50K samples with
the highest AvgkNNs are employed for baseline real data. We employ the most unique 1K sam-
ples for constructing the MRI baseline data. All quality metrics are computed with 50K generated
samples.
Computational complexity. The inference time of our minority guidance is in line with that of
classifier guidance by Dhariwal & Nichol (2021), which takes approximately 0.15 seconds per image
with 250 NFE in our CIFAR-10 experiments. On the other hand, the baseline ancestral sampling
(with the same 250 NFE) spends 0.12 seconds per image on the same dataset, which is relatively
cheap due to the absence of the classifier guidance in the sampling process. In addition to the
inference time, our sampler requires some time for the construction of a minority classifier, which
totals around 23 minutes for the CIFAR-10 dataset. Specifically, 3 minutes are dedicated to the
minority-class labeling process (which is described in Section 3.3), while 20 minutes are spent on
the classifier training. All these results were obtained using a single A100 GPU.
Other details. For the distance measure in minority score (i.e., d(·, ·) in Eq. (7)), we employ Learned
Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018) for all of our experiments; see
Section D.1 for empirical evidence that supports this choice. For the perturbation timestep used
for computing minority score (i.e., t in Eq. (7)), we employ t = 0.9T for the models pretrained
with the cosine schedule (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) and t = 0.6T for the ones built with the linear
schedule (Ho et al., 2020), where T indicates the total number of steps that a given backbone model
is trained with. For instance, we use t = 900 on CelebA where the pretrained model is configured
with T = 1000. We leave in Section D.6 for details on ablating t.
For each dataset, the range of minority class for generation (i.e., ˜l in Eq. (8)) is chosen as the one that
achieves the best balance among fidelity, diversity, and low-densitiness of generated samples. We
swept over {1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, . . . , 10.0} for the classifier scale w. We employ
250 timesteps to sample from the baseline DDPM and Sehwag et al. (2022) for all the results. For
our minority guidance, the same 250 timesteps are mostly employed, yet we occasionally use 100
timesteps for speeding-up sampling (e.g., when conducting ablation studies), since we found that
it yields little degradation as reported in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). See Table 2 for details on the
sampling parameters.


  14
     https://github.com/hichoe95/Rarity-Score
  15
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/dino
  16
     https://github.com/GaParmar/clean-fid
  17
     https://github.com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             (a) L1                             (b) L2                           (c) LPIPS

Figure 9: Performance comparison of minority score with various distance metrics. The most novel
(top row) and the most common (bottom row) CelebA real training samples determined by minority
scores based on (a) L1; (b) L2; and (c) LPIPS are exhibited.


Our implementation is based on PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), and all experiments are per-
formed on twin A100 GPUs. Code is available at https://github.com/soobin-um/
minority-guidance.


D     A BLATION S TUDIES , A NALYSES , AND D ISCUSSIONS

We continue from Sections 3 and 4 of the main paper and provide ablation studies and discussions
on the proposed approach. We first make an investigation for choosing a proper distance metric that
can yield well-performing minority score. We subsequently present additional evidence to reinforce
the effectiveness of the minority score as a detector of minority instances. After that, we ablate the
number of classes L and investigate its impact on the performance of minority guidance. We also
explore the sensitiveness of our algorithm w.r.t. the number of available samples N . We then explore
another strategy for the minority-focused generation, which is naturally given by our minority score.
We further perform an ablation study on t, the perturbation timestep for minority score. Lastly,
we conduct additional investigations on our in-house brain MRI dataset to highlight the practical
significance of our work.

D.1   T HE DISTANCE METRIC FOR MINORITY SCORE

Figure 9 compares the performances of several ver-                 Unique-1K Common-1K
sions of minority score employing distinct distance
metrics. We see that samples containing bright and           L1      121.33          69.24
highly-saturated visual aspects obtain high values from      L2      119.21          68.80
the L1 and L2 versions. This implies that the minor-     LPIPS       102.66         130.57
ity scores with such distances are sensitive to less-
semantic information like brightness and saturation. Table 3: Sensitiveness to brightness of the
On the other hand, we observe that the minority score three versions of minority score.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Correlations of minority score with existing outlier metrics. For the CelebA test samples,
we compute minority score and the three outlier metrics, and display the correlations between mi-
nority score and each outlier metric. A higher value of l indicates a density of more unique samples
in terms of minority score. For instance, l = 9 denotes a density of instances that yield the top 10%
values of minority score. “MS” denotes minority score, our proposed metric. “AvgkNN” refers to
Average k-Nearest Neighbor, and “LOF” is Local Outlier Factor (Breunig et al., 2000).


based on LPIPS does not exhibit such sensitiveness,
yielding results that are disentangled with brightness and saturation of images. Moreover, it suc-
ceeds in identifying some weird-looking abnormal samples latent in the dataset (see the samples
in the first row of the right column) while the other versions fail to do so due to their distraction,
e.g., to bright and highly-saturated instances. Table 3 compares the brightness measured on images
that are collected using the three versions of minority scores with distinct metrics: L1, L2, and
LPIPS. The average brightness values of the most and least unique 1K samples determined via each
of the three versions are exhibited. Notice that the minority scores with L1 and L2 distances are
sensitive to changes in such less semantic information compared to the one based on LPIPS. We
therefore choose LPIPS as the distance metric in computing minority score and use it for all of our
experimental results.

D.2   E FFECTIVENESS OF MINORITY SCORE AS AN OUTLIER METRIC

We argued in the manuscript that minority score is effective for mining minority samples (by giv-
ing them high values), and provided empirical evidence for the claim by visualizing samples with
various levels of minority score (e.g., in Figure 2). The argument was further strengthened by
our experiments that exhibit an improved capability of our sampler (that actually focuses on high-
minority-scored instances) for producing low-density samples (see Figure 6 for explicit details). To
further validate the success of our metric, we additionally provide empirical evidence of the effec-
tiveness of our metric by conducting quantitative evaluations comparing minority score with other
well-established outlier measures, such as Average k-Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN) and Local Outlier
Factor (LOF).
Figure 10 illustrates correlations of minority score with existing well-known outlier metrics. Notice
that minority score has positive correlations with other metrics, further demonstrating its ability to
reliably capture the uniqueness and minority characteristics of samples.

D.3   T HE NUMBER OF CLASSES L FOR MINORITY GUIDANCE

We first discuss how the number of classes L can be used for balancing between the faithfulness of
the guidance and the controllability over the uniqueness of features. We then provide an empirical
study that ablates the number of classes L and explores its impact on the performance of minority
guidance.
Consider a case where we use a small L for constructing ordinal minority scores. This leads to
large numbers of samples per class and therefore helps to build a faithful classifier that well captures
class-wise representations. However, if we use too small L, then it induces samples containing wide
variety of features being flocked into small categorical ranges, thus making it difficult to produce
them separately (i.e., losing the controllability). One extreme case that helps understand this is when
L = 1, where the sampler then becomes just the standard one (that uses Eq. (3)) where we don’t
have any control over the uniqueness of features. On the other hand, employing large L would


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Impact of L                      (b) Impact of N                  (c) Impact of w in Eq. (18)

Figure 11: Impact of design choices on the density of Local Outlier Factor (LOF) (Breunig et al.,
2000). The influences of three parameters are exhibited: (a) the number of minority classes L; (b)
the number of available samples N ; (c) the mixing intensity w in the mixture score approach (i.e.,
Eq. (18)). The results are obtained on CIFAR-10. The higher LOF, the less likely samples.


make the generation highly controllable w.r.t. the uniqueness of features. However, too large L
results in vast numbers of small-sized classes, which makes the classifier hard to capture class-
wise representations properly, thereby resulting in a crude predictor that rarely gives meaningful
guidance. Considering the other extreme case L = N where the number of classes is the same
as the number of samples, the classifier therein would never be able to learn representations over
classes well enough for making meaningful guidance for the uniqueness of features. Therefore, we
can say that it is important to set a proper L that well balances between the controllability and the
faithfulness. Nonetheless, we empirically observed that our minority guidance is robust to the choice
of L, and a properly selected (yet not that difficult to come up with) L yielding benign numbers of
samples for each classes (e.g., containing over 50 samples per class) performs well regardless of L,
i.e., effectively producing samples with desired features while maintaining realistic sample quality.
Below we provide demonstrations that validate the above descriptions.
Figure 11a compares results obtained with a variety of minority classes. Observe that for all con-
sidered L, our approach improves generative capability of the minority samples over the baseline
DDPM sampler, which demonstrates its robustness w.r.t. the number of minority classes L. How-
ever, we note that L = 100 offers better guidance for the minority features than L = 1000, yielding a
more tilted LOF density toward minority regions (i.e., high LOF values). This validates the role of L
as a balancing knob for the faithfulness of the guidance and the controllability over the uniqueness.

D.4    T HE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE SAMPLES N

Figure 11b and Table 4 provide empirical results that ablate the
number of available samples N specifically on CIFAR-10. Ob-
                                                                                 Method           Recall
serve that even with limited numbers of samples that are much
smaller than the full training set, minority guidance still offers               Ours (all)       0.6254
significant improvement in the minority-focused generation over                  Ours (20%)       0.5646
the baseline DDPM sampler. In fact, this benefit is already
demonstrated via our experiments on LSUN-Bedrooms presented                Table 4: Impact of N on sam-
in Section 4.2 where we only take a 10% of the total training set          ple diversity. The results are
in obtaining great improvement; see Figures 27 and 20 therein.             obtained on CIFAR-10 using
However, we see degraded diversity compared to the full dataset            10K generated samples for each
case, which is reflected in a lower recall (Kynkäänniemi et al.,         method.
2019) value; see Table 4 for explicit details.

D.5    G ENERATION FROM q̂(x0 ) ∝ q(x0 )l(x0 ; sθ )

                                                                                   (1)        (N ) i.i.d.
Recall our setting considered in Section 3.3 where we have a dataset x0 , . . . , x0                  ∼ q(x0 ),
a pretrained diffusion model s∗θ (xt , t), and minority score values associated with the dataset
                                      (i)
l(1) , . . . , l(N ) where l(i) := l(x0 , s∗θ ), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Since our interest is to make samples with


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Comparison of minority scores with different choices of the perturbation timestep t. For
the CelebA test samples, we compute Average k-Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN) and minority scores
with three different timesteps: (i) t = 0.1T (left); (ii) t = 0.9T (middle); (iii) t = 0.99T (right),
and exhibit the correlations between AvgkNN and each version of minority score. T indicates the
total number of steps that a given backbone model is trained with (e.g., T = 1000 for CelebA). The
perturbations are based on the cosine noise schedule (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). A higher value of
l indicates a density of more unique samples based on the respective minority score. For instance,
l = 9 denotes a density of instances that yield the highest 10% values of minority score. “MS” refers
to minority score, our proposed metric. “AvgkNN” refers to Average k-Nearest Neighbor.


high l(i) (i.e., minority instances) more likely to be produced, one can naturally think of sampling
from a blended distribution q̂(x0 ) ∝ q(x0 )l(x0 ; s∗θ ). However, simulating the generation process
w.r.t. this mixed distribution is not that straightforward, since we do not haveR access to the score
functions of its perturbed versions {∇xt log q̂αt (xt )}Tt=1 where q̂αt (xt ) := q̂(x0 )qαt (xt |x0 )dx0 .
To circumvent the issue, we take an approximate approach for obtaining the perturbed mixtures.
Initially, we take an approximation q̃αt (xt ) of the perturbed distribution q̂αt (xt ) as q̃αt (xt ) ∝
qαt (xt )l(xt ) where l(xt ) denotes minority score w.r.t. a noised instance xt (describing the unique-
ness of xt ). This gives ∇xt log q̃αt (xt ) = s∗θ (xt , t) + ∇xt log l(xt ). Since l(xt ) is intractable, we
resort to considering an approximated version ˆl(xt ) by computing an empirical average via the use
of the minority classifier pψ (˜l|xt ):
                                                 L−1
                                                 X
                                    ˆl(xt ) :=         τi · pψ (˜l = i | xt ),
                                                 i=0

where {τi }L−1
           i=0 denote the threshold levels used for categorizing minority score (see Section 3.3 for
details). The score function of the perturbed mixture at timestep t then reads:
                           ∇xt log q̃αt (xt ) ≈ s∗θ (xt , t) + w∇xt log ˆl(xt ),                       (18)
where w is a parameter introduced for controlling the intensity of the mixing; see Figure 11c for
demonstrations of its impact. We found that using the mixed score as a drop in replacement of
s∗θ (xt , t) in the standard sampler (i.e., Eq. (3)) improves the capability of diffusion models to gen-
erate low-density minority samples.
Figure 11c exhibits the ability of the mixed score approach in Eq. (18) to generate minority sam-
ples concerning a variety of w. Notice that increasing w yields the LOF density shifting toward
high-valued regions (i.e., low-density regions), implying that w plays a similar role as ˜l in minority
guidance and therefore can be used for improving the generation capability for minority features.
While this alternative sampler based on the mixed distribution q̂(x0 ) ∝ q(x0 )l(x0 ; s∗θ ) yields sig-
nificant improvement over the standard DDPM sampler (i.e., w = 0.0 case), minority guidance still
offers better controllability over the uniqueness of features thanks to the collaborative twin knobs ˜l
and w. Hence, we adopt it as our main gear for tackling the preference of the diffusion models w.r.t.
majority features.

D.6    T HE PERTURBATION TIMESTEP t FOR MINORITY SCORE

Figure 12 exhibits performances of minority score with distinct choices of the perturbation timestep
t. Notice that when using small (or too high) values of t, the corresponding minority score does


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Real samples in our focused brain MRI dataset across minority score values. Data
instances that yield the smallest (left), moderate (middle), and the highest (right) minority scores are
exhibited herein.


Figure 14: Generated samples by minority guidance on the brain MRI dataset over various minority
classes. Three different classes are considered herein: ˜l = 0 (left), ˜l = 35 (middle), and ˜l = 49
(right). The classifier scale is fixed to w = 2.5 for all three settings. We share the same random seed
for all generations.


not well correlate with Average k-Nearest Neighbor (AvgkNN), meaning its lack of effectiveness
in terms of outlier detection; see the next paragraph for a theoretical intuition on this phenomenon.
Conversely, a suitable choice of t (e.g., t = 0.9T in the figure) yields a well-performing metric that
shares a clear trend aligned with AvgkNN. We found that adopting similar perturbation strength in
the linear schedule scenarios (e.g., t = 0.6T ) yields good performances as well. Below we provide
an intuition on why a properly-chosen t is important for the performance of minority score.
Rationale on the failures of small and too large t’s. Employing weak perturbation (like t = 0.1T )
leaves little ambiguity in predicting clean samples based on perturbed ones, which enables Tweedie’s
denoising formula (i.e., Eq. (4)) to offer high-fidelity reconstructions both for majority and minority
instances, thereby yielding marginal differences between the their reconstruction losses. On the
other hand, when the perturbation is too strong (e.g., t = T ), it would destroy all information in
given clean samples. This makes Tweedie’s formula unable to reconstruct information even for
majority samples, thus inducing little gap between reconstruction losses of majority and minority
samples.

D.7   A DDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BRAIN MRI DATASET

Figure 13 visualizes real brain MRI images yielding various levels of minority score. Observe the
trend that as minority score increases, instances are more likely to contain features associated with
lesions of the dataset such as cerebral atrophy, demonstrating the effectiveness of our metric even on
this distinctive data modality. Moreover, we see that such brain impairments are often more severe


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Generated samples from minority guidance over various minority classes. Three different
classes are considered: ˜l = 0 (left column), ˜l = 50 (middle column), and ˜l = 99 (right column).
We consider three benchmarks: (i) CelebA (top row); (ii) CIFAR-10 (middle row); (iii) LSUN-
Bedrooms (bottom row). We share the same random seed for each row.


Figure 16: Generated samples by minority guidance over various classifier scales. Three different
scales are considered: w = 0.0 (left column), w = 1.0 (middle column), and w = 5.0 (right
column). The minority class is fixed to the most common one (i.e., ˜l = 0). As in Figure 15,
we consider three benchmarks: (i) CelebA (top row); (ii) CIFAR-10 (middle row); (iii) LSUN-
Bedrooms (bottom row). We share the same random seed for each row.


in samples with high minority scores, which aligns well with the dataset constitution that rarely
contains instances with such significant brain atrophy.
 Figure 14 exhibits generated samples by minority guidance considering a range of minority class
˜l. Observe that as ˜l increases, the samples tend to have impaired features that correspond to low-
 density attributes of the data. In the generated samples, we observe the similar correlation as we
 saw in Figure 13 between the severity of the lesion and minority score, i.e., producing severer
 impairments with higher minority classes.
We argue that this capability of controlling uniqueness of features is particularly instrumental in
medical imaging. In fact, there are numerous cases that demand medical images exhibiting highly
unique diseases, such as significant brain atrophy (e.g., the right-side images in Figure 14) which is
rarely seen in normal populations. On the other hand, there are instances where we need to generate
images with lesions that are not exceedingly rare, like mild cerebral atrophy (e.g., the middle-side
images in Figure 14), or even normal images (e.g., the left-side images in Figure 14) without any
health issues. Our sampler’s ability to control the level of uniqueness may empower us to handle
such diverse requirements in medical image generation.


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.8    C APABILITY TO LEARN THE GROUND - TRUTH DATA DISTRIBUTION

Since our approach focuses on producing minority instances ly-
ing in the tail of a data distribution, one may concern that it
                                                                        Method cFID sFID
could introduce the performance loss against instances within
high-density regions. We address this concern herein by inves-          ADM       2.93 2.88
tigating the capability of our approach to reproduce all regions of     Ours      2.91 2.86
the data manifold not limited to low-density regions. Specifically
on CelebA, we evaluate the FID metrics of generated samples Table 5: The capability of re-
by our approach and compare the values with the performances producing the ground-truth data
due to the standard sampler (i.e., ancestral sampling). The base- distribution.
line real data used for the evaluation herein is the entire CelebA
dataset (not minority instances used in Table 1.) To encourage
generation that covers a wide range of data manifold, we condition our sampler on all ranges of
minority classes uniformly at random with a fixed scale w = 1.0. See Table 5 for explicit details.
Notice in the table that our sampler yields better performance than the baseline DDPM sampler,
demonstrating its robustness against the potential performance loss in learning non-minority repre-
sentations.


D.9    I NTERACTION WITH OTHER GUIDANCE

One significant benefit of diffusion models lies in the controllable
nature of their sampling process, which enables arbitrary condi-
                                                                       Scale (w) Accuracy (%)
tioning unseen at the training time. Hence, it is important for a
guidance technique to preserve such controllability and to harmo-          0.0          46.86
nize well with other forms of guidance signal. To further evaluate         1.0          87.44
the practical significance of our proposed sampler in this context,        2.0          96.26
we investigate the interactive aspect of our approach with other           4.0          99.16
forms of guidance herein. Specifically, we incorporate an addi-
tional (class-conditional) classifier guidance on ImageNet-64 and Table 6: The impact of an addi-
explore the impact of the supplementary guidance. Table 6 ex- tional classifier guidance.
hibits the accuracy outcomes of an ImageNet classifier applied
to generated samples across a spectrum of additional classifier
strengths. Notice that as the classifier scale increases, the generated samples increasingly mirror
their intended class-conditions, demonstrating the adaptable nature of our approach in accommodat-
ing supplementary guidance.


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We continue from Section 4.2 of the main paper and provide some additional results. We first exhibit
generated samples that visualize the impacts of ˜l and w. We then provide the complete results on all
five benchmarks where we compare ours with the baselines in a thorough manner.


E.1   V ISUALIZATION OF THE IMPACTS OF ˜l AND w

Figure 15 exhibits generated samples by minority guidance considering a variety of the (categorized)
minority class ˜l. Observe that as ˜l increases, the samples tend to have more rare features that appear
similar to the ones observable in the minority samples (e.g., in Figure 2). See the left plot in Figure 3
for a quantitative analysis.
Figure 16 showcases generated samples illustrating the impact of the classifier scale w. (see the
right plot in Figure 3 for a quantitative analysis). We see that as w increases, the generated sam-
ples are more likely to exhibit representative features of the associated minority class (i.e., ˜l = 0),
such as a frontal-view attribute in CelebA. This observation aligns well with the quantitative result
shown in Figure 3 and with the findings presented in Dhariwal & Nichol (2021), which extensively
investigates the impact of w.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 17: Generated samples by the class-conditional minority guidance over various classifier
 scales. Three different scales are considered herein: w = 0.0 (left column), w = 1.0 (middle
 column), and w = 2.5 (right column). The minority class is fixed to the most unique one (i.e.,
˜l = 24). The same ImageNet classes as in Figure 8 are considered for generation: water tower (top
 row), bald eagle (top-middle row), joystick (middle-bottom row), and espresso maker (bottom row).
 We share the same random seed for each row.


Figure 17 further demonstrates the influence of the classifier scale w in the extended minority guid-
ance (i.e., Eq. (17)). It is evident that increasing w leads to a more focused generation of unique
features associated with the targeted class ˜l = 24, exhibiting a similar trend as in the unconditional
setting.

E.2   C OMPARISON WITH THE BASELINES : COMPLETE RESULTS AND ADDITIONAL SAMPLES

Figure 24 exhibits generated samples by our approach and their associated nearest neighboring real
samples on CelebA. Notice in the figure that generated features due to our method exhibit a notable
level of novelty distinct from those observed in real samples.
Figure 25 visualizes generated samples on CelebA. Observe that the proposed sampler is more likely
to generate novel-featured samples that are exhibited in real minority data; see Figures 2 and 9 for
instances of the minority features of the dataset. Figure 18 gives a quantitative validation to this
observation. We see that minority guidance outperforms the other baselines in terms of generating
low-density samples, as demonstrated by yielding more data instances with high values of outlier
metrics. The same trend is observed in our CIFAR-10 results; see Figures 26 and 19 for details.
Figure 21 provides a comparison of the performances of neighborhood density measures on the
class-conditional ImageNet 64 × 64. It is noteworthy that our extended minority guidance (to the
class-conditional setting) outperforms the baselines in generating low-density unique samples for all
three measures. Notably, our sampler demonstrates superior performance compared to the tailored
algorithm by Sehwag et al. (2022), which is specifically designed for the class-conditional setting
and not applicable in other contexts like unlabeled-data settings. For completeness, we exhibit the
neighborhood density results of LSUN-Bedrooms, which are already reported in the manuscript; see
Figure 20 for details.
Figures 22 and 23 exhibit the density measures on the brain MRI dataset. Inspired by Ulyanov et al.
(2018) and Naeem et al. (2020) that showcase the power of random embedding spaces for admitting
distinctive data modality, we employ randomly-initialized neural networks (e.g., ResNet-50, VGG-


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


16) for computing density measures for the results in Figure 22. On the other hand, the performance
values in Figure 23 are computed in a feature space of DINO (Caron et al., 2021) which is fine-tuned
on our brain MRI data (see Section C for details on the fine-tuning setting). Notice that minority
guidance outperforms the baselines in generating unique samples for all cases, which corroborates
our observations made on Figure 5 (in Section 4.2).
Table 7 provides quality and diversity evaluations on all our considered benchmarks including
CIFAR-10. We additionally provide the results on the brain MRI data evaluated based on a fine-
tuned feature space of DINO (Caron et al., 2021) on our available brain MRI images. Observe
that the same performance benefit of our sampler also applies to the scenarios that are not covered
in Table 1, which further strengthen the robustness of our sampler. We found that the performance
values of StyleGAN2-ADA (Karras et al., 2020) sometimes diverge on our brain MRI dataset, yield-
ing poor performance values in some metrics (e.g., Precision, cFID on the fine-tuned feature space).
This diverging phenomenon is also observed in density distributions of the method, which are widely
spreaded over the axes of neighborhood metric values (e.g., as seen in the middle plot in Figures 23).
We conjecture that this comes from the inconsistent modalities between natural and medical images,
which may hinder proper interpretations of generated MRI features in the ImageNet-pretrained fea-
ture space (e.g., hence yielding low precision). Another possible reason is that the fine-tuned feature
space (wherein the high-cFID value is measured) may still suffer from the lack of knowledge on
the brain MRI modality. While we employed all the available samples (i.e., 13,640 slices) for fine-
tuning, it may not be sufficient to construct a well-structured feature space that can admit diverse
aspects of the target data, which often requires huge amount of data to achieve.
Table 8 exhibits the evaluation results employing a variety of density metrics for collecting base-
line real data. Observe that our sampler yields better (or comparable) performance values under
various criteria not limited to AvgkNN, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in producing
instances that are generally unique.
To facilitate a more comprehensive qualitative comparison among the samplers, we provide an ex-
tensive showcase of generated samples for all the considered datasets. See Figures 25–29 for details.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 18: Comparison of neighborhood density on CelebA. “Real” refers to our real-data baseline,
the test samples of CelebA. “BigGAN” is our GAN-based generative baseline, BigGAN (Brock
et al., 2019). “DDPM (standard)” indicates the diffusion-based generative baseline: ADM (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021) with the standard sampler (i.e., Eq. (3)) (Ho et al., 2020). “DDPM (ML)” refers to a
classifier-guided DDPM sampler conditioning on Minority Labels. “DDPM (ours)” denotes DDPM
with the proposed sampler, minority guidance. “AvgkNN” refers to Average k-Nearest Neighbor,
and “LOF” is Local Outlier Factor (Breunig et al., 2000).


Figure 19: Comparison of neighborhood density on CIFAR-10. “Real” refers to our real-data base-
line, the test samples of CIFAR-10. All the remaining settings are the same as those in Figure 18.


Figure 20: Comparison of neighborhood density on LSUN-Bedrooms. The results are the same as
those in Figure 6.


Figure 21: Comparison of neighborhood density on the class-conditional ImageNet. “Real” refers
to the validation samples of ImageNet. “Sehwag et al.” refers to the low-density sampler proposed
in Sehwag et al. (2022). All the remaining settings are the same as those in Figure 18.


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 22: Comparison of neighborhood density on the brain MRI dataset. The density measures are
computed in randomly-initialized feature spaces (Ulyanov et al., 2018; Naeem et al., 2020). “Real”
refers to the training dataset (i.e., all 13,640 slices). “DDPM (standard)” indicates ADM (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sampling. “DDPM (ours)” denotes minority guidance. The higher
values, the less likely samples for all three measures.


Figure 23: Comparison of neighborhood density on the brain MRI dataset. The density measures
exhibited herein are evaluated in a fine-tuned DINO (Caron et al., 2021) feature space on our brain
MRI dataset. All the remaining settings are the same as those in Figure 22.


Figure 24: The novelty of generated samples by minority guidance. Generated samples by our
approach (left) and their corresponding nearest neighbors in the training dataset of CelebA (right)
are visualized.



                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Method          cFID    sFID    Prec   Rec         Method        cFID    sFID    Prec   Rec

  CelebA 64×64                                       ImageNet 64×64
  ADM           75.05     16.73   0.97   0.23        ADM           17.85   4.90    0.79   0.52
  ADM-ML        51.66     13.04   0.94   0.31        Sehwag et al. 10.76   4.12    0.80   0.52
  BigGAN        80.41     16.51   0.97   0.19        Ours          11.95   2.62    0.76   0.55
  Sehwag et al. 27.97     10.17   0.82   0.42
  Ours          26.98     8.23    0.89   0.34

  CIFAR-10                                           ImageNet 256×256
  IDDPM          31.58    10.61   0.93   0.35        ADM           17.41   12.85   0.87   0.35
  BigGAN         34.08    12.14   0.94   0.19        Sehwag et al. 13.43    9.88   0.85   0.42
  Ours           29.95    9.63    0.92   0.41        Ours          13.83    7.82   0.85   0.45

  CIFAR-10-LT                                        Brain MRI 256×256
  DDPM        75.71       44.26   0.95   0.23        ADM          21.71    14.30   0.82   0.37
  Qin et al.  64.93       41.41   0.92   0.36        StyleGAN2a   22.69    23.07   0.53   0.28
  Ours        63.34       42.53   0.95   0.24        Ours         19.73    13.36   0.84   0.47

  LSUN Bedrooms 256×256                              Brain MRI 256×256 (FT f-space)
  ADM         62.83 7.49          0.89   0.16        ADM          20.64     –     0.87    0.77
  LDM         63.61 7.19          0.90   0.13        StyleGAN2a 315.19      –     0.69    0.61
  StyleGAN    56.45 5.96          0.87   0.13        Ours         11.83     –     0.86    0.79
  Ours        41.52 6.67          0.87   0.10


Table 7: Comparison of sample quality and diversity for generating minority samples. The results
on all considered benchmarks are exhibited herein. “ADM-ML” refers to a classifier-guided ances-
tral sampling conditioning on Minority Labels. “StyleGAN2a” indicates StyleGAN2-ADA (Karras
et al., 2020). “FT f-space” refers to the evaluations made in an MRI-adapted feature space con-
structed by fine-tuning the pretrained DINO (Caron et al., 2021) on our brain MRI benchmark. The
best results are marked in bold.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Method        cFID    sFID     Prec   Rec         Method         cFID     sFID     Prec   Rec

   CelebA 64×64 (LOF)                                LSUN Bedrooms 256×256 (MS)
   ADM       32.50 10.21          0.94   0.30        ADM         28.20 11.74 0.54            0.33
   ADM-ML 30.37 9.76              0.88   0.39        StyleGAN    24.19   8.43 0.57           0.33
   BigGAN    35.05 10.16          0.95   0.29        Ours         6.92   5.53 0.70           0.36
   Ours      25.41 8.90           0.80   0.43

   CelebA 64×64 (RS)                                 ImageNet 64×64 (LOF)
   ADM       60.68 12.75          0.98   0.22        ADM           11.55  4.05        0.83   0.52
   ADM-ML 32.45 8.16              0.97   0.31        Sehwag et al. 8.28   3.45        0.83   0.52
   BigGAN    67.07 13.12          0.98   0.18        Ours          8.96   2.42        0.80   0.55
   Ours      20.68 7.71           0.93   0.32

   CelebA 64×64 (MS)                                 ImageNet 64×64 (MS)
   ADM       58.15 16.37          0.91   0.34        ADM           14.67      6.09    0.70   0.62
   ADM-ML 30.32 10.99             0.87   0.43        Sehwag et al. 12.57      5.30    0.70   0.62
   BigGAN    63.16 16.15          0.91   0.29        Ours          5.88       2.34    0.71   0.69
   Ours       8.88   5.37         0.85   0.49

   CIFAR-10 (LOF)                                    Brain MRI 256×256 (MS)
   IDDPM      17.31       8.56    0.93   0.37        ADM          24.02 21.10         0.78   0.35
   BigGAN     31.05      10.74    0.93   0.22        StyleGAN2a   26.36 19.82         0.47   0.28
   Ours       17.05      8.43     0.91   0.42        Ours         14.50 16.99         0.84   0.40

   CIFAR-10 (MS)                                     Brain MRI 256×256 (MS; FT f-space)
   IDDPM     25.62       13.53    0.83   0.51        ADM          30.73     –     0.81 0.79
   BigGAN    46.13       15.93    0.82   0.31        StyleGAN2a 281.08      –     0.63 0.67
   Ours      15.16       8.86     0.83   0.59        Ours         35.49     –     0.84 0.79


Table 8: Comparison of sample quality and diversity for generating minority samples. Various
different criteria (other than AvgkNN which is covered in Tables 1 and 7) are used for constructing
real baseline minority data. “LOF” indicates the results derived with the real baseline data that
yields the highest LOF values. Similarly, “RS” and “MS” are the evaluations based on the baseline
data inducing the highest Rarity Score and minority score values, respectively. “ADM-ML” refers
to a classifier-guided ancestral sampler conditioning on Minority Labels. “StyleGAN2a” indicates
StyleGAN2-ADA (Karras et al., 2020). “FT f-space” refers to the evaluations made in an MRI-
adapted feature space constructed by fine-tuning the pretrained DINO (Caron et al., 2021) on our
brain MRI benchmark. The best results are marked in bold.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 25: Sample comparison on CelebA. Generated samples by BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019)
(left), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sampling (middle), and minority guidance
(right) are exhibited. We share the same random noise for the generations based on the DDPM-based
samplers (i.e., middle and right).


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 26: Sample comparison on CIFAR-10. Generated samples by BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019)
(left), IDDPM (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) with ancestral sampling (middle), the proposed sampler
(right) are visualized herein. We share the same random noise for the generations based on the
DDPM-based samplers (i.e., middle and right).


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 27: Additional images for comparison on LSUN-Bedrooms. Generated samples by Style-
GAN (Karras et al., 2019) (left), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sampling (middle),
and minority guidance (right) are exhibited. We use the same random seed for the diffusion-based
samplers (i.e., middle and right).


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) Dhariwal & Nichol (2021)        (b) Sehwag et al. (2022)                (c) Ours

Figure 28: Sample comparison on the class-conditional ImageNet. Generated samples from five
classes are exhibited: (i) Water tower (top row); (ii) Bald eagle (top-middle row); (iii) Joystick
(middle row); (iv) Espresso maker (middle-bottom row); (v) Cloak (bottom row). For each row, we
share the same random seed across all three methods.


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 29: Additional images for comparison on the brain MRI dataset. Generated samples by
StyleGAN2-ADA (Karras et al., 2020) (left), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with ancestral sam-
pling (middle), and minority guidance (right) are exhibited. We use the same random seeds for the
diffusion-based samplers (i.e., middle and right).


                                               39
