Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NLEARNING THE U NWANTED DATA FROM A P ER -
SONALIZED R ECOMMENDATION M ODEL

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
            Recommender Systems (RS) learn user behavior by monitoring their activities on
            the online platform. In a few scenarios, users consume the content but don’t want
            to get their recommendations because a). They consumed the content by mistake,
            and those interactions have been utilized in personalizing the model; b) The con-
            tent was consumed by someone else on their behalf; c) Data acquisition was faulty
            because of machine failure; d) The user has lost interest in the service, etc. Out
            of any of these reasons, the user wants the data that was used for generating the
            recommendation to be unlearned by RS. The constraints with this unlearning are
            1) The user’s other data should be intact, 2) Personalized experience should not be
            affected, and 3) We can not afford training from scratch. To solve the stated prob-
            lem, a few unlearning strategies have already been proposed, but unlearning the
            matrix factorization-based model is not much explored. In this work, we propose
            a solution of unlearning from the faulty recommendation model (m1 ) by diluting
            the impact of unwanted data. To do so, we first correct the unwanted data and pre-
            pare an intermediate tiny model m2 , referred to as the rescue model. Further, we
            apply the convolution fusion function (CFF) on the latent features acquired using
            m1 , m2 . The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on multiple public
            datasets. We observed that the proposed method outperforms SOTA benchmark
            models on recommendation tasks.(code 1 files)


1       I NTRODUCTION
The main objective of recommendation systems is to provide personalized suggestions and assist
in making choices for users based on their previous interests. The recommender system plays an
important role in people’s daily lives by alleviating information overload. Furthermore, personal-
ized decision-making on online platforms is heavily dependent on the recommendations received.
Collaborative filtering-based recommendation techniques such as matrix factorization (MF) have
been extensively applied for building personalized recommendations (He et al. (2020); Okura et al.
(2017)).
Sometimes, the user wants to forget the videos seen or books read at a difficult time and does not
want anyone to remind him/her of those things again. EU’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) ensures data privacy and security. Under the legal regulation as right to be forgotten, one
can request online platforms to delete their specified data and associated learnings of the recommen-
dation model.
Conventional intelligent systems work on the historically generated data for predicting near-future
outcomes. Such systems do not consider users’ privacy or shift in data generation. Sometimes,
laws and regulations or changes in user preferences or environmental impact force us to unlearn or
forget the old choices learned over a certain timeline. Further, only deleting the data that needs to
be forgotten will not solve the problem because the intelligent model trained with the specified data
retains the traces of that data and makes predictions based on those traces in the model.
In the context of recommendation systems, the online platforms understand the user’s behavior
with the help of their activity during engagement with the platform. User’s activities on the platform
drive the state of the recommendation model, which continually monitors users’ behavior and tries to
    1
        https://anonymous.4open.science/r/UnlearningRecommendation-ICLR


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adapt accordingly to provide more relevant and fresh recommendations. The adaptation of the model
happens by leveraging the user’s behavioral features. The problem arises when the user requests the
platform to forget the data acquired by the platform within the specified period, whereas the model
has already consumed that data and transited to its new state. The user’s request for forgetting the
data makes the new state of the model illegitimate. Hence, recommendations given by the model are
irrelevant and would lead to a bad user experience. The most common option to get rid of this faulty
state is to train the model from scratch by using the entire training data, only eliminating the data
requested to unlearn, which is very costly. The training from scratch is not a viable solution because
a). It is a time-consuming job b) Previous historical data may not be available. Therefore, we need
to obtain a new legitimate state of the model by utilizing only the current illegitimate model state
and data to unlearn, which is the motivation of this work.
Recently, multiple studies have explored machine unlearning, but very little work has been done in
the area of recommendation unlearning (Li et al. (2022)). The most simple methodology of unlearn-
ing is to delete the data that needs to be forgotten and train a new recommendation model using the
remaining dataset. However, such an approach is not possible because of the high computational
cost in the case of huge datasets. A little work has been done to efficiently unlearn the data from the
machine learning models (Bourtoule et al. (2021), Cao & Yang (2015)).
This paper proposes an efficient recommendation unlearning approach that unlearns the requested
data and provides intact recommendation performance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that unlearns from the pretrained model using only the specified data to unlearn and without
the need of training from scratch. The main contributions of the work can be pointed out as:

       • This work proposes a novel method for unlearning the model with the specified data without
         training from scratch.
       • A novel convolution fusion-based framework has been proposed that fuses two different
         latent features and provides latent features that help in obtaining a full matrix that is equiv-
         alent to the first model features that were trained with all historical data.

The paper has been organized as follows. In-depth literature related to recommendation systems
and the emergence of recommendation unlearning has been reviewed in the next section 2. Section
4 presents the proposed methodology and notations used. Section 5 includes the results on three
different real-world datasets. Finally, section 7 concludes our findings and research with future
research directions in the area of recommendation unlearning.

2     L ITERATURE S URVEY
In literature, unlearning has been analyzed on the parameters of accuracy and time complexity. Gen-
erally, machine learning researchers have compared the performance with retraining the model. Our
work is related to existing work in machine unlearning and recommendation unlearning. Therefore,
we divided the literature survey into two categories.

2.1   M ACHINE U NLEARNING

Unlearning is an important and new research area that has gained popularity because of privacy
laws in the data science domain. The methodologies of deleting the learned knowledge of a ma-
chine learning model have been studied in different aspects, such as privacy unlearning (Chen et al.
(2021)), and concept drift unlearning (You & Lin (2016)). Most of the studies proposed machine un-
learning algorithms in image classification where the objective is to unlearn a particular class of the
image dataset (Mehta et al. (2022)). Based on the work done in this area, the concept of unlearning
can be broadly categorized as exact unlearning, differential privacy, approximate unlearning, dataset
cleaning, mitigation, and continual learning. Bourtoule et al. (2021) and Schelter et al. (2021), pre-
sented exact unlearning based methods. In their paper, Bourtoule et al. (2021) had given an ensemble
of models on shards of the dataset and Schelter et al. (2021) presented a technique of unlearning for
randomized trees. Exact unlearning-based work faces a limitation in size of data deletion. It assumes
that such techniques can perform better with deletion requests of very small size of data. Brophy
& Lowd (2021) has given a random-forests-based unlearning approach that retrains the subtrees as
needed. Ginart et al. (2019) proposed a data elimination technique for k-means clustering.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   R ECOMMENDATION U NLEARNING

Recommendation unlearning is a new area of research, and we have seen very little work done on it.
Chen et al. (2022) introduces an erasable recommendation framework that employs three data parti-
tion strategies for balanced shard splitting and an aggregation method to enhance recommendation.
Zhang et al. (2023) introduces the Influence Function-based Recommendation Unlearning (IFRU)
framework that uses the influence function to quantify the spillover influence of erasing data on the
computational graph of recommender models.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   M ATRIX FACTORIZATION

Matrix factorization (MF) (Koren et al. (2009)) is a mathematical technique to work on matrices. It
is a powerful method that is widely used in collaborative filtering-based recommendation systems
to find hidden user-item interactions by approximations.
Let us consider a matrix R containing user u, items v, and the rating r. MF approximates R based
on the number of latent factors as the part of two matrices P (user latent features) and Q (item latent
features). The values of P and Q need to be learned through an optimization algorithm to minimize
the approximation error. MF works on a user-item rating matrix to uncover the latent features of
users and items that enable accurate, personalized recommendations.

4     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we first introduce the key notations and formulate the problem for the unlearning
task. The proposed methodology for unlearning tasks has been explained in detail.

4.1   BASIC N OTATIONS

This section covers the acronyms and notations used in the paper. The users and items are rep-
resented as u, and v, respectively. r is used to show the rating given by the user to a particular
item. R tells about user-item rating matrix. The number of latent features and learning rate are the
hyper-parameters that have been represented as K and ↵. P represents the user latent features and
Q represents the item latent features.
Definition 1 A rating noise is the high values of ratings intentionally set to bring the item in the
recommendation list.

4.2   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Let D be a dataset containing user u and item i interactions as ratings r. D = {(ui , ij , rij ) |
ui is a user, ij is an item, and rij is the rating given by ui to ij }. Here, ui represents the i-th user,
ij represents the j-th item, and rij represents the rating given by the i-th user to the j-th item.
Formally, unlearning problem is identifying a model RM0 (D↵ , ✓) such that
                                   RM0 (D↵ , ✓) = CT (RM, D )                                         (1)
Let RM (D, ✓), denotes the model with parameters ✓ trained with data dtrain : dtrain ⇢ D. CT is
a function that performs an unlearning process and produces a model RM0 that has nearly similar
performance as the original model RM.
Theorem 1 The convolution Fusion Function generates a fading effect.
Proof Let the initial interaction matrix be D, and the faulty interaction matrix be D0 with users in
rows and items in columns. Where D0 = f (D, ⌘, n list) where ⌘ is an additive rating noise that
randomly assigns a high rating (5 on the scale of 1 to 5) to all the indices of user-item matrix that
needs to be unlearned n list. let
                                          morig = M F (D)
                                                                                                  (2)
                                            m1 = M F (D0 )

                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Figure 1: Unlearning Steps
                                                   .

m1 is the model that is currently serving the users and needs to unlearn the added noise. If Dn list
is the collection of data that users want to unlearn. A few of columns in Dn list will be required to
                                                       P#users
unlearn and we set all such entries as (µ = #users1
                                                      ( user=1 itemi ) which is the average rating
of the item and hence we get modified data as Df l1 which only keeps average ratings of the items
corresponding to each location of faulty entry.
                                            m2 = M F (Df l1 )                                            (3)
If Ulf 1 , Ulf 2 , Ulf 3 are the user latent features such that Ulf 1 = morig .user, Ulf 2 =
m1.user, Ulf 3 = m2.user. If Ilf 1 , Ilf 2 , Ilf 3 are the user latent features such that Ilf 1 =
morig .user, Ilf 2 = m1.user, Ilf 3 = m2.user.
                                        Ulf 4 = CF F (Ulf 2 , Ulf 3 )
                                                                                                         (4)
                                         Ilf 4 = CF F (Ilf 2 , Ilf 3 )
The CFF function under the Convolution operation conv(Ulf 2 , Ulf 3 ) considers applying a column
filter to both the input matrices. If the value at i, j location at Ulf 2 , Ulf 3 is ✓i,j , i,j respectively,
then output of conv will be (w1 ⇤ ✓i,j + w2 ⇤ i,j )


                                U 1 = |Ulf 4    Ulf 1 |, I1 = |Ilf 4 |   Ilf 1 |
                                                                                                         (5)
                                 U 2 = |Ulf 4   Ulf 2 |, I2 = |Ilf 4     Ilf 2 |

with the empirical analysis (shown in Table 2b) we observed that U 1 < U 2 ,and I1 < I2 which
simply tells that recovered user latent features Ulf 4 , Ilf 4 is close to the legitimate latent feature
Ulf 1 , Ilf 1 .

4.3     P ROPOSED S OLUTION

The detailed steps of the proposed methodology are further explained in this subsection. The paper
proposes a novel methodology to unlearn data from a recommendation system. Figure 1 shows
the steps to unlearn data from a recommendation system. The proposed solutions are given in the
following steps:

4.3.1    S IMULATING THE FAULTY DATA
In our experiments, in the user-item interaction matrix, we have randomly selected a few users and
their corresponding item ratings (first two columns in Table 3). Since we wanted to simulate the real-
world scenario, we added noise to those randomly selected data. Noise is expected to bring those
items into the recommendations; hence, in this work, we have set those entries with the highest
ratings, which is 5. This noisy data (Df l ) leads to the model’s noisy or illegitimate state (m1 ),
whose recommendations are denied and reported by the user. Therefore, the model is required to
be rescued from this state. In a real scenario, the user mentions either the time duration of their
activity whose data he doesn’t want the platform to consider for personalizing the model, or the user


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


directly prompts what he doesn’t want to see in the recommendations. (It is worth noticing that
recommendations are given for those items whose corresponding predicted user ratings are high (eg.
4 or 5)). If O1 is the operation of adding noise at random entries in the dataset, as shown in Eq.6.
                          morig = M F (D),       Df l = O1(D, noise = 5)
                                         0                                                          (6)
                                       D = (D||Df l ),       m1 = M F (D0 )

4.3.2   P REPARING THE R ESCUE M ODEL
The faulty model serving in the previous step leads to faulty recommendations. In this step, we
consider the faulty data: Df l (data that leads to a faulty model). This activity of the user has been
simulated in the previous step. In this step, we consider the faulty data, prepare a separate model,
and consider it as a rescue model (m2 ). The average rating of those items replaces the faulty entries
of the data points. This way, the dataset has a more generic behavior. If µ is the average rating of
each item and O2 is the operation to replace the entries of the faulty data with the average rating of
the corresponding item (Eq.7).
                             Df l1 = O2(Df l , µ),       m2 = M F (Df l1 )                          (7)

4.3.3   C ONVOLUTION F USION F UNCTION (CFF)
The rescue model is operated over the faulty model to eliminate its faulty features. In this step, we
consider the faulty model and rescue model and operate them with CFF. CFF considers the latent
features of the faulty model and latent features of the rescue model, and this way, it fades the faulty
features with the help of features of the rescue model, as shown in Theorem-1. The behavior is quite
intuitive since the rescue model has generic features corresponding to the faulty entries, and fusing
both features fades the faulty effect.
                      user latent = CF F (m1 .user latent, m2 .user latent)
                                                                                                    (8)
                     item latent = CF F (m1 .item latent, m2 .item latent)

The steps of the convolution fusion function are outlined in Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 1, lines
numbers 3 and 4 define the two convolution layers in the neural network, and lines numbers 5 and 6
include two fully connected linear layers. Furthermore, line number 8-20 defines the fusion process
of latent features that includes concatenation, reshaping and normalization operations.

4.3.4   R ESCUED M ODEL
The resultant features of the CFF have the least impact of faults (shown in Eq. 8). This process
of CFF is performed for user latent features and for item latent features separately; hence, the final
matrix is created with the rescued user latent features and rescued item latent features. The rescued
model is also known as a transformed model, which is the legitimate state of the model Eq. 9.
                                  mf = user latent · item latent                                    (9)

In this work, Matrix Factorization is considered as the recommendation model, and unlearning is
realized on the same model. Therefore, the proposed method works on the matrix of user-item and
ratings rij given by a user ui to item ij . When a user realizes a need to unlearn, he specifies the
unwanted data by clicking on certain events or by selecting a timeline. RS unlearn methodology
is only required if the requested unwanted data was part of the training data. Based on the user’s
request, the first check is whether the requested data was part of RS training data previously. If the
answer is yes, the current state of the model would be considered as faulty, and data (Df l ) received
in this duration will be used to obtain the legitimate state of the model by unlearning. Faulty model
m1 trained using Df l and an intermediate tiny model m2 trained using corrected Dun . The corrected
Dun has been formed by replacing the settled highest rating with the average rating value of that
particular item. The user latent features P1 , P2 and item latent features Q1 , Q2 have been extracted
from the model m1 and m2 respectively. Convolution fusion function (CF F ) accepts the output
of m1 and m2 as the input and creates an updated recommendation model that is free from all the
patterns and traces of unwanted data. Algorithm 1 shows the process of the fusion function, and
components of the fusion function have been demonstrated in figure 2.
In brief, the workflow of unlearning using label aggregation can be given in the following steps:


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) Generic Block of feature unlearning           (b) Fusion function for rating aggregation

      Figure 2: The process of feature unlearning and fusion function for rating aggregation.



     1. Creating a faulty noisy model m1 using the created noisy dataset Df l .

     2. Creating an intermediate tiny model m2 using the corrected form of unwanted dataset Df l .
        Df l1 is the fraction of the dataset to be unlearned that is created by replacing the imputed
        noise with the average rating value of that item.

     3. Acquiring the latent features of m1 and m2 to create final unlearned model Mf using fusion
        function.



Algorithm 1 Convolution Fusion Function
Input: m1 , m2 ; kernel: kernel size, type: type of transfer
Output: output tensor x
 1: Function CF(m1 , m2 , type):
 2:     hidden dim        m1 .latent
 3:     conv1      Conv2d(1, out channel, (kernel, 1), stride = 1)
 4:     conv2      Conv2d(out channel, out channel2, (1, 1), stride = 1)
 5:     f c1     Linear(m1 .latent ⇥ 512)
 6:     f c2     Linear(512, m2 .latent)
 7: End Function CF
 8: xm1       F unction CF (m1 , m2 , user)
 9: xˆm2      F unction CF (m1 , m2 , item)
10: x      concatenate(xm1 , xˆm2 , dim = 1)
11: x      x.view( 1, 1, 2, xm1 .shape[ 1])
12: if type is ”user” then
13:    x = xm1
14: else if type is ”item” then
15:    x = xm2
16: else
17:        raise E RROR(”fusion error”)
18: end if
19:     x norm       (x2 ).sum(dim = 1).sqrt()
20:     x     x/x norm.detach().unsqueeze( 1)
21: return x


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5       E XPERIMENTS

This section discusses the experiments conducted to investigate the performance of our proposed
unlearning methodology.

5.1       DATASETS

We evaluated our approach using two widely known datasets in recommendation research: Movie-
Lens 100K dataset and MovieLens 1M2 datasets. In Table 1, we report dataset statistics.

                                            Table 1: Dataset Statistics

                        Dataset             Users     Items (Movies)      Rating Distribution
                     Movielens-100K          943           1664                  1-5
                     Movielens-1M           6040           3706                  1-5


5.2       E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY

In this study, 80% of the user-item utility matrix has been used for the training set, and the rest of the
20% values have been used to test the proposed methodology. Further, Root Mean Square Error has
been calculated as a performance metric. In order to check the unlearning efficiency, randomly x%
of users have been selected who want to unlearn their y% data. 64 and 0.03 are the selected values
of hyper-parameters K and ↵.

5.3       BASELINE

The results of the proposed unlearning methodology have been compared with the following bench-
mark methods:
Model Retrain: This is the naive method to remove unwanted data from a machine learning model.
In retraining-based unlearning, all desired samples are removed from the dataset, and the model
is re-trained from scratch with the remaining data. Retraining has been considered as the basic
benchmark method to remove all unwanted patterns from machine learning models.
SISA Bourtoule et al. (2021): SISA based unlearning is considered to be the state-of-the-art machine
unlearning method. In SISA training method, the training data is divided into shards, and further,
one model per shard is trained. Finally, the results of all submodels are aggregated via the mean
for the final results. When unlearning is requested, a model is trained with the specified shard after
removing the unwanted data.

5.4       A BLATION S TUDY: E FFECT OF UNLEARNED DATA SIZE

This paper proposes a novel unlearning model using the label aggregation method. We perform ab-
lation studies to understand how much data can be forgotten without degrading model performance.
This study enables the service provider to set a limit on the size of the data to be forgotten without
    2
        https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/


                                                      Table 2

(a) Comparison proposed methodology and exist-           (b) Distance between latent features of faulty model and final
ing SISA method on ML-1M                                 model with original model
 Parameter         Proposed SISA            Retrain          Matrix Comparison         `1           `2
                   Method-                                                P         74.6792      73.4687
                                                             10%-30%
                   ology                                                  Q         77.3881      76.71722
      10, 50       1.0235   1.14830         1.1039                        P         75.3566      73.5278
                                                             20%-50%
                                                                          Q         77.2679      77.1649


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 3: Performance analysis of the proposed methodology with the unlearned data size.

Table 3: Unlearning Data Results for Two Publicly Available Datasets. Results showing the RMSE
of the Recommendation Models.

                      Users    F Data        ML-100K              ML-1M
                      (in %)   (in %)     M1       Mf         M1       Mf
                               30         1.1401 0.9960       1.1088 0.9854
                      10       40         1.1540 1.0254       1.1206 1.0128
                               50         1.1682 1.0440       1.1209 1.0235
                               30         1.1606 1.0259       1.1233 1.0261
                      15       40         1.1828 1.0608       1.1333 1.0497
                               50         1.1699 1.0674       1.1378 1.0639
                               30         1.1788 1.0632       1.1412 1.0562
                      20       40         1.1700 1.0775       1.1413 1.0747
                               50         1.1793 1.0976       1.1527 1.1077


causing much damage to the model’s performance. The service provider can set a threshold for
model performance to limit the size of data to be unlearned. The study also presents how much data
can be unlearned by how many users. Figure 3 presents the results in RMSE on the Movielens-100K
and Movielens-1M datasets. We can note two observations from the results shown in figure 3. First,
it shows that as we increase the size of the data to be unlearned, the performance decreases slightly.
Second, the proposed approach can be used to unlearn up to 50% of the user data without compro-
mising much performance. We see that in cases where small-size data needs to be unlearned, the
RMSE is less than 1.


6   R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS

We present a method that unlearns the data requested by users and retains the original model with the
remaining personalized recommendation. This is due to one of the merits of the proposed method
that it is not doing any kind of retraining from the scratch. The experimental results have been
demonstrated in Table 3. Table 3 shows the performance of the proposed method on the metric Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) on two publicly available datasets. The experiments have also been
performed to analyze the performance of the proposed unlearning method on varying data sizes.
It shows the performance in different cases when a certain number of users (say x%) request to
forget some amount of their data (say y%). RMSE2 presents the error value in recommendation
prediction when the model is trained using noisy data. RMSE3 represents the error in the final
recommendation model obtained after unlearning the unwanted data. The proposed method uses the
matrix factorization method to demonstrate the concept. In the original matrix factorization-based


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


recommendation model Morig , the RMSE values for ML-100K dataset and ML-1M dataset are
1.1005 and 1.1044, respectively. This error value is the original performance of the MF method when
the recommendation model learned all historical datasets. When compared with the performance
of the original model Morig , we see a clear increase in the performance of the final unlearned
model Mf in the case of smaller data to be unlearned. As we increase the number of users and
their requested data to unlearn, we get a slightly higher RMSE. However, the proposed approach
still retains lower or almost equal RMSE than the original MF RMSE in case of large data to be
unlearned.
The comparison of RMSE for the proposed methodology and existing unlearning model have been
shown in Table 2a. We evaluated the performance of the state-of-the-art unlearning method SISA.
In experiments, we fixed the number of shards as 5 and conducted the experiments using Movielens-
1M dataset. SISA achieved 1.1483 RMSE when 10% users want to forget 50% of their ratings.
Retrain is a naive method that involves training from scratch after deleting requested data to be
unlearned. Therefore, it always shows a lower error. We have taken a similar case for input data as
in SISA. Retraining based RMSE is 1.1039 in case 10% of users want to forget 50% of their ratings.
As expected, retraining achieves higher performance than SISA and the proposed method is at least
as good as retraining. In Table 2a, we see that the proposed approach achieves significantly better
performance than both state-of-the-art baseline forgetting techniques.
Table 2b presents the Euclidean distance between the latent features of the faulty model and the final
model with the original model. In Table 2b, `1 = |m1 mf | and `2 = |morig mf |. We have
presented `1 and `2 in two cases: 1. 10% users request 30% of the ratings need to be forgotten. 2.
20% users wants to remove 50% of their ratings. We see that `1 > `2 in all cases. We have noted
that the latent features of the final model are closer to the latent features of the original model than
the latent features of the faulty model.

7   C ONCLUSION
Machine unlearning is the new domain of AI that works to improve user experience and helps to
have a more engaging experience between the system and users. In this work, we have proposed
the need for unlearning in the recommendation system and proposed the methodology to perform
it. Our solution neither demands for the previously used training data nor performs training from
scratch. The proposed method is quite different from existing methods (e.g. Sharding methods),
which are based on the idea of identifying and training a model from scratch among the pool of
models. The proposed method uses the already-performing faulty model (which has received train-
ing from unwanted data) and data to unlearn (specified by the user). Data to unlearn is assumed to
be smaller than the total data; hence, we are preparing a model from that unwanted data separately,
and this model helps the faulty model in eliminating the features from the unwanted data. This way,
the proposed method is quick and appropriate. We have shown the performance of the proposed
method theoretically in Theorem-1 and empirically in Table 3. In this work, we have shown the
results on two different datasets and on varying percentages of users and sizes of data. Results have
also been compared with baseline SISA and retraining. The proposed method has been proven ef-
ficient in terms of performance. The observations of the fusion based recommendation unlearning
in combination with rating aggregation are inspirational and motivating to future recommendation
unlearning models.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin
  Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 141–159. IEEE, 2021.
Jonathan Brophy and Daniel Lowd. Machine unlearning for random forests. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 1092–1104. PMLR, 2021.
Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.
Chong Chen, Fei Sun, Min Zhang, and Bolin Ding. Recommendation unlearning. In Proceedings
  of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 2768–2777, 2022.
Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang.
 When machine unlearning jeopardizes privacy. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Con-
 ference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 896–911, 2021.
Antonio Ginart, Melody Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Y Zou. Making ai forget you: Data
  deletion in machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. Lightgcn:
  Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In Proceedings of the
  43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval,
  pp. 639–648, 2020.
Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender
  systems. Computer, 42(8):30–37, 2009.
Yuyuan Li, Xiaolin Zheng, Chaochao Chen, and Junlin Liu. Making recommender systems forget:
  Learning and unlearning for erasable recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11491, 2022.
Ronak Mehta, Sourav Pal, Vikas Singh, and Sathya N Ravi. Deep unlearning via randomized condi-
  tionally independent hessians. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10422–10431, 2022.
Shumpei Okura, Yukihiro Tagami, Shingo Ono, and Akira Tajima. Embedding-based news rec-
  ommendation for millions of users. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1933–1942, 2017.
Sebastian Schelter, Stefan Grafberger, and Ted Dunning. Hedgecut: Maintaining randomised trees
  for low-latency machine unlearning. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on
  Management of Data, pp. 1545–1557, 2021.
Sheng-Chi You and Hsuan-Tien Lin. A simple unlearning framework for online learning under con-
  cept drifts. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 20th Pacific-Asia Conference,
  PAKDD 2016, Auckland, New Zealand, April 19-22, 2016, Proceedings, Part I 20, pp. 115–126.
  Springer, 2016.
Yang Zhang, Zhiyu Hu, Yimeng Bai, Fuli Feng, Jiancan Wu, Qifan Wang, and Xiangnan He. Rec-
  ommendation unlearning via influence function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02147, 2023.


                                              10
