Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G EN NBV: G ENERALIZABLE N EXT-B EST-V IEW
P OLICY FOR ACTIVE 3D R ECONSTRUCTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Even with the recent advances in neural radiance rendering (NeRF) enable high-
         quality digitization of large-scale scenes, the image-capturing process is time-
         consuming and labor-intensive. Previous works attempt to automate this process
         using active 3D reconstruction, with the Next-Best-View (NBV) policy being the
         most well-known. However, the majority of NBV policies are rule-based and only
         apply to a predefined limited action space, limiting their generalization ability.
         In this work, we propose GenNBV, a novel framework that endows the first free-
         space NBV policy with generalizability through end-to-end training. This pol-
         icy is reinforcement learning (RL)-based and empowers a 3D scanning drone to
         capture from any viewpoint and interact with the environment across diverse sce-
         narios, even those involving unseen structures during training. We also proposed
         a novel scene representation using action, geometric, and semantic embeddings,
         to further boost generalizability. To evaluate this NBV policy, we also establish
         a benchmark using the Isaac Gym simulator with the Houses3K and OmniOb-
         ject3D datasets. Experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves a 98.26%
         and 83.61% coverage ratio on unseen buildings from these datasets, respectively,
         outperforming prior solutions.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in 3D reconstruction (Park et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2021; 2022b) and neural ren-
dering (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2022) have significantly enhanced
the quality of 3D digitization of large-scale scenes, such as buildings and city landmarks (Hardouin
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Xiangli et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). To reconstruct a
large-scale scene, the conventional approaches need professional pilots to skillfully navigate drones
to capture multi-view images that can cover the majority. However, it typically takes a professional
team several days’ effort, thus limiting its scalability. Moreover, even professional pilots may miss
some parts of a building at the first scan, leading to extra time or multiple rounds for rescanning.
Such repetitive work exacerbates the already time-consuming and labor-intensive process.
To alleviate the manual effort in 3D scanning, active 3D reconstruction algorithms have emerged
as a promising approach to automate flight path design and viewpoint selection Devrim Kaba et al.
(2017); Chen et al. (2019); Chaplot et al. (2020). These algorithms enable robots to actively explore
and interact with unseen environments. They alternate between inferring optimal viewpoints, captur-
ing new data, and updating the rebuilt 3D model. The pioneering work is the Next-Best-View (NBV)
policy for reconstruction, which determines the sequence of optimal viewpoints for scanning (Lee
et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Peralta et al., 2020b; Guedon et al., 2022; Ran et al.,
2023). With the optimal key viewpoints selected by NBV policy, a continuous piloting path can
be generated using the classic planning modules, such as RRT (LaValle & Kuffner Jr, 2001) and
FMM (Sethian, 1996). However, existing NBV algorithms fail to generalize due to two key aspects:
1) Action space. Many previous methods select views from a limited action space, such as a set com-
posed of only one hundred candidate viewpoints (Pan et al., 2022), or a tiny pre-defined space like a
hemisphere (Lee et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Guedon et al., 2022; Ran et al., 2023). Nevertheless,
these predefined view sets may not apply to complicated scenes and thus reduce generalizability. 2)
Policy. Existing approaches like uncertainty-driven works (Lee et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Ran
et al., 2023) typically yield the NBV from hand-crafted rules from the scene representation. These
methods tend to overfit specific scenes and may fail to generalize.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            ya
                                                                  w   z
                                                       x


                NeRF
                                                                          y
                                                           pit
                                                                 ch


                                                 ...
                            Fail to Generalize     Train on Hundreds of Objects            Surface Reconstruction for Unseen Objects


        Uncertainty-guided NBV Policy                                     Our Generalizable Free-space NBV

Figure 1: To determine the best view for 3D reconstruction, previous methods only chose from pre-
defined views using manually defined rules on neural radiance field, lacking the ability to generalize
to unforeseen scenes (Left). With our end-to-end trained, generalized free-space policy, it can gen-
eralize to unseen objects, enabling the captured drone to image from any viewpoint (Right).


In this work, we propose GenNBV, the first framework that endows the free-space NBV policy
with generalizability through end-to-end training. First, for action space, we formulate a free space
composed of both the drone’s position and heading to make it capable of scanning a scene from
any viewpoint. In this action space, the agent drone interacts with the training environment by
sequentially collecting sensory information for a target building from viewpoints generated by an
end-to-end policy. Second, we proposed an end-to-end trainable and generalizable policy. Specifi-
cally, after each capture, we calculate a coverage ratio Isler et al. (2016); Peralta et al. (2020b) from
the reconstructed result and use it as a key component in the reward function. Once the coverage
ratio reaches a threshold or a collision happens, the environment is reset and the building to be recon-
structed is replaced. Leveraging the labeled trial-and-error experience, the policy is optimized using
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to maximize the average reward across all structures in diverse shapes
in the training stage. Consequently, the well-trained policy is capable of inferring near-optimal NBV
when encountering unseen structures, enabling a zero-shot generalizable reconstruction.
Furthermore, we design a novel multi-modal generalizable scene representation to improve the ro-
bustness of the policy network. At each step, our policy network selects the NBV based on a latent
state embedding derived from historical observations by the flying drone. Our multi-model state
embedding includes an action embedding from viewpoint information, semantic embedding from
the RGB images, and geometric embedding derived from a novel probabilistic voxel representation
from multi-view depth maps. This hybrid scene representation conveys the uncertainty of remaining
viewpoints and the completeness of the building reconstructed from the gathered viewpoints.
To validate the effectiveness of our method, we construct a dataset for training and evaluation with
Houses3K (Peralta et al., 2020a) in the NVIDIA Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021) simula-
tor and further test its generalization ability on novel building and object categories on OmniOb-
ject3D (Wu et al., 2023) and Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023). In contrast to commonly used metrics
in previous works, such as coverage ratio and number of views, we further propose to evaluate dif-
ferent methods with Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the coverage. It provides a comprehensive
indicator to reflect the model’s performance in both coverage sufficiency and view efficiency. Our
method outperforms others by a large margin in terms of all metrics. We also provide visualization
results and a demo video in the appendix to qualitatively evaluate our method.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Traditional 3D Reconstruction. Photometry and geometry are two crucial aspects of reconstruc-
tion evaluation. Neural implicit representation (Park et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020) has shown
progress in photometric rendering performance but faces challenges like time-consuming optimiza-
tion and poor generalization, hindering its application in real-time reconstruction problems such as
3D SLAM (Sucar et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Ortiz et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022; Rosinol et al.,
2022; Johari et al., 2023). Geometry, in contrast, typically corresponds to 3D representations such
as point clouds and 3D mesh and is directly related to issues like collision avoidance. Considering
these properties, researchers are prone to focus on geometric reconstruction in practical applications
and we also follow this stream.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Active 3D Reconstruction. Active 3D reconstruction is a promising field that has not been thor-
oughly benchmarked yet. The pioneering work is the Next-Best-View (NBV) policy for reconstruc-
tion, which determines the sequence of optimal viewpoints for scanning (Lee et al., 2022; Pan et al.,
2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Peralta et al., 2020b; Guedon et al., 2022; Ran et al., 2023). These works
can be pivotally differentiated based on the paradigm of NBV policies: rule-based or learning-based.
Existing rule-based approaches like uncertainty-driven works (Lee et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022;
Ran et al., 2023) typically yield the NBV from hand-crafted rules from the scene representation,
which tends to overfit specific scenes. Most learning-based policies (Chen et al., 2019; Chaplot
et al., 2020; Peralta et al., 2020b) use a deep reinforcement learning algorithm like PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017) to sequentially predict the optimal viewpoints based on observation. They must obtain
feedback from task-related rewards such as coverage ratio (Peralta et al., 2020b; Guedon et al.,
2022) and optimize during massive iteration with task environment.
The action space is designed based on the paradigm of NBV policies. Most rule-based NBV policies
select views from a limited action space, such as a set composed of only one hundred candidate
viewpoints (Pan et al., 2022), a tiny pre-defined space like a hemisphere (Lee et al., 2022; Zhan
et al., 2022; Guedon et al., 2022; Ran et al., 2023), making it possible to overlook some important
viewpoints due to unavailability. Even though learning-based category further explore the larger
action space like a 2D plain (Chen et al., 2019; Chaplot et al., 2020) or a constrained 3D space
(Peralta et al., 2020b), their limited action space still prevent them from capturing sufficient details
for 3D reconstruction.
Scene representation built from history observations, which directly provide reconstruction progress
to NBV policies, is also a crucial aspect of the active 3D reconstruction framework. Previous works
have explored visual representations for NBV policies, such as TSDF (Hardouin et al., 2020), neural
radiance field (Adamkiewicz et al., 2022), and 2D BEV maps (Chaplot et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2022;
Guo et al., 2022). However, implicit representations are hard to jointly with learning-based NBV
policies, and 2D BEV map lacks sufficient information for large-scale outdoor scenes that contain
numerous geometric details in 3D space.
Generalizable Reinforcement Learning. Increasing the diversity of training data leads to better
generalizability (Cobbe et al., 2020). In the robotics field, domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017)
allows legged robots to walk on various terrains absent from the training environment. For end-to-
end driving policy, training in large-scale synthetic and realistic scenarios improves the safety of
autonomous cars (Li et al., 2022b;a) in unseen test scenarios. Scan-RL (Peralta et al., 2020b) and
SCONE (Guedon et al., 2022) are two pioneering works investigating the generalizability of active
3D reconstruction frameworks, while both of them suffer from the constrain of viewpoint sampling
in limited space. In this work, we tackle the aforementioned issues by predicting NBV in free 3D
space with a learning-based planner, which is trained with a dataset containing buildings in various
shapes and poses for acquiring generalizability for unseen buildings.


3     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we deliver our active 3D reconstruction framework GenNBV, especially the pivotal
Next-Best-View policy. An overview of our framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. Firstly, we formu-
late the NBV problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), with a novel design of observations
(blue boxes in Fig. 2) and action space in Sec. 3.1. Next, we elaborate our end-to-end NBV pol-
icy ⇡ (orange box in Fig. 2) in Sec. 3.2. Inspired by Curl (Laskin et al., 2020), we point out that
generalizability greatly depends on how to extract embeddings (green box in Fig. 2), which reflect
the reconstruction progress, from raw sensory observations like RGB images and camera poses. In
Sec. 3.3, we introduce the reward function (right-hand side of Fig. 2) reflecting the optimization
objective and the details of policy optimization.

3.1   F ORMULATION OF THE N EXT-B EST-V IEW P ROBLEM

We formulate the NBV problem as learning an optimal policy ⇡ that controls the capturing process,
such that enough information is captured for large-scale scene reconstruction, with limited decision-
making budgets. As capturing, transferring, and processing a large set of captured images introduce
significant computational costs, we also want to design a policy that also minimizes the number of


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                  Hybrid Scene Representation
  [x: -4, y: -5, z: 7, yaw: -120, pitch: -45]           Historical Observations         z
                                                                                  yaw                                                          Pose State 1
                                                                                               y


                                                                                                                                                ...
                                                                                  x
                                                                                            pitch
                                                                                                                                              Pose State t

                                                                                                    Semantic Repre. $!" Geometric Repre. $!# Historical Poses
                  Step 2                                                                                                                                         ΔCoverage Ratio

                                                                                                                          Vectorization
   [x: 4, y: -6, z: 2, yaw: -60, pitch: 10]



                                                Training Dataset


                                                                          ...                           Action !!
                                                                                                                          Policy
                  Step 1                                                                                                                          Inference     Reward Calculation


Figure 2: Overview of our proposed framework GenNBV. Our end-to-end policy takes the historical
multi-modal observations as input, transforms them into a more informative scene representation,
and produces the next viewpoint position. A reward signal will be returned at training time to opti-
mize the end-to-end policy for maximizing the expected cumulative reward in one episode. Specifi-
cally, the signal is the increased coverage ratio after collecting a new viewpoint.


captured images. Therefore, our policy only captures sparse keyframes that sufficiently record all
details of objects.
As shown in Fig. 2, at each time step t, the agent receives a visual observation ot , takes an action
at , infers the action at the next time step t + 1 to move to a new location, and then receives a
new visual observation, repeating this interaction with the environment until the episode ends. Our
simulated agent is embodied as CrazyFlie (Giernacki et al., 2017), a type of unmanned aerial vehicle
equipped with various sensors, including an RGB-D camera and an IMU, to execute data collection
for reconstruction. We discussed the details of the observation space and action space below.
Observation Space. As shown in the left column of Fig. 2, at each time step, the agent receives
an RGB image It , a depth map Dt , and a state vector including the heading (yaw and pitch) and
position (x, y, z) of the onboard camera. The observation ot (yellow box in Fig. 2) consists of all
previously captured images in one episode, historical actions, and the current captures and actions.
With this information as input, the policy network can estimate the progress of data collection and
determine where to scan next.
Action Space. Unlike most previous NBV algorithms, we use larger action space in order to cover
all details of objects. Specifically, we use the camera location and camera angle as our action space,
which is a 5-dimension vector consisting of 3D position coordinates and 2D rotation angles (yaw-
axis and pitch-axis). We restrict the roll-axis rotation as it is not supported in all drone platforms.

3.2         G ENERALIZABLE S TATE E MBEDDING

To ensure that the policy learned on one set of 3D objects can generalize to objects with different
appearances and structures, a smart state embedding of raw sensor observations is needed to capture
invariant features across different objects. Previous methods (Peralta et al., 2020b; Chaplot et al.,
2020) only extract representations in 2D space, which are very sensible to appearance changes, and
our experiments have shown that policies only trained on 2D features may not generalize to different
objects. Instead, we propose a multi-model representation that has better generalizability.
Specifically, we first build two mid-level representations that can better model the relationship be-
tween the 3D object and our agent: a 3D geometric representation F G from depth maps and a
semantic representation F S from RGB images. Then we encode these mid-level representations
and concatenate them with a pose embedding into state embedding st , guiding the NBV policy for
subsequent decision-making. The overall encoder for state embedding is shown in Fig. 2, and details
of each representation are discussed below.
Geometric Representation One simple way to record the geometry of a 3D object is using a bi-
nary 3D occupancy map (Chaplot et al., 2020), where the value of each cell in the 3D cube indicates
whether a cell contains a 3D object or not. However, since the 3D representation is gradually updated
with newly captured data, this simple binary occupancy map cannot differentiate a real unoccupied


                                                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cell from an unscanned cell. An unscanned cell is a strong indicator that the agent should capture
more data in this region, while no further scan is needed for a real unoccupied cell.
Previous works (Chaplot et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2022) simplify the 3D scene repre-
sentation into a 2D Bird’s Eye View map for actively reconstructing indoor scenes. However, the 2D
BEV map lacks sufficient information for our large-scale outdoor scenes that contain many geomet-
ric details in 3D space. In addition, their wheeled robotic platforms are constrained to freely scan
and represent these outdoor scenes. Therefore, to model the scanning process in 3D free space, we
employ the probabilistic 3D grid (Thrun, 2002) as our geometric 3D representation, which records
the probability of each 3D voxel being captured or not. Specifically, we first obtain a 3D point cloud
in the world coordinate by back-projecting all 2D pixels to 3D points, using the depth map Dt , cam-
era intrinsic parameters, and camera pose at . By voxelizing the obtained point cloud, we then build
a 3D occupancy grid that explicitly indicates the binary state (occupied or free) in this 3D space.
Subsequently, we represent this 3D grid as a probabilistic occupancy grid FtG and extend the state
space of voxels with three states (occupied, free, unknown).
During each scanning (one episode in RL), at each step t + 1, we update the probabilistic occu-
pancy grid Ft+1
             G
                 based on the preceding grid FtG and current observation. Specifically, the grid is
updated through Bresenham’s line algorithm (Bresenham, 1965), which casts the ray path in 3D
space between the camera viewpoint and the endpoints among the point cloud back-projected from
depth Dt+1 . Following the classical occupancy grid mapping algorithm (Thrun, 2002), we have the
log-odds formulation of occupancy probability:

                                log Odd(vi |zj ) = log Odd(vi ) + C,                               (1)

where vi denotes the occupancy probability of ith voxel in the grid FtG , zj is the measurement event
that j th camera ray passes through this voxel and C is an empirical constant. The derivation can be
found in Appendix. A.3. Thus, we update the log-odds occupancy probability of each voxel in the
grid FtG by adding a constant one time when a single camera ray passes through this voxel. Note
that the probabilistic occupancy grid F G is continually updated within one episode. Finally, the
occupancy status of voxels is classified into three categories: unknown, occupied, and free, using
preset probability thresholds.
Semantic Representation. Geometric representation enables agents to comprehend spatial occu-
pancy, yet it’s insufficient for perceiving the environment. For example, when observing a hole in
an object, the agent may struggle to differentiate between incomplete scanning and the actual pres-
ence of a hole in the object. In such cases, the semantic information contained in the captured RGB
images can help the agent distinguish between these two scenarios.
To provide semantic information, we employ a preprocessing module that takes as input the current
frame of RGB image It and preceding k frames and converts these frames [It , It 1 , ..., It k ] to
grayscale, and concatenate them as output, following Peralta et al. (2020b). Then the preprocessed
frames are fed into a two-layer convolutional network for extracting the semantic representation FtS .
State Embedding. To further combine the semantic and geometric embeddings, we first encode
them to sSt = f S (FtS ) and sG
                              t = f (Ft ) where f are learnable networks Linear(Flatten(x)),
                                     G    G            ⇤

as shown in Fig. 2. Subsequently, we combine them with the historical action embedding sA    t =
Linear(a1:t ) to generate the final state embedding st , as the input to the policy network. This
process can be formulated as: st = Linear(sG      S A
                                             t ; st ; st ).

Policy Network. Taking the state embedding st as input, the policy network is a 3-layer multilayer
perceptron network (MLP) whose output is used to parameterize a normal distribution over action
space. In this way, the action can be drawn from the stochastic policy a ⇠ ⇡(·|ot ).

3.3   R EWARD F UNCTION AND O PTIMIZATION

We train the end-to-end policy with reinforcement learning (RL) and hence design a reward function
to precisely reflect the task objective for 3D reconstruction. The policy is optimized with proximal
policy optimization Schulman et al. (2017) (PPO) for parallelizing sampling.
Reward Function. With the occupancy probability FtG at time step t, we can threshold each voxel
with an empirical bound to determine if it is occupied or not. This discrimination process outputs a


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


binary occupancy grid with Ñt voxels being occupied, which is used to calculate the coverage ratio:
                                              Ñt
                                            CRt = · 100%,                                    (2)
                                              N⇤
where N ⇤ is the number of ground-truth occupied voxels representing the surface of objects. To
encourage our NBV policy to cover as many unseen views as possible, we use the difference of
coverage ratio (CR) between two consecutive steps as the reward function rCR :
                                           CR
                                          rt+1 = CRt+1        CRt .                                        (3)

In free-space exploration, we also need to avoid collision. Previous limited-space agents (Lee et al.,
2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Guedon et al., 2022) do not consider collision avoidance since their search
space, like hemisphere, is by-design safe. Thus, we add a negative reward for collision and termi-
nate the episode if a collision happens or the current coverage ratio is greater than 95%. We also
implement a negative reward when the number of captured keyframes is over an empirical threshold
to improve the path efficiency.
Policy Optimization. Once the reward function has been specified, the policy can be learned
through any off-the-shelf RL algorithm. In this work, we specifically use PPO as thousands of
workers can be parallelized to improve the sample efficiency. Specifically, given our parameterized
policy ⇡✓ , the objective of PPO is to maximize the following objective function:
                                          
                                             ⇡✓ (at |st ) ⇡✓
                               L(✓) = Et                    A old (st , at ) ,                  (4)
                                            ⇡✓old (at |st )
where A⇡✓old (st , at ) is the advantage function that measures the value of taking action at at state st
under the current policy ⇡✓old . To prevent significant deviation of the new policy from the old policy,
PPO incorporates a clipped surrogate objective function:
          LCLIP (✓) = Et [min (⌘t (✓)A⇡✓old (st , at ), clip(rt (✓), 1   ✏, 1 + ✏)A⇡✓old (st , at ))] ,    (5)

where ⌘t (✓) = ⇡⇡✓✓ (a(at |s t)
                          t |st )
                                  and ✏ is a hyper-parameter that controls the size of the trust region.
                  old



4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments on Houses3K Peralta et al. (2020a), OmniObject3D Wu
et al. (2023), and Objaverse Deitke et al. (2023). For our policy and other learning-based policies,
we train them on Houses3K training datasets. After this, we evaluate all policies on the Houses3K
test dataset and the OmniObject3D dataset for quantifying the in-distribution and out-of-distribution
generalizability. Finally, we show the visualization results on three datasets, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Simulation Environment. We conduct all experiments in NVIDIA Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al.,
2021), a physics simulation platform designed for reinforcement learning and robotics research.
With GPU-accelerated tensor API and sensor interaction API, we can easily implement customized
CUDA kernels to efficiently calculate our geometric representation. Moreover, the sensor simulation
is efficient. It can run up to 1000 FPS, significantly reducing the training time. We create the agent
drone CrazyFlie (Giernacki et al., 2017) and equip it with sensors including RGB-D cameras and
IMU. Considering memory limitations, we downsample the image resolution to 400 ⇥ 400. The
vertical field of view of this onboard camera is 90°. We also set up a point light source with a fixed
position and constant intensity in Isaac Gym.
Dataset. We conduct our experiments on Houses3K (Peralta et al., 2020a), OmniObject3D (Wu
et al., 2023) and Objaverse 1.0 (Deitke et al., 2023). Our model is trained on large-scale 3D objects
from Houses3K. To validate the effectiveness and generalizability of our model, we evaluate it on
unseen 3D objects from Houses3K. For testing the cross-dataset generalizability, we also evaluate
it on batches of various objects from OmniObject3D and Objaverse datasets, which include both
house and non-house categories.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Evaluation results of Next-Best-View policies for active 3D reconstruction on Houses3K
and the house category from OmniObject3D. The number of views is set to 30 and 20 for Houses3K
and OmniObject3D, respectively. “*”: the policy is trained with the Houses3K training set and
evaluated with holdout Houses3K test set and OmniObject3D test set. “†”: the ungeneralizable
policy is directly trained and evaluated on corresponding test sets.

  Dataset                                           Houses3K                  OmniObject3D
                                           Mean       Final Coverage     Mean     Final Coverage
  Policy                                   AUC "          Ratio "        AUC "       Ratio "
  Random                                   48.53%         58.24%         51.75%         63.48%
  Random Hemisphere                        71.19%         79.72%         63.70%         72.91%
  Uniform Hemisphere                       82.91%         89.71%         71.55%         79.99%
  †Uncertainty-Guided (Lee et al., 2022)   83.13%         89.31%         69.48%         79.93%
  †ActiveRMap (Zhan et al., 2022)          84.86%         90.77%         71.80%         80.19%
  *Scan-RL (Peralta et al., 2020b)         87.39%         95.63%         74.75%         80.63%
  *GenNBV (Ours)                           91.19%         98.26%         76.31%         83.61%



Houses3K contains 3,000 textured 3D building models. They are divided into 12 batches, with each
batch featuring 50 distinct geometries and 5 varying textures. We further eliminate poorly designed
geometries based on the following two criteria: 1) objects with complex internal structures (as we
are mostly focusing on the surface reconstruction), and 2) objects with redundant bases at bottom.
Following these criteria, the training set consists of 256 objects from 6 selected batches, and the
test set consists of 50 objects from another batch. All these selected training and test objects have
distinct geometries.
OmniObject3D offers a collection of 6K high-fidelity objects that are scanned from real-world
sources across 190 typical categories. The house category from OmniObject3D for evaluation has
43 diverse objects. In contrast, Objaverse 1.0 comprises a vast library of 818K 3D synthetic objects
spanning 21K categories. The diverse and high-quality nature of these datasets makes them ideal for
evaluating our models and visualizing the results.
Evaluation Metrics. The objective of NBV policies is to capture the most useful information for
reconstruction, with the least number of views. Most prior works (Peralta et al., 2020b; Guedon
et al., 2022) use the coverage ratio (%) and the number of views to evaluate the performance of NBV
planning policies. Coverage Ratio (%) (Isler et al., 2016) quantifies the geometric completeness of
reconstruction, but is highly correlated with the number of views. Therefore, we propose to unify
the number of views to a fixed value for all NBV policies during evaluation and use the area under
the curve (AUC) of coverage ratio as the main metric for comparison. Thus we report the Final
Coverage Ratio and Mean AUC along with the consistent number of views in all tables.
Implementation Details. We conduct all experiments in Isaac Gym simulation engine with one
NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. Our implementation refers to the codebase of Legged Gym (Rudin et al.,
2021) and the PPO implementation in Stable Baseline3 (Raffin et al., 2021). The ground-truth point
clouds on objects’ surfaces are sampled by the Poisson Disk sampling method (Yuksel, 2015) using
Open3D API (Zhou et al., 2018). Please refer to the Appendix A for further details.


4.2 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON
To comprehensively demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of GenNBV, we design three
levels of evaluation experiments: 1) As shown in Table 1, we show the performance of our NBV
policy on the Houses3K test set; 2) We evaluate the policy trained on Houses3K training set to the
house category from OmniObject3D which has completely different geometric structures and tex-
tures compared to Houses3K training set. The quantitative result is at Table 1 and the visualization
result is as shown in Fig. 3; 3) we also compare the generalizability of GenNBV with others by
evaluations on an outdoor scene with enormous details from Objaverse to demonstrate the potential
of GenNBV to generalize to the city-scale scene.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 2: Ablation studies of representations in our framework on Houses3K test set.

                                    Representation Category          Evaluation Metrics
                               Probabilistic   5-DoF      RGB     Mean      Final Coverage
                                 3D Grid        Pose     Image    AUC "         Ratio "
                                    X
         Multimodal Unimodal
                                                                  81.06%        84.56%
                                                 X                69.53%        76.61%
                                                              X   81.24%        87.90%
                                    X            X                88.66%        96.67%
                                    X                         X   89.77%        95.31%
                                                 X            X   88.30%        96.29%
                                    X            X            X   91.19%        98.26%



We implement the following six policies as our baseline algorithms. 1) Random: This policy ran-
domly generates 5-dim vector (x, y, z, pitch, yaw) among the action space as the next viewpoint.
2) Random Hemisphere: This policy randomly generates the next positions on a pre-defined hemi-
sphere that sufficiently covers all objects of the test set. The headings are constrained to point to
the center of the hemisphere. 3) Uniform Hemisphere: All positions are evenly distributed on the
previously mentioned hemispheres. 4) Uncertainty-Guided Policy (Lee et al., 2022): This NBV
selection policy iteratively selects the next view from a pre-defined viewpoint set according to the
uncertainty based on a continuously optimized neural radiance field. 5) ActiveRMap (Zhan et al.,
2022): This policy also adopts an iterative selection framework, with multiple objectives including
information gain, to select the next viewpoints from the candidate set. 6) Scan-RL: This RL-based
NBV policy predicts the next viewpoint only relying on the historical RGB images.
As shown in Table 1, GenNBV shows the best in-distribution and out-of-distribution generaliz-
ability in both coverage sufficiency and view efficiency, when evaluated on test sets consisting of
unseen objects from Houses3K and OmniObject3D. Moreover, learning-based NBV policies such
as GenNBV and Scan-RL, with much larger action space, outperform all rule-based baselines, even
if ActiveRMap and Uncertainty-Guided baselines are trained and evaluated on the same 3D objects.



4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

In Sec. 3.2, we introduce how to build the state embedding from diverse features. Here we reveal the
importance of specific features with the ablation results shown in Table 2. Thanks to the same shape
of features and state embedding, we only need to adjust the input dimension of the linear layer of
state embedding according to the modal type when ablating the model.
To investigate the effect of our multimodal representation, we also evaluate the effect of different
combinations of representation categories in Table 2. In unimodal experiments, we design the 5-
DoF Pose baseline (i.e. Prior Trajectory) that learns an empirically optimal trajectory, which helps
understand the effectiveness of prior knowledge in active 3D reconstruction. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our multimodal representation for policy learning in multimodal experiments.



4.4   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We visualize the reconstruction results generated from the scanning trajectory of a single episode
in Fig. 3. It demonstrates that our next-best-view policy can reconstruct objects better in terms of
completeness and appearance quality compared to Scan-RL. We further visualize the reconstruction
results of an outdoor scene from Objaverse using 30 collected views in Fig. 4.


                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scan-RL


GenNBV
 (Ours)


                                                  (a) Houses3K



Scan-RL


GenNBV
 (Ours)


                                                  (b) OmniObject3D

Figure 3: The visualization results of unseen 3D objects reconstructed by Scan-RL (Peralta et al., 2020b) and
our model to compare the generalizability. (a) Unseen buildings from the test set of Houses3K. (b) Unseen
buildings from OmniObject3D. It is obvious that some parts of the model reconstructed by Scan-RL are wrong
or missing. For example, the second object in the first row has a pillar in the wrong shape. Scan-RL fails to
reconstruct the roof edge for the fourth object from OmniObject3D, as shown in the third row.


      Uncertainty-guided                         Scan-RL                             GenNBV (Ours)


Figure 4: The visualization results of an unseen 3D outdoor scene with enormous details from Objaverse,
reconstructed by Uncertainty-guided, Scan-RL and our model. Compared to the uncertainty-guided method
and Scan-RL, the scene reconstructed by our method is more watertight and has fewer holes on the ground and
building surface, especially in the region highlighted by the red box.

5    C ONCLUSION
This study presents an end-to-end approach for active 3D scene reconstruction, reducing the need
for manual intervention. Specifically, the learning-based policy explores how to reconstruct diverse
objects in the training stage and thus can generalize to reconstruct unseen objects in a fully au-
tonomous manner. Our controller maneuvers in free space and the next best view selection based on
a hybrid scene representation which conveys scene coverage status and thus reconstruction progress.
We show the effectiveness of our approach by testing it on multiple datasets including Houses3K,
OmniObject3D, and Objaverse. The quantitative and qualitative results on Houses3K and Objaverse
show that our method outperforms other baselines in terms of in-distribution and out-of-distribution
generalizability. In addition, the experiment conducted on Objaverse shows that the policy trained
in single-building settings can even generalize to a large-scale outdoor scene.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michal Adamkiewicz, Timothy Chen, Adam Caccavale, Rachel Gardner, Preston Culbertson, Jean-
 nette Bohg, and Mac Schwager. Vision-only robot navigation in a neural radiance world. IEEE
 Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):4606–4613, 2022.
Jack E Bresenham. Algorithm for computer control of a digital plotter. IBM Systems journal, 4(1):
  25–30, 1965.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Saurabh Gupta, Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. Learning to explore using active neural slam. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance
  fields. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 333–350. Springer, 2022.
Tao Chen, Saurabh Gupta, and Abhinav Gupta. Learning exploration policies for navigation. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2048–
  2056. PMLR, 2020.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of anno-
 tated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 13142–13153, 2023.
Mustafa Devrim Kaba, Mustafa Gokhan Uzunbas, and Ser Nam Lim. A reinforcement learning
 approach to the view planning problem. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6933–6941, 2017.
Wojciech Giernacki, Mateusz Skwierczyński, Wojciech Witwicki, Paweł Wroński, and Piotr Kozier-
 ski. Crazyflie 2.0 quadrotor as a platform for research and education in robotics and control en-
 gineering. In 2017 22nd International Conference on Methods and Models in Automation and
 Robotics (MMAR), pp. 37–42. IEEE, 2017.
Antoine Guedon, Pascal Monasse, and Vincent Lepetit. Scone: Surface coverage optimization in
  unknown environments by volumetric integration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Junfu Guo, Changhao Li, Xi Xia, Ruizhen Hu, and Ligang Liu. Asynchronous collaborative au-
  toscanning with mode switching for multi-robot scene reconstruction. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 41(6):1–13, 2022.
Guillaume Hardouin, Julien Moras, Fabio Morbidi, Julien Marzat, and El Mustapha Mouaddib.
  Next-best-view planning for surface reconstruction of large-scale 3d environments with multiple
  uavs. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
  1567–1574. IEEE, 2020.
Stefan Isler, Reza Sabzevari, Jeffrey Delmerico, and Davide Scaramuzza. An information gain
  formulation for active volumetric 3d reconstruction. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3477–3484. IEEE, 2016.
Mohammad Mahdi Johari, Camilla Carta, and François Fleuret. Eslam: Efficient dense slam sys-
 tem based on hybrid representation of signed distance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17408–17419, 2023.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5639–
 5650. PMLR, 2020.
Steven M LaValle and James J Kuffner Jr. Randomized kinodynamic planning. The international
  journal of robotics research, 20(5):378–400, 2001.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Soomin Lee, Le Chen, Jiahao Wang, Alexander Liniger, Suryansh Kumar, and Fisher Yu. Un-
  certainty guided policy for active robotic 3d reconstruction using neural radiance fields. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):12070–12077, 2022.
Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Chenda Duan, Wenjie Mo, Bolei Zhou, et al. Scenarionet:
  Open-source platform for large-scale traffic scenario simulation and modeling. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a.
Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Qihang Zhang, Zhenghai Xue, and Bolei Zhou. Metadrive:
  Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE transactions
  on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 45(3):3461–3475, 2022b.
Yixuan Li, Lihan Jiang, Linning Xu, Yuanbo Xiangli, Zhenzhi Wang, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai.
  Matrixcity: A large-scale city dataset for city-scale neural rendering and beyond. arXiv e-prints,
  pp. arXiv–2308, 2023.
Yilin Liu, Liqiang Lin, Yue Hu, Ke Xie, Chi-Wing Fu, Hao Zhang, and Hui Huang. Learning
  reconstructability for drone aerial path planning. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(6):
  1–17, 2022.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, and Gavriel State. Isaac gym: High
  performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning, 2021.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part I 16, pp. 405–421. Springer, 2020.
Joseph Ortiz, Alexander Clegg, Jing Dong, Edgar Sucar, David Novotny, Michael Zollhoefer, and
  Mustafa Mukadam. isdf: Real-time neural signed distance fields for robot perception. Robotics:
  Science and Systems, 2022.
Xuran Pan, Zihang Lai, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Activenerf: Learning where to see with uncer-
  tainty estimation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel,
  October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXIII, pp. 230–246. Springer, 2022.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 165–174, 2019.
Daryl Peralta, Joel Casimiro, Aldrin Michael Nilles, Justine Aletta Aguilar, Rowel Atienza, and
  Rhandley Cajote. Houses3k dataset. https://github.com/darylperalta/Houses3K,
  2020a.
Daryl Peralta, Joel Casimiro, Aldrin Michael Nilles, Justine Aletta Aguilar, Rowel Atienza, and
  Rhandley Cajote. Next-best view policy for 3d reconstruction. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020
  Workshops: Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 558–573. Springer,
  2020b.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. The Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(1):12348–12355, 2021.
Yunlong Ran, Jing Zeng, Shibo He, Jiming Chen, Lincheng Li, Yingfeng Chen, Gimhee Lee, and
  Qi Ye. Neurar: Neural uncertainty for autonomous 3d reconstruction with implicit neural repre-
  sentations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone. Nerf-slam: Real-time dense monocular slam
  with neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13641, 2022.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
  2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
James A Sethian. A fast marching level set method for monotonically advancing fronts. proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(4):1591–1595, 1996.
Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davison. imap: Implicit mapping and po-
  sitioning in real-time. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 6229–6238, 2021.
Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast con-
  vergence for radiance fields reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5459–5469, 2022a.
Jiaming Sun, Yiming Xie, Linghao Chen, Xiaowei Zhou, and Hujun Bao. Neuralrecon: Real-time
   coherent 3d reconstruction from monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
   on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15598–15607, 2021.
Jiaming Sun, Xi Chen, Qianqian Wang, Zhengqi Li, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Xiaowei Zhou, and Noah
   Snavely. Neural 3D reconstruction in the wild. In SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings, 2022b.
Sebastian Thrun. Probabilistic robotics. Communications of the ACM, 45(3):52–57, 2002.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
  main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
  2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30.
  IEEE, 2017.
Tong Wu, Jiarui Zhang, Xiao Fu, Yuxin Wang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Wayne Wu, Lei Yang, Jiaqi
  Wang, Chen Qian, et al. Omniobject3d: Large-vocabulary 3d object dataset for realistic percep-
  tion, reconstruction and generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 803–814, 2023.
Yuanbo Xiangli, Linning Xu, Xingang Pan, Nanxuan Zhao, Anyi Rao, Christian Theobalt, Bo Dai,
  and Dahua Lin. Bungeenerf: Progressive neural radiance field for extreme multi-scale scene
  rendering. In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
Kai Ye, Siyan Dong, Qingnan Fan, He Wang, Li Yi, Fei Xia, Jue Wang, and Baoquan Chen. Multi-
  robot active mapping via neural bipartite graph matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14839–14848, 2022.
Cem Yuksel. Sample elimination for generating poisson disk sample sets. Computer Graphics
  Forum, 34(2):25–32, 2015.
Huangying Zhan, Jiyang Zheng, Yi Xu, Ian Reid, and Hamid Rezatofighi. Activermap: Radiance
  field for active mapping and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12656, 2022.
Han Zhang, Yucong Yao, Ke Xie, Chi-Wing Fu, Hao Zhang, and Hui Huang. Continuous aerial path
  planning for 3d urban scene reconstruction. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(6):225–1, 2021.
Xiaoshuai Zhang, Sai Bi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Hao Su, and Zexiang Xu. Nerfusion: Fusing radi-
  ance fields for large-scale scene reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5449–5458, 2022.
Qian-Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. Open3D: A modern library for 3D data processing.
  arXiv:1801.09847, 2018.
Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Os-
  wald, and Marc Pollefeys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12786–12796,
  2022.


                                               12
