Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HERE W E H AVE A RRIVED IN P ROVING THE E MER -
GENCE OF S PARSE I NTERACTION P RIMITIVES IN
DNN S
 Qihan Ren, Jiayang Gao, Wen Shen, Quanshi ZhangвҲ—
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
 {renqihan,gjy0515,adashen,zqs1022}@sjtu.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
         This study aims to prove the emergence of symbolic concepts (or more precisely,
         sparse primitive inference patterns) in well-trained deep neural networks (DNNs).
         Specifically, we prove the following three conditions for the emergence. (i) The
         high-order derivatives of the network output with respect to the input variables are
         all zero. (ii) The DNN can be used on occluded samples and when the input sam-
         ple is less occluded, the DNN will yield higher confidence. (iii) The confidence of
         the DNN does not significantly degrade on occluded samples. These conditions
         are quite common, and we prove that under these conditions, the DNN will only
         encode a relatively small number of sparse interactions between input variables.
         Moreover, we can consider such interactions as symbolic primitive inference pat-
         terns encoded by a DNN, because we show that inference scores of the DNN on
         an exponentially large number of randomly masked samples can always be well
         mimicked by numerical effects of just a few interactions. The code is available at
         https://github.com/sjtu-xai-lab/interaction-sparsity.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In the field of explainable AI, one of the fundamental problems is whether the inference logic of a
deep neural network (DNN) can really be explained as symbolic concepts. Although some interest-
ing phenomena of the emergence of concepts in DNNs have been discovered in previous studies (Li
& Zhang, 2023b; Ren et al., 2023a), the core problem is still not strictly formulated or proven, i.e.,
strictly proving whether the knowledge encoded by DNNs is indeed symbolic.
To this end, it is a significant challenge to prove whether or not the knowledge encoded by a black-
box DNN is symbolic. Up to now, heuristic studies usually explained DNN features using manually
annotated concepts (Bau et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018), without formally defining or proving the
concepts in a DNN. Thus, the proof of the emergence of symbolic concepts in DNNs will have a
profound impact on both theory and practice.
However, the definition of concepts encoded by a DNN is still an open problem, because it is a
complex cross-disciplinary issue related to cognitive science, neuroscience, and mathematics. Nev-
ertheless, let us ignore cognitive issues and limit our discussion to the scope of whether we can
obtain a relatively small set of primitive inference patterns to strictly explain the complex changes
of inference scores of the DNN on different input samples.
To be precise, we hope to prove a set of sufficient conditions to enable us to represent the knowledge
of a DNN as symbolic primitives. To this end, if we ignore cognitive issues, Ren et al. (2023a)
and Li & Zhang (2023b) have considered Harsanyi interactions (Harsanyi, 1963) to represent the
symbolic primitives encoded by a DNN. It is because they have empirically observed that a well-
trained DNN usually only encoded a few salient interactions, and they have also observed that the
network output could be well mimicked by these interactions. Specifically, each interaction repre-
sents an AND relationship between a set S of input variables, and this interaction has a numerical
effect I(S) on the inference score of the DNN. The input variables can be image regions for image
classification or words for natural language processing. As Figure 1 shows, when classifying a dog
   вҲ—
     Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         рқ‘Ј(рқ’ҷ)
                                        рқ‘Ҷ1                     Interaction 1        рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ1 = 0.4
                                                                (activated)
          вҖҰ
                    Explained as                                Interaction 2 рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ2 = 0
                                   рқ‘Ҷ3          рқ‘Ҙ2 рқ‘Ҙ1            (deactivated)                    рқ‘Ј(рқ’ҷ) = рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ1 + рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ2
    Feed to   DNN                                                             рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ3 = 0                  +рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ3 + вӢҜ
                                               рқ‘Ҙ3
                                                        рқ‘Ҷ2          Interaction 3
                                                                    (deactivated)
                                        рқ‘Ҙ4
                                                                ...

Figure 1: Illustration of interactions encoded by a DNN. Each interaction S corresponds to an AND
relationship among a specific set S of input variables (image patches). The patches x1 and x4 are
masked, so that interactions S2 and S3 are deactivated.

image, a DNN may encode a salient interaction among three image regions in S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }.
Only when all three image regions are present will the interaction be activated and contribute a nu-
merical effect I(S) to the inference score of the DNN. Masking any regions in S will deactivate the
interactions and make I(S) = 0.
Therefore, the proof of the emergence of interaction primitives is to prove a set of common con-
ditions, which makes a DNN only encode a small number of symbolic (sparse) interactions. It
means that given an input sample x, the inference score v(x) of the DNNP can be disentangled into
the sum of the effects I(S) of a few salient interactions, i.e., v(x) вүҲ SвҲҲв„Ұsalient I(S) + bias, which
can be called interaction primitives. Specifically, we prove three conditions. (i) The DNN has at
most M -th order non-zero derivatives, where M < n, and n is the number of input variables to
the DNN. (ii) The DNN can be used on occluded samples (e.g., an image with some patches being
masked), and yields a higher classification confidence when the sample is less occluded. (iii) The
classification confidence of the DNN does not significantly degrade on occluded samples. Because
these conditions are common for many DNNs, and the proof does not depend on the specific archi-
tecture of the network, our proof ensures that the emergence of symbolic interaction primitives is a
universal phenomenon for various networks trained for different tasks.
In fact, the essential reason for the emergence of sparse interaction primitives is neither the architec-
ture of the neural network, nor the sparsity of network parameters/intermediate-layer features, but
the property of the task. To be precise, when the task requires the DNN to conduct smooth inference
on masked/occluded samples, a well-trained DNN usually encodes sparse interaction primitives.

2   R ELATED W ORK
We have developed a system of game-theoretic interactions for explaining DNNs in the last three
years, and have published more than fifteen papers in this direction. This system focused on ad-
dressing the following problems in explainable AI: (i) explicitly defining, extracting, and counting
interactions encoded by a DNN, (ii) explaining the representation capacity (e.g., generalization abil-
ity and adversarial robustness) of DNNs from the perspective of interaction, and (iii) summariz-
ing/explaining common mechanisms shared by different empirical deep learning methods.
вҖў Explicitly defining and extracting interactions encoded by a DNN. A representative approach in
explainable AI was to explain the interactions between different input variables (Sundararajan et al.,
2020; Tsai et al., 2022). Based on game theory, Zhang et al. (2021a;b; 2020) defined multi-variate
interaction and multi-order interaction. Ren et al. (2023a) discovered the sparsity of interactions in
experiments. Li & Zhang (2023b) further discovered that salient interactions were usually transfer-
able across different input samples and exhibited certain discrimination power. Chen et al. (2024)
extracted generalizable interactions shared by different DNNs. These studies indicated that salient
interactions could be considered as interaction primitives encoded by a DNN. Furthermore, Ren et al.
(2023b) used the sparsity of interactions to define the optimal baseline value for the Shapley value.
Cheng et al. (2021a) used interactions of different complexities to explain the encoding of specific
types of shapes and textures in DNNs for image classification. Cheng et al. (2021b) discovered that
salient interactions usually represented prototypical visual patterns in images.
вҖў Explaining the representation capacity of DNNs using game-theoretic interactions. Game-
theoretic interactions have been used to explain the representation capacity of a DNN, although
the following studies used the multi-order interaction (Zhang et al., 2020), rather than the Harsanyi


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


interaction. Nevertheless, the Harsanyi interaction has been proven to be compositional elements
in the multi-order interaction. The multi-order interaction has been used to explain the adversar-
ial robustness (Ren et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024), adversarial transferability (Wang et al., 2021),
and generalization ability (Zhang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2024) of a DNN. In addition, Deng
et al. (2021) proved the difficulty of a DNN in encoding middle-complexity interactions. Ren et al.
(2023c) proved that compared to a standard DNN, a Bayesian neural network (BNN) tended to avoid
encoding complex Harsanyi interactions. Liu et al. (2023) explained the intuition that DNNs learned
simple Harsanyi interactions more easily than complex Harsanyi interactions.
вҖў Summarizing common mechanisms for the success of various empirical deep learning methods.
Deng et al. (2024) found that the computation of attribution values for fourteen attribution methods
could all be explained as a re-allocation of interaction effects. Zhang et al. (2022a) proved that
twelve methods to improve the adversarial transferability in previous studies essentially shared the
common utility of reducing the interactions between adversarial perturbation units.

3       DNN S TEND TO ENCODE SPARSE INTERACTIONS
3.1 OVERVIEW OF THE EMERGENCE OF SYMBOLIC ( SPARSE ) INTERACTIONS IN DNN S
In this study, we aim to prove that symbolic (sparse) interactions usually emerge in a well-trained
DNN. Recent studies (Ren et al., 2023a; Li & Zhang, 2023b) have empirically discovered the emer-
gence of symbolic (sparse) interactions in various DNNs on different tasks. In mathematics, the
emergence of symbolic (sparse) interactions means that the DNNвҖҷs inference logic can be repre-
sented as the detection of a small number of interactions with a certifiably low approximation error.
вҖў Definition. A clear definition of interactions encoded by a DNN is required. In this study, the
interaction is defined as the Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1963). Let us consider a trained DNN
v and an input sample x = [x1 , В· В· В· , xn ]вҠӨ with n input variables indexed by N = {1, В· В· В· , n}.
The input variables can be image regions for image classification or words in an input sentence
for a natural language processing task. Furthermore, without loss of generality, let us assume that
the output of the DNN on the sample x is a scalar, denoted by v(x) вҲҲ R. For DNNs with multi-
dimensional output, we may choose one dimension of the output vector as the final output v(x). In
                                                         p(y=y truth |x)
particular, for classification tasks, we set v(x) = log 1вҲ’p(y=y   truth |x) by following Deng et al. (2021).


The interaction effect of the Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1963) (or the Harsanyi interaction) be-
tween a set S вҠҶ N of input variables is defined as follows:
                                             def
                                                   X
                                       I(S) =             (вҲ’1)|S|вҲ’|T | В· u(T ),                             (1)
                                                   T вҠҶS

                   def
 where u(T ) = v(xT ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ). Here, v(xT ) denotes the network output on the masked input
sample xT , where the variables in N \ T are masked using their baseline values b = [b1 , . . . , bn ]вҠӨ ,
and the variables in T are unchanged. Accordingly, v(xвҲ… ) denotes the network output on the sample
xвҲ… , where all the input variables are masked. In particular, we have u(вҲ…) = I(вҲ…) = 0.
Each interaction can be understood as an AND relationship between input variables in S. For exam-
ple, as Figure 1 shows, to recognize a dog face, let a DNN encode the collaboration between three
image regions in S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }. Only when the image regions x1 , x2 , and x3 are all present will
the interaction be activated and make a certain numerical effect I(S) on the network output. The
absence (masking) of any of the three image regions (e.g., the masking of x1 in Figure 1) deactivates
the interaction and removes the numerical effect, i.e., I(S) = 0.
We followed Li & Zhang (2023b) to visualize interactions encoded by PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b)
on the ShapeNet (Yi et al., 2016) dataset. Each point cloud in this dataset contained 2500 points. To
simplify the visualization, Li & Zhang (2023b) considered each semantic part1 on the point cloud
as a single input variable to the DNN. Figure 2 shows that the interaction S = {light, front wheel}
usually contributed a positive effect to the network output (i.e., I(S) > 0), whereas the interaction
S = {front wheel, back frame, mid frame} usually had a negative effect (i.e., I(S) < 0).
вҖў Faithful compositional inference patterns. We use the following three axiomatic properties to
define interactions as representations of faithful inference patterns (or concepts) encoded by a DNN.
    1
        Annotations of the semantic parts were provided by the ShapeNet dataset. See Appendix C.2 for details.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR   2024
                                     Conceptж”№жҲҗдәҶinteraction


                      A salient interaction S = {light, front wheel} (highlighted in color)
                                                                                                                         0.2
         sample 1             sample 2              sample 3             sample 4               sample 5


                                                                                                             frequency
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                               -2         0         2
        рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = 1.72         рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = 1.96         рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = 1.90            рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = 1.81            рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = 1.93                                рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ)
              A salient interaction S = {front wheel, back frame, mid frame} (highlighted in color)
                                                                                                                  0.25
         sample 1            sample 2              sample 3               sample 4              sample 5


                                                                                                             frequency
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                    -1    0     1
       рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = вҲ’0.84       рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = вҲ’1.20           рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = вҲ’0.93         рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = вҲ’1.02            рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ) = вҲ’1.23                               рқҗј(рқ‘Ҷ)

Figure 2: Interactions extracted by PointNet++ on different samples in the ShapeNet dataset and
their corresponding effects I(S). Histograms on the right show the distribution of interaction effects
I(S) on different вҖңmotorbikeвҖқ samples.

(1) Sparsity property. A DNN is supposed to encode few salient interactions on a specific sample.
(2) Universal matching property. The network output on any arbitrarily masked sample is supposed
to be well matched by the effects of specific interactions.
(3) Sample-wise transferability property. Salient interactions are supposed to be shared across dif-
ferent samples in the same category.
Li & Zhang (2023b) have empirically discovered the sparsity of Harsanyi interactions. They have
also observed a significant overlap between salient interactions extracted from different samples in
the same category, which indicated the transferability of interactions across different samples. In
addition, it has been proven that the Harsanyi interaction satisfies the universal matching property.
Theorem 1 (Proven in Ren et al. (2023a) and Appendix B.1). Let the input sample x be arbitrarily
masked to obtain a masked sample xS . The output of the DNN on maskedPsample xS can be
disentangled into the sum of all interaction effects within S: вҲҖS вҠҶ N, v(xS ) = T вҠҶS I(T ) + v(xвҲ… ).
Furthermore, the Harsanyi interaction has been proven to satisfy seven desirable properties in
game theory, e.g., the efficiency, linearity, dummy, and symmetry properties. In addition, the
Harsanyi interaction can explain the elementary mechanism of three existing game-theoretic at-
tribution/interaction metrics, e.g., the Shapley value 2 (Shapley, 1953). See Appendix A for details.
вҖў Illustrating the emergence of interaction primitives. The core task of proving the emergence
of symbolic primitives is to prove that in a well-trained DNN, the interactions defined above are
sparse. Although there are as many as 2n interactions corresponding to all subsets S in 2N = {S :
S вҠҶ N }, recent studies (Ren et al., 2023a; Li & Zhang, 2023b) have empirically discovered that
these interactions were usually sparse in a well-trained DNN. That is, only a few salient interactions
have significant effects on the network output and can be taken as salient interaction primitives. In
comparison, most other interactions have near-zero effects (i.e., I(S) вүҲ 0), which are referred to as
noisy patterns. According to Theorem P 1, the network output can be summarized by a small number
of salient interactions, i.e., v(x) вүҲ SвҲҲв„Ұsalient ,SМё=вҲ… I(S) + v(xвҲ… ).
Although the sparsity of interactions has already been demonstrated in previous studies (Ren et al.,
2023a; Li & Zhang, 2023b), we still conducted experiments in this study to better illustrate this
phenomenon. We followed Li & Zhang (2023b) to conduct experiments on various neural net-
works3 , including multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), residual MLPs (ResMLPs) (Touvron et al., 2022),
LeNet (LeCun et al., 1998), AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014), ResNet (He et al., 2016), PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a), PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b), and
on different datasets, including tabular data (the tic-tac-toe dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), phishing
dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), and wifi dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017)), point cloud data (the ShapeNet
dataset (Yi et al., 2016)), and image data (the MNIST-3 dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and CelebA-
eyeglasses dataset (Liu et al., 2015)). For better visualization, we drew a curve of the interaction
                                          Лң
strength by normalizing the interaction I(S)     = I(S)/ maxS вҖІ |I(S вҖІ )| in descending order. Fig-
ure 3 shows the strength curve that was averaged over different samples in the dataset, which was
   2                   P             1
      We have П•(i) = SвҠҶN \{i} |S|+1     I(S вҲӘ {i}), which means that the Shapley value П•(i) can be explained
as the result of uniformly assigning each Harsanyi interaction I(S вҲӘ {i}) to each involved variable.
    3
      Please see Appendix C.1 for details on these DNNs and datasets.


                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          tic-tac-toe                       tic-tac-toe                       wifi                             wifi                        CelebA-eyeglasses
                            MLP-5                           ResMLP-5                        MLP-5                           ResMLP-5                            ResNet-34
                       salient


   |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |
                                                        salient                          salient                         salient                              salient
                                  noisy                           noisy                            noisy                                noisy                           noisy
             0.05                             0.05                            0.05                             0.05                                 0.05



                           phishing                         phishing                        ShapeNet                        ShapeNet                       CelebA-eyeglasses
                             MLP-5                          ResMLP-5                         PointNet                       PointNet++                          ResNet-18
   |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |


                        salient                         salient                           salient                         salient                             salient
                                  noisy                           noisy                             noisy                           noisy                               noisy
             0.05                             0.05                             0.05                            0.05                                 0.05



                          MNIST-3                         MNIST-3                           MNIST-3                         MNIST-3                        CelebA-eyeglasses
                            LeNet                          ResNet-20                        ResNet-44                        VGG-16                             ResNet-34
   |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |


                        salient                         salient                           salient                         salient                             salient
                                  noisy                             noisy                           noisy                           noisy                               noisy
             0.05                             0.05                             0.05                            0.05                                 0.05


                    index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ           index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ           index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ          index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ               index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ


Figure 3: Normalized strength of different interactions, shown in descending order. Various DNNs
trained for different tasks all encoded sparse interactions. In other words, only a relatively small
number of interactions had a significant effect, while most interactions were noisy patterns and had
near-zero effects, i.e., I(S) вүҲ 0.

computed according to the method in (Li & Zhang, 2023b). Figure 3 successfully verifies that inter-
actions encoded by various DNNs on different tasks were all sparse. Moreover, we followed Li &
Zhang (2023b) to define interactions with |I(S)| > П„ = 0.05 В· maxS вҖІ |I(S вҖІ )| as salient interactions.
3.2 P ROVING THE SPARSITY OF INTERACTIONS                          еҸҲжҠҠй«ҳеәҰеҺӢзј©дәҶ
                                                                   Conceptж”№жҲҗдәҶinteraction
Despite these achievements, there is still no theory to prove the emergence of such sparse interactions
as symbolic primitives. Therefore, in this subsection, we make an initial attempt to theoretically
prove the sparsity of interactions. To be precise, we need to prove the conditions, under which the
output of a DNN can be approximated by the effects of a small number of salient interactions,
instead of a mass of fuzzy features. More interestingly, the proof will show that the sparsity of
interactions depends on the property of the classification task itself, rather than the architecture of
the neural network, or the sparsity of the parameters/intermediate-layer features.
Given a trained DNN v and an input sample x = [x1 , В· В· В· , xn ]вҠӨ , let v(x) вҲҲ R denote the scalar
network output on the sample x. Let us consider the Taylor expansion of the network output v(x),
which is expanded at the point b = [b1 , В· В· В· , bn ]вҠӨ :
                                             вҲһ               вҲһ
                                             X               X    вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v     (x1 вҲ’ b1 )Оә1 В· В· В· (xn вҲ’ bn )Оәn
                                   v(x) =             В·В·В·           Оә1        Оәn   В·                                 .                                                              (2)
                                             Оә1 =0          Оә =0
                                                                 вҲӮx1 В· В· В· вҲӮxn x=b            Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                                              n


 Strictly speaking, there are no high-order derivatives for ReLU neural networks. In this case, we
can still use the finite difference method (Peebles et al., 2020; Gonnet & Scholl, 2009) to compute
the equivalent high-order derivatives yielded by the change in ReLU gating states.
Assumption 1-Оұ. Interactions higher than the M -th order have zero effect, i.e., вҲҖ S вҲҲ {S вҠҶ N |
                                                                                             def
|S| вүҘ M + 1}, I(S) = 0. The order is defined as the number of input variables in S, order(S) = |S|.
Assumption 1-ОІ. The network is assumed to have at most M -order non-zero derivatives, i.e.,
                                                                      Оә +В·В·В·+Оәn
вҲҖ b вҲҲ Rn , вҲҖ Оә1 В· В· В· Оәn вҲҲ N, s.t. Оә1 + В· В· В· + Оәn вүҘ M + 1, we have вҲӮвҲӮx1Оә1 В·В·В·вҲӮxОәnv = 0.
                                                                                                                                    1           n   x=b

In mathematics, Assumption 1-Оұ can be derived (see Appendix B.2) from Assumption 1-ОІ (assum-
ing no derivatives higher than the M -th order in the Taylor expansion of the function v), which is a
stronger assumption than Assumption 1-Оұ and is specific to continuously differentiable functions4 .
In comparison, Assumption 1-Оұ can be applied to more general networks than Assumption 1-ОІ.
In fact, only Assumption 1-Оұ without Assumption 1-ОІ is already enough to conduct our later proof.
The assumed non-existence of high-order interactions in Assumption 1-Оұ is not strange, and it has
been illustrated in many large language models (please see Figure 4). This is because high-order
    4
      This is a common setting for a simple DNN or a DNN with almost zero high-order derivatives. In fact, it
is not necessary for most DNNs to have derivatives of very high orders during training.


                                                                                            5
    еҺҹжң¬зҡ„пјҡ

                        OPT-1.3B                         OPT-1.3B                    LLaMA-7B                      LLaMA-7B                         Aquila-7B                  Aquila-7B
Published
   0.4    as a 1conference
         Sample    0.6     paper
                          Sample 2 at0.8ICLRSample
                                             2024  1                                                                Sample 2                        Sample 1                    Sample 2


 рқ‘ҡ
  рқҗјstr
                                                                                                         1.0                             0.4                         0.8
                                                                                                         0.0                                                         0.0
                                                                           0.0                                                           0.0
         0.0                            0.0
               1         order рқ‘ҡ   10          1         order рқ‘ҡ     10          1    order рқ‘ҡ       10         1    order рқ‘ҡ         10          1    order рқ‘ҡ    10         1    order рқ‘ҡ    10


 box and whisker plotпјҲwithout outlierпјүвҖ”вҖ” жңҖеҗҺз”ЁиҝҷдёӘ
                                                                          2.0                                                            1.0
                       OPT-1.3B                     OPT-1.3B              1.5
                                                                                     LLaMA-7B                      LLaMA-7B                         Aquila-7B                  Aquila-7B


|рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ |
                       Sample 1                     Sample 2              1.0         Sample 1                      Sample 2              0.5
                                                                                                                                                    Sample 1                   Sample 2
                                                                          0.5
                                                                          0.0                                                             0.0
                       order рқ‘ҡ                       order рқ‘ҡ                          order рқ‘ҡ                        order рқ‘ҡ                          order рқ‘ҡ                   order рқ‘ҡ

Figure 4: Box-and-whisker diagram for the strength of interactions |I(S)| of each order m. We tested
different LLMs
      Camera
        ж ·жң¬1
                 (OPT-1.3B,  LLaMA-7B,ж ·жң¬3 and Aquila-7B)ж ·жң¬19
             readyзүҲжң¬пјҡеҸҜи§ҶеҢ–иҝҳжҳҜз”ЁеҺҹжқҘзҡ„пјҢpеҖјж”№дәҶпјҲз”ЁдәҶжӣҙж–°д№ӢеҗҺзҡ„stop
                         ж ·жң¬33
                                                         on the SQuADword dataset.
                                                                          listпјү
                                                                        ж ·жң¬3
                                                                                   Experiments show
                                                                                         ж ·жң¬18
that high-order interactions on these networks were usually close to zero. Please see Appendix D.1
for experimental details and Appendix E.1 for results on more samples.
    (a)                                                                                                                       (b)
                   OPT-1.3B                               LLaMA-7B                        5.0 Aquila-7B
             5.0                                   5.0
    рқ‘ўаҙӨ (рқ‘ҡ)


                                                                                                                                                    OPT-1.3B    LLaMA-7B         Aquila-7B

                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                               Average рқ‘қ            1.18Вұ0.22    1.18Вұ0.42       1.11Вұ0.39
             0.0                                   0.0
                   0       order рқ‘ҡ            10         0         order рқ‘ҡ           10         0        order рқ‘ҡ      10


Figure 5: (a) Visualization of the monotonicity. Each curve shows the monotonic increase of the
average output of the m-th order uМ„(m) with the order m on a sample. The shaded area indicates
the standard deviation of all m-order outputs on a sample, i.e., Std|S|=m [u(S)]. Note that the value
of standard deviation does not affect our proof, because the proof only relies on the average output
uМ„(m) . (b) The average value of p over different input samples, along with the standard deviation.

interactions usually represent extremely complex patterns and are usually unnecessary in real ap-
plications. For example, let us consider an interaction with a nonzero effect I(S) corresponding
to the AND relationship between M вҖІ = 100 > M input variables. This indicates that if any of
the 100 input variables is masked, then the interaction will be deactivated. Such an elaborate in-
teraction is usually considered as an over-fitted pattern in real applications and it is not commonly
learned by a DNN. In addition, ignoring very high-order interactions is common in the literature on
game-theoretic interactions (Sundararajan et al., 2020; Tsai et al., 2022). In spite of that, we admit
that there are a few special cases where high-order interactions may appear in real applications, but
in those cases, extensive high-order interactions can be summarized as a simple effect, thereby not
hurting the proof of the sparsity of interactions. Please see Section 3.3 for further discussion.
Second, let us consider a classification task in a real-world application, where some input samples
may be partially occluded or masked. In fact, the classification of occluded samples is quite com-
mon, and a well-trained DNN is supposed to yield higher classification confidence for samples that
are less masked. Therefore, we make the following monotonicity assumption:
Assumption 2 (Monotonicity). The average network output is assumed to monotonically increase
                                                                                        вҖІ
with the size of the unmasked set S of the input variables, i.e., вҲҖ mвҖІ вүӨ m, we have uМ„(m ) вүӨ uМ„(m) ,
             def
where uМ„(m) = E|S|=m [u(S)], u(S) = v(xS ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ).
This assumption indicates that the average classification confidence of the DNN increases when the
input sample is less occluded. Specifically, uМ„(m) = E|S|=m [v(xS ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… )] вүҘ 0 represents the
average network output over all masked samples xS with |S| = m. We refer to uМ„(m) as the average
output of the m-th order in the following discussion.
Justification of the monotonicity assumption. Assumption 2 commonly holds on different samples
and DNNs. We justify this assumption through both theoretical analysis and experiments. Theoreti-
cally speaking, if we limit our discussion to two specific masked samples S and S вҖІ s.t. S вҠҠ S вҖІ , we
cannot always ensure u(S) < u(S вҖІ ), because some variables in S вҖІ \ S may be unrelated to the clas-
sification, and may even have negative contributions to the classification. However, Assumption 2
focuses on the average output over all m-order masked states, uМ„(m) = E|S|=m [u(S)], which is much
stabler and more robust than the output on a specific masked state u(S). Thus, the monotonicity
assumption is common for an input sample. Please see Appendix H for an example.
For experimental justification of Assumption 2, we conducted experiments on three Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs), including the OPT-1.3B model (Zhang et al., 2022b), the BAAI Aquila-7B
model (FlagAI, 2023), and the LLaMA-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023). We tested these networks
on 1000 sentences from the SQuAD dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). For each input sentence, we
followed Shen et al. (2023) to select n = 10 words from the sentence as input variables to reduce the
computational cost. Please see Appendix D.1 for details on the input sentences, how to determine


                                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Our theory can explain the sparsity of interactions in about 84.52% - 89.87% samples,
because these samples had monotonic values of uМ„(m) . Nevertheless, the remaining 10.13% -15.48%
samples without the monotonicity also encoded very sparse interactions. Our proof is still significant
enough, although we cannot prove the sparsity on all input samples.
                                                                         OPT-1.3B           LLaMA-7B      Aquila-7B
              Percent of samples with monotonicity                        89.87%             84.52%        87.46%
                                  Samples with monotonicity             29.06Вұ52.46         50.71Вұ40.35   30.16Вұ26.22
  Avg # of valid interactions
                                  Samples without monotonicity          42.67Вұ38.87         79.71Вұ59.43   65.94Вұ69.99

the set N , and how to mask words in N \T when computing v(xT ). Table 1 shows that on all LLMs,
over 84% of the input samples satisfied the monotonicity assumption. Figure 5(a) also visualizes the
increase of the average output of the m-th order uМ„(m) along with the order m on different LLMs.
Table 1 also shows that because of the complexity of training an LLM, in a few cases, the average
network output of the m-th order was not always monotonic along with the order m. In fact, this
conflicted with the common logic, but it was still possible because the extremely high diversity of
sentences made the LLM difficult to be sufficiently trained (fully converge). In this study, we did
not consider such a case and only focused on the ideal case where a network was well-trained.
Third, we need to ensure that the classification confidence of the DNN does not significantly degrade
on masked input samples. In real applications, the classification/detection of occluded samples is
common. Thus, for a well-trained DNN, its confidence when classifying occluded (masked) samples
should not be substantially lower than its confidence for unmasked samples.
Assumption 3. Given the average network output of samples with m unmasked input variables,
uМ„(m) , we assume a lower bound for the average network output of samples with mвҖІ (mвҖІ вүӨ m)
                                              вҖІ        вҖІ p
unmasked input variables, i.e., вҲҖ mвҖІ вүӨ m, uМ„(m ) вүҘ ( m
                                                     m
                                                        ) uМ„(m) , where p > 0 is a positive constant.
In Assumption 3, we bound the decrease of the average output of order m by a polynomial of
                                                    вҖІ        вҖІ p
degree p. If this assumption is violated, i.e., uМ„(m ) < ( m
                                                           m
                                                              ) uМ„(m) for mвҖІ вүӨ m, then it implies
either extremely low classification confidence on masked samples or extremely high classification
confidence on normal (unmasked) samples, which are both undesirable cases in real applications.
We also conducted experiments to illustrate the value of p on real DNNs and datasets. We used the
same LLMs and dataset as those in the previous experiment. Figure 5(b) shows that the value of p
across different samples was around 0.9 to 1.5, which was reasonable for further analysis.
Proof of the sparsity of interactions. Under the above conditions, we prove that interactions en-
coded by a DNN are sparse. We start by analyzing the upper bound of the sum of the effects of all
                                      def P
k-order interactions, denoted by A(k) = SвҠҶN,|S|=k I(S).
Theorem 2 (Proven in Appendix B.3). There exists m0 вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ M }, such that for all
1 вүӨ k вүӨ M , the sum of the effects of all k-order interactions can be written as
                       A(k) = (О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 ) uМ„(1) ,
                                                    (k)                    (k)        (k)
                                                                                                                    (3)

where |О»(k) | вүӨ 1, |a0(k) | < n, |ai(k) | вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ 1} for i = 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1, and

                                     1       aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1           a0
                          Оҙ вүӨ logn      1 вҲ’ pвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1 вҲ’ В· В· В· вҲ’ p      , if О» > 0,                                    (4)
                                     О»      n                 n

                                      1   aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1            a0
                          Оҙ вүӨ logn                  + В·В·В· + p      , if О» < 0.                                      (5)
                                     вҲ’О» n  pвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1          n
          def P      (m0 )                  def P    (k)  (m0 )
 Here, О» = M         k
               k=1 (n) О»
                           (k)
                               Мё= 0, ai = M       k
                                           k=1 (n) ai    for i = 0, 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1, and вҢҠpвҢӢ denotes the
                     k                            k
greatest integer that is less than or equal to p.
The above theorem indicates that the sum of effects of all k-order interactions is O(np+Оҙ ). Then,
we discuss the sparsity of interactions in the following two cases.
вҖў Case 1: When the positive  P
                                and negative interactions of the k-th order do not fully cancel
                     (k) def P |S|=k I(S)
out each other. Let О· =             |I(S)|
                                           denote the remaining proportion of the effects of k-order
                                    |S|=k


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Table 2: Comparison between the number of valid interactions and the derived upper bound.
                                    OPT-1.3B         LLaMA-7B           Aquila-7B           MLP (tabular dataset)
  Real # of valid interactions      28.73Вұ52.37      50.53Вұ40.37       30.13Вұ26.20              54.42Вұ36.81
  Upper bound                      197.84Вұ188.87    293.20Вұ287.28     184.23Вұ124.71            229.11Вұ139.52

interactions that are not cancelled out. Here, the absolute value of this proportion |О· (k) | should not
be negligible. Thus, let us set |О· (k) | вү« n1 . Otherwise, we consider that the positive and negative
interactions almost cancel out, and then this instance belongs to Case 2.
Without loss of generality, we set a small positive threshold П„ subject to 0 < П„ вүӘ ET вҠҶS [|u(T )|].
Then, we consider all interactions with |I(S)| вүҘ П„ as valid (salient) interactions. We consider all
interactions with |I(S)| < П„ as noisy patterns. In fact, as Figure 3 shows, most interactions below
the threshold П„ had roughly exponentially decreasing strength, which meant that most non-salient
interactions (noisy patterns) had almost zero effect.
                             def
Therefore, let us use R(k) = |{S вҠҶ N | |S| = k, |I(S)| вүҘ П„ }| to denote the number of valid interac-
tions of the k-th order. The following theorem provides an upper bound for R(k) .
Theorem 3 (Proven in Appendix B.4). R(k) has the following upper bound:
                                      uМ„(1)
                                               |О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a0 |.
                                                             (k)                     (k)
                          R(k) вүӨ                                                                                    (6)
                                    П„ |О· (k) |
The above theorem indicates that if positive interactions do not fully cancel with negative interac-
tions (i.e., |О· (k) | is not extremely small), then the number of valid interactions R(k) of the k-th order
has an upper bound of O(np+Оҙ /|П„ О· (k) |), which is much less than the total number of nk potential
interactions of the k-th order in most cases.
In fact, the final number of valid interactions also depends on the value of p. Although we cannot
theoretically guarantee different DNNs all have small p values, experiments in Figure 5(b) show that
p was around 0.9 to 1.5 on common tasks. Nevertheless, Eq. (6) just shows an upper bound of valid
interactions, which is much more than the real interaction number. Please see Table 2 for the higher
sparsity of real interactions than the upper bound. Thus, Theorem 3 shows that it is quite common
for a DNN to encode sparse interactions.
вҖў Case 2: When positive and negative interactions of the k-th order almost cancel each other.
In this case, the absolute value of О· (k) can be extremely small. In such an extreme situation, the
number of valid interactions is proportional to np+Оҙ /|П„ О· (k) |. Then, the upper bound for the number
of  interactions R(k) is much higher, according to Theorem 3. However, R(k) is still much less than
 n        (k)
 k if |О·      | is not exponentially small.
Real number of valid interactions vs. the derived bound. We conducted experiments to compare
the real number of valid interactions with the derived upper bound. We used the same LLMs and
dataset as those in previous experiments. Besides, we also trained a 5-layer multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) on a tabular dataset named TV news (Dua & Graff, 2017). Specifically, we set M = 9. We
set П„ = 0.05 maxS вҖІ |I(S вҖІ )| for all LLMs, and set П„ = 0.1 maxS вҖІ |I(S вҖІ )| for the MLP. Table 2 shows
that the real number of valid interactions was about 30 to 50, while the derived bound was about
200 to 260. Note that the number of all potential interactions was 2n = 210 = 1024. Please see
Appendix E.2 for the number of valid interactions and the bound on several example sentences.
3.3 W HEN ARE INTERACTIONS NON - SPARSE ?
Despite the above proof of the sparsity of interactions under certain assumptions, there exist some
special cases in which the DNN does not encode sparse interactions.
Scenario 1. Let us consider the scenario where the network output contains some random noise,
i.e., we can decompose the network output into v вҖІ (xS ) = v(xS ) + ПөS , where ПөS denotes a fully
random noise. In this case, the effect of each interaction can be rewritten as I вҖІ (S) = I(S) + IПө (S),
where I(S) denotes the interaction extracted from the normal output component v(xS ), and IПө (S) =
P            |S|вҲ’|T |
    T вҠҶS (вҲ’1)         В· (ПөT вҲ’ ПөвҲ… ) denotes the interaction extracted from the noise. Because IПө (S) is a sum
of 2 noise terms, the variance of IПө (S) w.r.t. the noise is 2|S| times larger. In this case, the value of
      |S|

IПө (S), as well as I вҖІ (S), is not likely to be zero, i.e., we will not obtain sparse interactions.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In fact, this scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-Оұ and 1-ОІ. In this case, we can simply ignore
small noises in v вҖІ (xS ) to obtain sparse interactions. To this end, Li & Zhang (2023a) proposed a
method to estimate and remove potential small noises from the network output and boost the sparsity.
Scenario 2. Let us consider the second scenario, in which the network output on a masked sample
xS is purely dependent on the number of variables in S. We consider an example in which the sign
of u(S) is decided by the parity of the number of variables in S, i.e., if |S| is odd, then u(S) = +1;
otherwise, u(S) = вҲ’1. In this case, I(S) is always positive if |S| is odd, and always negative if |S|
is even, which is not sparse. In fact, this scenario does not satisfy Assumption 2 (the monotonicity
assumption). In addition, the classification of the parity does not represent the typical paradigm for
classification because there are no inference patterns for classification.
Scenario 3. In this scenario, the network encodes high-order OR relationships between the in-
put variables. For example, the network may encode an OR relationship вҖңblue patch 1вҖқ вҲЁ В· В· В· вҲЁ
вҖңblue patch mвҖқ to recognize the sky. Such an OR relationship will be explained as a large number
of lower-order Harsanyi interactions. However, in real applications, such high-order interactions,
e.g., the detection of the sky, can actually be taken as a single concept. If we disentangle and remove
such high-order interactions from the network output, the remaining output is likely to generate
sparse Harsanyi interactions. In addition, this scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-Оұ and 1-ОІ.
Scenario 4. Let us consider Pthe scenario in which the network output is in the form of a periodic
function, e.g., v(xS ) = sin( iвҲҲS xi ). In this case, interactions encoded by the network are not
sparse. This scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-Оұ, 1-ОІ, and Assumption 2.
Scenario 5. Let us consider the special task that heavily relies on the information of all input vari-
ables, e.g., judging whether the number of 1вҖҷs in a binary sequence (e.g., the sequence [0, 0, 1, 0, 1])
is odd or even. In this task, the value of p may be large, and the monotonicity assumption is not
satisfied. As a result, the interactions may not be sparse. See Appendix E.3 for experiments.

4       S IGNIFICANCE OF THE EMERGENCE OF INTERACTION PRIMITIVES
вҖў The emergence of symbolic interaction primitives can be considered as a theoretical foundation
for the field of explainable AI. Many studies have attempted to explain the feature representation of
DNNs as the encoding of different concepts with clear meanings. For example, Bau et al. (2017;
2020) examined how each convolutional filter was related to its encoded fuzzy concept. Kim et al.
(2018) attempted to find a certain feature direction in the intermediate layer corresponding to a
specific manually-defined concept. However, the fundamental issue behind these explanations, i.e.,
whether a DNN can be faithfully explained as symbolic concepts, has not been studied.
вҖў The proof of the emergence of interaction primitives may provide a new perspective to analyze the
generalization power and robustness of a DNN. In fact, game-theoretic interactions have been used
to explain overfitting (Zhang et al., 2020), adversarial robustness (Ren et al., 2021), and adversarial
transferability (Wang et al., 2021), although these studies used multi-order interactions (Zhang et al.,
2020) for analysis5 , rather than the Harsanyi interaction.
вҖў Given the sparsity property and the universal matching property, the sample-wise transferability
property can be obtained by contradiction. If interactions are not transferable across samples, then
it means that the DNN activates different sets of salient interactions on different samples, and this
indicates that the number of interaction patterns encoded by the DNN will be explosively large.

5       C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study provided a set of conditions for the emergence of symbolic interaction primitives for
inference. Under these conditions, we proved that a DNN encoded very sparse interactions between
input variables. The commonness of these conditions indicated that the emergence of symbolic
(sparse) interactions was not unusual, but might be a universal phenomenon for various well-trained
AI models, because the proof does not rely on the network architecture. In future work, we will
attempt to derive a tighter upper bound for the number of valid interactions R(k) encoded by the
network. Additionally, we will further quantify the precise conditions that prevent the emergence of
symbolic interaction primitives from occurring in a DNN.
    5
        Harsanyi interactions are compositional elements of multi-order interactions (Ren et al., 2023a).


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. This work is partially supported by the National Science and Technology
Major Project (2021ZD0111602), the National Nature Science Foundation of China (92370115,
62276165, 62206170).

E THIC STATEMENT
This paper aims to prove the emergence of sparse primitive inference patterns in well-trained DNNs
under certain conditions. The proof potentially provides theoretical support for explaining DNNs at
the concept level. There are no ethical issues with this paper.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We have provided proofs for the theoretical results of this study in Appendix B. We
have also provided experimental details in Appendix C.1, Appendix C.2, and Appendix
D.1. Furthermore, we have released the code at https://github.com/sjtu-xai-lab/
interaction-sparsity.

R EFERENCES
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.

David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30071вҖ“30078, 2020. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907375117. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1907375117.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural Language Processing with Python: Analyzing
  Text with the Natural Language Toolkit. OвҖҷReilly Media, Inc., 2009.

Lu Chen, Siyu Lou, Benhao Huang, and Quanshi Zhang. Defining and extracting generalizable
  interaction primitives from DNNs. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OCqyFVFNeF.

Xu Cheng, Chuntung Chu, Yi Zheng, Jie Ren, and Quanshi Zhang. A Game-Theoretic Taxonomy
  of Visual Concepts in DNNs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10938, 2021a.

Xu Cheng, Xin Wang, Haotian Xue, Zhengyang Liang, and Quanshi Zhang. A Hypothesis for the
  Aesthetic Appreciation in Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv::2108.02646, 2021b.

Huiqi Deng, Qihan Ren, Xu Chen, Hao Zhang, Jie Ren, and Quanshi Zhang. Discovering and
  Explaining the Representation Bottleneck of DNNs. ICLR, 2021.

Huiqi Deng, Na Zou, Mengnan Du, Weifu Chen, Guocan Feng, Ziwei Yang, Zheyang Li, and Quan-
  shi Zhang. Unifying Fourteen Post-hoc Attribution Methods with Taylor Interactions. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.

Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.

FlagAI. Baai aquila language model, 2023. URL https://github.com/FlagAI-Open/
  FlagAI/blob/master/examples/Aquila.

Gaston H Gonnet and Ralf Scholl. Scientific computation. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Michel Grabisch and Marc Roubens. An axiomatic approach to the concept of interaction among
 players in cooperative games. International Journal of game theory, 28(4):547вҖ“565, 1999.

John C. Harsanyi. A simplified bargaining model for the n-person cooperative game. International
  Economic Review, 4(2):194вҖ“220, 1963. ISSN 00206598, 14682354.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770вҖ“778, 2016.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, and Rory
  sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation
  vectors (TCAV). In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2668вҖ“2677. PMLR, 10вҖ“15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/
  kim18d.html.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25, pp.
  1097вҖ“1105, 2012.
Yann LeCun, LeМҒon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278вҖ“2324, 1998.
Mingjie Li and Quanshi Zhang. Defining and Quantifying AND-OR Interactions for Faithful and
 Concise Explanation of DNNs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13312, 2023a.
Mingjie Li and Quanshi Zhang. Does a Neural Network Really Encode Symbolic Concepts? Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning, 2023b.
Dongrui Liu, Huiqi Deng, Xu Cheng, Qihan Ren, Kangrui Wang, and Quanshi Zhang. Towards the
  Difficulty for a Deep Neural Network to Learn Concepts of Different Complexities. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
William Peebles, John Peebles, Jun-Yan Zhu, Alexei Efros, and Antonio Torralba. The hessian
 penalty: A weak prior for unsupervised disentanglement. In Andrea Vedaldi, Horst Bischof,
 Thomas Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm (eds.), Computer Vision вҖ“ ECCV 2020, pp. 581вҖ“597,
 Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-58539-6.
Charles R. Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J. Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point
  sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017a.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hi-
  erarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space.   In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/d8bf84be3800d12f74d8b05e9b89836f-Paper.pdf.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383вҖ“2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/D16-1264.
Jie Ren, Die Zhang, Yisen Wang, Lu Chen, Zhanpeng Zhou, Yiting Chen, Xu Cheng, Xin Wang,
   Meng Zhou, Jie Shi, and Quanshi Zhang. Towards a Unified Game-Theoretic View of Adversarial
   Perturbations and Robustness. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
   J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
   3797вҖ“3810. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Jie Ren, Mingjie Li, Qirui Chen, Huiqi Deng, and Quanshi Zhang. Defining and Quantifying the
   Emergence of Sparse Concepts in DNNs. In The IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
   nition Conference, 2023a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jie Ren, Zhanpeng Zhou, Qirui Chen, and Quanshi Zhang. Can We Faithfully Represent Absence
   States to Compute Shapley Values on a DNN? In International Conference on Learning Repre-
   sentations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YV8tP7bW6Kt.
Qihan Ren, Huiqi Deng, Yunuo Chen, Siyu Lou, and Quanshi Zhang. Bayesian Neural Networks
  Tend to Ignore Complex and Sensitive Concepts. International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023c.
Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 2(28):307вҖ“
  317, 1953.
Wen Shen, Lei Cheng, Yuxiao Yang, Mingjie Li, and Quanshi Zhang. Can the inference logic of
 large language models be disentangled into symbolic concepts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01083,
 2023.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631вҖ“1642, 2013.
Mukund Sundararajan, Kedar Dhamdhere, and Ashish Agarwal. The shapley taylor interaction
 index. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9259вҖ“9268. PMLR, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Piotr Bojanowski, Mathilde Caron, Matthieu Cord, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Edouard
  Grave, Gautier Izacard, Armand Joulin, Gabriel Synnaeve, Jakob Verbeek, and HerveМҒ JeМҒgou.
  Resmlp: Feedforward networks for image classification with data-efficient training. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1вҖ“9, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.
  3206148.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, TimotheМҒe
  Lacroix, Baptiste RozieМҖre, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Che-Ping Tsai, Chih-Kuan Yeh, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Faith-shap: The faithful shapley interac-
  tion index. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00870, 2022.
Xin Wang, Jie Ren, Shuyun Lin, Xiangming Zhu, Yisen Wang, and Quanshi Zhang. A Unified
  Approach to Interpreting and Boosting Adversarial Transferability. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R Bowman. Neural network acceptability judgments.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:625вҖ“641, 2019.
Li Yi, Vladimir G Kim, Duygu Ceylan, I-Chao Shen, Mengyan Yan, Hao Su, Cewu Lu, Qixing
  Huang, Alla Sheffer, and Leonidas Guibas. A scalable active framework for region annotation in
  3d shape collections. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 35(6):1вҖ“12, 2016.
Die Zhang, Hao Zhang, Huilin Zhou, Xiaoyi Bao, Da Huo, Ruizhao Chen, Xu Cheng, Mengyue
  Wu, and Quanshi Zhang. Building Interpretable Interaction Trees for Deep NLP Models. In
  Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, pp. 14328вҖ“14337. AAAI
  Press, 2021a.
Hao Zhang, Sen Li, YinChao Ma, Mingjie Li, Yichen Xie, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting and
  Boosting Dropout from a Game-Theoretic View. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020.
Hao Zhang, Yichen Xie, Longjie Zheng, Die Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting Multivariate
  Shapley Interactions in DNNs. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI
  2021, pp. 10877вҖ“10886. AAAI Press, 2021b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quanshi Zhang, Xin Wang, Jie Ren, Xu Cheng, Shuyun Lin, Yisen Wang, and Xiangming Zhu.
  Proving Common Mechanisms Shared by Twelve Methods of Boosting Adversarial Transferabil-
  ity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11694, 2022a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022b.
Huilin Zhou, Hao Zhang, Huiqi Deng, Dongrui Liu, Wen Shen, Shih-Han Chan, and Quanshi Zhang.
  Explaining Generalization Power of a DNN using Interactive Concepts. In Thirty-Eighth AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024. AAAI Press, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A XIOMS AND THEOREMS FOR THE H ARSANYI DIVIDEND INTERACTION
A.1 D ESIRABLE GAME - THEORETIC PROPERTIES
The Harsanyi dividend was designed as a standard metric to measure interactions between input
variables encoded by the network. In this section, we present several desirable axioms and theorems
that the Harsanyi dividend interaction I(S) satisfies. This further demonstrates the trustworthiness
of the Harsanyi dividend interaction.
The Harsanyi dividend interactions I(S) satisfies the efficiency, linearity, dummy, symmetry,
anonymity, recursive and interaction distribution axioms, as follows. We follow the notation in
the main paper to let u(S) = v(xS ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ).
(1) Efficiency axiom (proven by Harsanyi (1963)). The outputP   score of a model can be decomposed
into interaction effects of different patterns, i.e. u(N ) = SвҠҶN I(S).
(2) Linearity axiom. If we merge output scores of two models u1 and u2 as the output of model u,
i.e. вҲҖS вҠҶ N, u(S) = u1 (S) + u2 (S), then their interaction effects Iu1 (S) and Iu2 (S) can also be
merged as вҲҖS вҠҶ N, Iu (S) = Iu1 (S) + Iu2 (S).
(3) Dummy axiom. If a variable i вҲҲ N is a dummy variable, i.e. вҲҖS вҠҶ N \{i}, u(S вҲӘ {i}) =
u(S) + u({i}), then it has no interaction with other variables, вҲҖ вҲ… Мё= S вҠҶ N \{i}, I(S вҲӘ {i}) = 0.
(4) Symmetry axiom. If input variables i, j вҲҲ N cooperate with other variables in the same way,
вҲҖS вҠҶ N \{i, j}, u(S вҲӘ {i}) = u(S вҲӘ {j}), then they have same interaction effects with other variables,
вҲҖS вҠҶ N \{i, j}, I(S вҲӘ {i}) = I(S вҲӘ {j}).
(5) Anonymity axiom. For any permutations ПҖ on N , we have вҲҖS вҠҶ N, Iu (S) = IПҖu (ПҖS), where
ПҖS вүң {ПҖ(i)|i вҲҲS}, and the new model ПҖu is defined by (ПҖu)(ПҖS)=u(S). This indicates that interaction
effects are not changed by permutation.
(6) Recursive axiom. The interaction effects can be computed recursively. For i вҲҲ N and S вҠҶ
N \{i}, the interaction effect of the pattern S вҲӘ {i} is equal to the interaction effect of S with the
presence of i minus the interaction effect of S with the absence of i, i.e. вҲҖS вҠҶ N \{i}, I(S вҲӘ {i}) =
I(S|i is always present)вҲ’I(S). I(S|i is always present) denotes the interaction effect when the variable
i is always present as a constant context, i.e. I(S|i is always present) = LвҠҶS (вҲ’1)|S|вҲ’|L| В· u(L вҲӘ {i}).
                                                                          P

(7) Interaction distribution axiom. This axiom characterizes how interactions are distributed for
вҖңinteraction functionsвҖқ (Sundararajan et al., 2020). An interaction function uT parameterized by a
subset of variables T is defined as follows. вҲҖS вҠҶ N , if T вҠҶ S , uT (S) = c; otherwise, uT (S) = 0.
The function uT models pure interaction among the variables in T , because only if all variables in
T are present, the output value will be increased by c. The interactions encoded in the function uT
satisfies I(T ) = c, and вҲҖS Мё= T , I(S) = 0.
A.2 C ONNECTION TO EXISTING GAME - THEORETIC ATTRIBUTION / INTERACTION METRICS
The Harsanyi interaction I(S) is actually the elementary mechanism of existing game-theoretic
attribution/interaction metrics, as follows.
Theorem 4 (Connection to the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953), proven in both Harsanyi (1963) and
Appendix B.5). Let П•(i) denote the Shapley value of an input variable i. Then, the Shapley value
П•(i) can be explained as the result of uniformly assigning attributions of each Harsanyi interaction
                                                      1
                                          P
to each involving variable i, i.e., П•(i) = SвҠҶN \{i} |S|+1 I(S вҲӘ {i}).

Theorem 5 (Connection to the Shapley interaction index (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999), proven in
both Ren et al. (2023a) and Appendix B.6). Given a subset of input     P variables   T вҠҶ N , the Shapley
                                                                                 1
interaction index I Shapley (T ) can be represented as I Shapley (T ) = SвҠҶN \T |S|+1 I(S вҲӘ T ). In other
words, the index I Shapley (T ) can be explained as uniformly allocating I(S вҖІ ) s.t. S вҖІ = S вҲӘ T to the
compositional variables of S вҖІ if we treat the coalition of variables in T as a single variable.
Theorem 6 (Connection to the Shapley Taylor interaction index (Sundararajan et al., 2020), proven
in both Ren et al. (2023a) and Appendix B.7). Given a subset of input variables T вҠҶ N , the k-
th order Shapley Taylor interaction index I Shapley-Taylor (T ) can be represented as the weighted sum of
                                                                                                            вҲ’1
interaction effects, i.e., I Shapley-Taylor (T ) = I(T ) if |T | < k; I Shapley-Taylor (T ) = SвҠҶN \T |S|+k
                                                                                             P
                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                               I(SвҲӘT )
if |T | = k; and I Shapley-Taylor (T ) = 0 if |T | > k.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     P ROOF OF THEOREMS
B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 IN THE MAIN PAPER
Theorem 1. Let the input sample x be arbitrarily masked to obtain a masked sample xS . The output
of the DNN on the masked sample xS can be disentangled into the sum of effects of all interactions
within the set S:                              X
                           вҲҖS вҠҶ N, v(xS ) =            I(T ) + v(xвҲ… ).                         (7)
                                                               T вҠҶS


Proof. According to the definition of the Harsanyi interaction, we have вҲҖS вҠҶ N ,

                            X                X X
                                   I(T ) =              (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| u(L)
                            T вҠҶS             T вҠҶS LвҠҶT
                                             X       X
                                        =                      (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| u(L)
                                             LвҠҶS T вҠҶS:T вҠҮL
                                               |S|
                                             X X            X
                                        =                           (вҲ’1)tвҲ’|L| u(L)
                                             LвҠҶS t=|L| T вҠҶS:SвҠҮL
                                                           |T |=t

                                                          |S|вҲ’|L|
                                                                                !
                                             X             X          |S| вҲ’ |L|
                                        =          u(L)                           (вҲ’1)m
                                                           m=0
                                                                          m
                                             LвҠҶS

                                        =u(S) = v(xS ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ).
                               P
Therefore, we have v(xS ) =         T вҠҶS I(T ) + v(xвҲ… ).


B.2   D ERIVATION OF A SSUMPTION 1-Оұ FROM A SSUMPTION 1-ОІ IN THE MAIN PAPER
Before we give the derivation of Assumption 1-Оұ from Assumption 1-ОІ, we first prove the following
lemma.
Lemma 1. The effect I(S) (S Мё= вҲ…) of an interactive concept can be rewritten as
                                                                              Оәi
                                                           Q
                          X           вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v         iвҲҲS (xi вҲ’ bi )
                  I(S) =                Оә         Оә      В·                       ,               (8)
                              ОәвҲҲQS вҲӮx 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxnn            Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                        1            x=b

where QS = {[Оә1 , . . . , Оәn ]вҠӨ | вҲҖ i вҲҲ S, Оәi вҲҲ N+ ; вҲҖ i МёвҲҲ S, Оәi = 0}.
Note that a similar proof was first introduced in Ren et al. (2023c).

                                                              Лң
Proof. Let us denote the function on the right of Eq. (8) by I(S), i.e., for S Мё= вҲ…,
                                                                                 Оәi
                                                               Q
                    Лң     def
                              X         вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v          iвҲҲS (xi вҲ’ bi )
                    I(S)  =               Оә         Оә       В·                       .            (9)
                                ОәвҲҲQS вҲӮx 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxnn             Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                          1             x=b


                                  Лң
According to Eq. (1), we define I(вҲ…)   = 0. Actually, it has been proven in Grabisch & Roubens
(1999) and Ren et al. (2023a) that the Harsanyi interaction I(S) defined in Eq. (1) is the unique
metric satisfying the universal matching property mentioned in the main paper, i.e.,
                                                X
                            вҲҖ S вҠҶ N, v(xS ) =           I(T ) + v(xвҲ… ).                       (10)
                                                               T вҠҶS

                                   Лң
Thus, as long as we can prove that I(S) also satisfies the above universal matching property, we can
       Лң
obtain I(S) = I(S).
                                    Лң
To this end, we only need to prove I(S) also satisfies the universal matching property in Eq. (10).
Specifically, given an input sample x вҲҲ Rn , let us consider the Taylor expansion of the network


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


output v(xS ) of an arbitrarily masked sample xS (S вҠҶ N ), which is expanded at xвҲ… = b =
[b1 , В· В· В· , bn ]вҠӨ . Then, we have
                           вҲһ             вҲһ
                           X             X     вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v     ((xS )1 вҲ’ b1 )Оә1 В· В· В· ((xS )n вҲ’ bn )Оәn
   вҲҖ S вҠҶ N,     v(xS ) =           В·В·В·           Оә1        Оәn   В·                                                   (11)
                           Оә1 =0         Оә =0
                                              вҲӮx1 В· В· В· вҲӮxn x=b                Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                          n


where bi denotes the baseline value to mask the input variable xi .
According to the definition of the masked sample xS , we have that all variables in S keep unchanged
and other variables are masked to the baseline value. That is, вҲҖ i вҲҲ S, (xS )i = xi ; вҲҖ i МёвҲҲ S, (xS )i =
bi . Hence, we obtain вҲҖi МёвҲҲ S, [(xS )i вҲ’ bi ]Оәi = 0. Then, among all Taylor expansion terms, only
terms corresponding to degrees Оә in the set PS = {[Оә1 , В· В· В· , Оәn ]вҠӨ | вҲҖi вҲҲ S, Оәi вҲҲ N; вҲҖi МёвҲҲ S, Оәi = 0}
may not be zero. Therefore, Eq. (11) can be re-written as
                                                                                   Q                      Оәi
                                                X        вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v                iвҲҲS (xi вҲ’ bi )
                   вҲҖ S вҠҶ N,        v(xS ) =                                    В·                               .    (12)
                                                ОәвҲҲPS
                                                        вҲӮxОә1 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxОәnn x=b          Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !

We find that the set PS can be divided into multiple disjoint sets as PS = вҲӘT вҠҶS QT , where QT =
{[Оә1 , В· В· В· , Оәn ]вҠӨ | вҲҖi вҲҲ T, Оәi вҲҲ N+ ; вҲҖi МёвҲҲ T, Оәi = 0}. Then, we can derive that
                                                                                       Q                       Оәi
                                              X X           вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v                 iвҲҲT (xi вҲ’ bi )
                вҲҖ S вҠҶ N,      v(xS ) =                                            В·
                                                           вҲӮxОә1 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxОәnn x=b           Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                              T вҠҶS ОәвҲҲQT
                                              X                                                                     (13)
                                          =          Лң ) + v(xвҲ… ).
                                                     I(T
                                              T вҠҶS


The last step is obtained as follows. When T = вҲ…, QT only has one element Оә = [0, В· В· В· , 0]вҠӨ , which
                                       Лң
corresponds to the term v(xвҲ… ). Also, I(вҲ…)                                            Лң
                                            = 0, which leads to the final form. Thus, I(S)   satisfies
the universal matching property in Eq. (10), and this lemma holds.


Then, we prove that by combining Lemma 1 and Assumption 1-ОІ, we can obtain Assumption 1-Оұ.
Assumption 1-Оұ. Interactions of higher than the M -th order have zero effect, i.e., вҲҖ S вҲҲ {S вҠҶ
N | |S| вүҘ M + 1}, I(S) = 0. Here, the order of an interaction is defined as the number of input
                               def
variables in S, i.e., order(S) = |S|.

Proof. According to Lemma 1, we have
                                                                                              Оәi
                                                                            Q
                                   X           вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v                   iвҲҲS (xi вҲ’ bi )
                     I(S) =                      Оә         Оә      В·                                       ,         (14)
                                         ОәвҲҲQS вҲӮx 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxnn                      Оә1 ! В· В· В· Оәn !
                                                 1            x=b

where QS = {[Оә1 , . . . , Оәn ]вҠӨ | вҲҖ i вҲҲ S, Оәi вҲҲ N+ ; вҲҖ i МёвҲҲ S, Оәi = 0}.
We note that when |S| вүҘ M + 1, we have вҲҖ Оә вҲҲ QS , Оә1 + В· В· В· + Оәn вүҘ M + 1. Then, combining
with Assumption 1-ОІ, we have
                                      вҲӮ Оә1 +В·В·В·+Оәn v
                                                            = 0,         вҲҖОә вҲҲ QS .                                  (15)
                                     вҲӮxОә1 1 В· В· В· вҲӮxОәnn x=b

This leads to I(S) = 0, вҲҖS вҲҲ {S вҠҶ N | |S| вүҘ M + 1}.

B.3 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 IN THE MAIN PAPER
To facilitate the proof of Theorem 2 in the main paper, we first prove the following two lemmas.
Lemma 2. For each M вүӨ m вүӨ n, the average network output of the m-th order can be written as
                                         M
                                         X   m

                                   (m)       k   (k)
                                uМ„     =     n A     ,                                 (16)
                                                          k=1     k

where A(k) =
               P
                  T вҠҶN,|T |=k I(T ).


                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. According to the definition of uМ„(m) , we have
                uМ„(m) = ESвҠҶN,|S|=m [u(S)]                                                         (17)
                      = ESвҠҶN,|S|=m [v(xS ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… )]                                              (18)
                                    hX            i
                      = ESвҠҶN,|S|=m           I(T )     //according to Theorem 1                   (19)
                                       T вҠҶS
                                     X
                                        m X
                      = ESвҠҶN,|S|=m                          I(T )                                 (20)
                                        k=1     T вҠҶS,|T |=k
                        Xm                  X
                      =       ESвҠҶN,|S|=m                    I(T )                                 (21)
                             k=1                    T вҠҶS,|T |=k
                          Xm       1 X                   X
                      =            n
                                                                           I(T )                  (22)
                             k=1             SвҠҶN,|S|=m       T вҠҶS,|T |=k
                                   m

                          Xm       1   nвҲ’k X
                      =            n
                                                         I(T )                                    (23)
                             k=1
                                   m
                                       mвҲ’k   T вҠҶN,|T |=k
                                   m X

                          Xm
                                   k
                      =            n          I(T )                                               (24)
                             k=1         T вҠҶN,|T |=k
                                   k
                                   m

                          Xm
                                   k   (k)
                      =            n A                                                            (25)
                             k=1
                                   k


From  Eq. (22) to Eq. (23), we note that each single T вҠҶ N (|T | = k) is repeatly counted for
 nвҲ’k                   P            P
 mвҲ’k times in the sum    SвҠҶN,|S|=m     T вҠҶS,|T |=k I(T ). And from Eq. (23) to Eq. (24), we use the
following property:

     n    m           n!         m!               n!          (n вҲ’ k)!           n     nвҲ’k
               =                          =                                  =                  .
     m     k      m!(n вҲ’ m)! k!(m вҲ’ k)!      k!(n вҲ’ k)! (m вҲ’ k)!(n вҲ’ m)!         k    mвҲ’k
                                                                                               (26)
Furthermore, according to Assumption 1-Оұ, we have вҲҖS вҲҲ {S вҠҶ N | |S| вүҘ M + 1}, I(S) = 0.
Therefore, we have вҲҖk вүҘ M + 1, A(k) = 0. This leads to
                                                 m         XM m

                                        Xm
                                  (m)            k   (k)          k   (k)
                вҲҖM вүӨ m вүӨ n, uМ„        =          n A     =        n A     .        (27)
                                                  k=1                      k=1
                                                         k                         k


Lemma 3. Given n вҲҲ N+ and M вҲҲ N+ , where M < n, if вҲҖ m вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’
    PM (m)
M }, k=1 nk wk = 0, then we have wk = 0 for k = 1, В· В· В· , M .
         (k )

Proof. We first represent the above problem using the matrix representation: if Cw = 0, where
           пЈ® n
               (1)       (n2 )          n
                                       (M   )
                                               пЈ№
                n         n      В·В·В·    n
               (1)
           пЈҜ nвҲ’1         (2)           (M ) пЈә                            пЈ®
                                                                           w1
                                                                                пЈ№
           пЈҜ( 1 )       nвҲ’1            nвҲ’1 пЈә
                       (       )      (      )
           пЈҜ n             2
                                 В·В·В·    M      пЈә                         пЈҜ w2 пЈә
      C = пЈҜ (1)          (n2 )          n
                                       (M   ) пЈәпЈә вҲҲ R(M +1)Г—M , and w = пЈҜ            M
                                                                         пЈ° ... пЈ» вҲҲ R ,      (28)
           пЈҜ                                                                    пЈә
           пЈҜ ..            ..    ..      .. пЈә
           пЈҜ .              .       .     .    пЈә
             ( 1 ) (nвҲ’M
           пЈ° nвҲ’M
                                      (nвҲ’M                                 wM
                           2 )          M )
                                               пЈ»
                n         n      В·В·В·    n
               (1)       (2)           (M )
then we have w = 0.
To prove this lemma, we only need to prove that rank(C) = M .
If we perform elementary row transformations on the matrix,  i.e., subtracting the  (i + 1)-th row from
                                                           n
                                                             вҲ’ nвҲ’1           nвҲ’1

the i-th row (i = 1, 2, В· В· В· , M ), and using the formula m        m   =    mвҲ’1 , the matrix can be


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transformed as below, with its row rank unchanged:
                                     пЈ® nвҲ’1
                                        ( 0 )    (nвҲ’11 )           (MnвҲ’1 пЈ№
                                                                         вҲ’1)
                                                            В· В· В·
                                     пЈҜ (n1 )       (n2 )             (M n
                                                                           ) пЈә
                                     пЈҜ (nвҲ’2)     (nвҲ’2                nвҲ’2 пЈә
                                                     1 )           (M    вҲ’1) пЈә
                                     пЈҜ 0
                                     пЈҜ (n)                  В·В·В·
                                     пЈҜ 1           (n2 )             (M n
                                                                           ) пЈә пЈә
                               C вҖІ = пЈҜ ...           ..     ..          .. пЈә                      (29)
                                     пЈҜ
                                     пЈҜ nвҲ’M            .         .        . пЈә   пЈә
                                     пЈҜ ( 0 ) (nвҲ’M        )         (nвҲ’M пЈә
                                                                     M вҲ’1    )
                                     пЈҜ n             1
                                                            В·В·В·
                                                   (n2 )                n
                                                                               пЈә
                                     пЈҜ (1)                           (M    ) пЈә
                                     пЈ° (nвҲ’M ) (nвҲ’M                  nвҲ’M пЈ»
                                                     2 )           ( M )
                                            1
                                                            В·В·В·
                                          (n1 )    (n2 )             (M n
                                                                           )
To prove that its rank is M , we only need to prove that the first M rows of C вҖІ are linearly indepen-
dent, which is further equivalent to proving a non-zero determinant of the square matrix consisting
of the first M rows, i.e.,
                                    пЈ® nвҲ’1
                                       ( 0 )    (nвҲ’11 )           (MnвҲ’1 пЈ№
                                                                       вҲ’1)
                                          n        n       В·В·В·        n
                                    пЈҜ nвҲ’2(1)      (2)               (M    ) пЈә
                                    пЈҜ( 0 )      (nвҲ’21 )           (MnвҲ’2 пЈә
                                                                       вҲ’1) пЈә
                                    пЈҜ n                    В·В·В·
                           D = det пЈҜ ( 1 )
                              def   пЈҜ             (n2 )             (Mn
                                                                          ) пЈә пЈә Мё= 0              (30)
                                    пЈҜ .    .        .
                                                    .      ..         .. пЈә
                                    пЈҜ .             .         .        .      пЈә
                                    пЈ° nвҲ’M
                                      ( 0 ) (nвҲ’M    1 )           (nвҲ’M
                                                                    M вҲ’1 )
                                                                              пЈ»
                                          n        n       В·В·В·        n
                                         (1)      (2)               (M )

We can recursively obtain the equations below:
                  пЈ® nвҲ’1         nвҲ’1
                                               nвҲ’1 пЈ№

                       0         1     В·В·В·    M вҲ’1
   M
        n         пЈҜ nвҲ’2         nвҲ’2
                                       В·В·В·     nвҲ’2 пЈә
  Y               пЈҜ 0            1            M вҲ’1 пЈә
D          = det пЈҜ .             ..     .       .. пЈә                                                           (31)
        k         пЈ° ..            .   ..         .  пЈ»
  k=1
                     nвҲ’M       nвҲ’M            nвҲ’M

                       0         1     В·В·В·    M вҲ’1
                                nвҲ’2            nвҲ’2 пЈ№

                       0               В·  В· В·
                  пЈ®
                                 0            M вҲ’2
                                nвҲ’3            nвҲ’3 пЈә
                  пЈҜ 0
                                 0     В·В·В·    M вҲ’2 пЈә
           = det пЈҜ .                                                     // subtracting (i + 1)-th row from i-th row
                  пЈҜ
                                  ..    ..       .. пЈә
                  пЈ° ..             .        .     .  пЈ»
                     nвҲ’M
                            nвҲ’M               nвҲ’M
                       0         1     В·В·В·    M вҲ’1
                                                                                                               (32)
                   пЈ® nвҲ’2         nвҲ’2
                                                        nвҲ’2 пЈ№

                      0           1          В·В·В·        M вҲ’2
                   пЈҜ nвҲ’3         nвҲ’2
                                             В·В·В·        nвҲ’2 пЈә
                   пЈҜ 0            1                     M вҲ’2 пЈә
             = det пЈҜ .            ..         ..           .. пЈә                                                 (33)
                   пЈ° ..            .            .          .  пЈ»
                     nвҲ’M        nвҲ’M                     nвҲ’M

                        0          1         В·В·В·        M вҲ’2
          = В·В·В·                                                                                                (34)
          =1                                                                                                   (35)
Now we can see that
                                                          1
                                            D = QM                n
                                                                        Мё= 0                                   (36)
                                                        k=1       k
This leads to the conclusion:
                                       PM       (m
                                                 k)
If вҲҖ m вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ M },       k=1 (n) wk = 0, then wk = 0 for k = 1, В· В· В· , M .
                                                    k


Next, we will prove Theorem 2.
Theorem 2. There exists m0 вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ M }, such that for all 1 вүӨ k вүӨ M , the sum of
the effects of all k-order interactions can be written as:
                                             (k)                               (k)      (k)
                  A(k) = (О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 ) uМ„(1) ,                              (37)


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     (k)                 (k)
where |О»(k) | вүӨ 1, |a0 | < n, |ai | вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ 1} for i = 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1, and

                                 1        aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1                 a0
                     Оҙ вүӨ logn       1 вҲ’ pвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1 вҲ’ В· В· В· вҲ’ p             , if О» > 0,                                                           (38)
                                 О»      n                        n

                                  1   aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1                   a0
                     Оҙ вүӨ logn                       +  В· В· В· +        , if О» < 0.                                                             (39)
                                 вҲ’О» npвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1                   np
                     m                                            m
         def PM ( k0 ) (k)          def PM ( 0 ) (k)
Here, О» =     k=1 (n) О»    Мё= 0, ai = k=1 nk ai for i = 0, 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1, and вҢҠpвҢӢ denotes
                      k                     ( )                       k
the greatest integer less than or equal to p.

Proof. First, according to Assumption 3, if we let mвҖІ = 1, then the average output of order m
should satisfy uМ„(m) вүӨ mp В· uМ„(1) . Then, according to Assumption 2, we further have uМ„(m) вүҘ uМ„(0) =
v(xвҲ… ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ) = 0. Combining with the conclusion in Lemma 2, we have
                                                      M
                                                      X    m

                                               (m)         k   (k)
                     вҲҖM вүӨ m вүӨ n, 0 вүӨ uМ„            =       n A     вүӨ mp В· uМ„(1) .               (40)
                                                                           k=1         k


Deriving the form of A(k) . For each A(k) , 1 вүӨ k вүӨ M , we consider its n-ary representation after
being divided by uМ„(1) , i.e.,
                    A(k)     (k)    (k) (k)       (k)            (k)    (k)
                      (1)
                          = aq(k) nq + aq(k) вҲ’1 nq вҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 ,                                                                   (41)
                    uМ„
                                   (k)         (k)       (k)              (k)                            (k)           (k)
                                                                                вҲ’1
                вҮ’ A(k) = aq(k) nq                    + aq(k) вҲ’1 nq                   + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0                      uМ„(1) ,         (42)
                    (k)                                                                                        (k)
where q (k) вҲҲ N, |ai | вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ 1} for i = 1, В· В· В· , q (k) , and |a0 | < n. Note that we absorb
                       (k)
the decimal part into a0 . Then, let us consider the following two cases for each 1 вүӨ k вүӨ M . We
will show that in both cases, A(k) can be represented as the form in Eq. (37).
Case 1: if q (k) вүӨ вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1. In this case, A(k) can directly be represented as the form in Eq. (37):
                           (k)                                  (k)              (k)               (k)         (k)      (k)             (k)
 A(k) = (О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + aq(k) +1 nq                               +1
                                                                                            + aq(k) nq               + a1 n + a0 ) uМ„(1) , (43)
                                    (k)                           (k)
where we simply set О»(k) = aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 = В· В· В· = aq(k) +1 = 0, and Оҙ can be arbitrary (we will discuss
the choice and range of Оҙ in Case 2).
Case 2: if q (k) вүҘ вҢҠpвҢӢ. In this case, we first merge all terms with a degree higher than or equal to
вҢҠpвҢӢ into a single term. According to Eq. (42), we have
               пЈ«                                                                   пЈ¶
             пЈ¬ (k) q(k)            (k)        (k)                     (k)    (k) пЈ· (1)
      A(k) = пЈ¬
             пЈӯaq(k) n   + В· В· В· + aвҢҠpвҢӢ nвҢҠpвҢӢ +aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 пЈ· пЈё uМ„                                                         (44)
               |          {z              }
                                           (k)
                           =:s(k) np+Оҙ
                            (k)

                                     (k)                                         (k)               (k)
            = s(k) np+Оҙ           + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0                                        uМ„(1) ,                          (45)

where s(k) вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1} denotes the sign of this term.
Let us consider all orders in the set G = {k | 1 вүӨ k вүӨ M, q (k) вүҘ вҢҠpвҢӢ}. Each order k has the
corresponding Оҙ (k) . We set Оҙ = maxkвҲҲG Оҙ (k) , and let k вҲ— = arg maxkвҲҲG Оҙ (k) . Then, for any k вҲҲ G,
we can rewrite the first term in Eq. (45) as
                                                (k)               (k)
                                                                          вҲ’Оҙ
                                 s(k) np+Оҙ            = s|(k) n{z
                                                                Оҙ
                                                                            }n
                                                                                 p+Оҙ
                                                                                            = О»(k) np+Оҙ .                                     (46)
                                                               =:О»(k)

Note that since Оҙ = maxkвҲҲG Оҙ (k) вүҘ Оҙ (k) and s(k) вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}, we have
                                                                (k)                     (k)
                                                                      вҲ’Оҙ                      вҲ’Оҙ
                                    |О»(k) | = |s(k) nОҙ                     | = |nОҙ                 | вүӨ 1.                                     (47)


                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   вҲ—                        вҲ—
In particular, |О»(k ) | = 1 because Оҙ (k ) = Оҙ. Therefore, for any k вҲҲ G, A(k) can be rewritten as

                                            (k)                    (k)     (k)
                   A(k) = О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 uМ„(1) ,                   (48)
                       (k)            (k)
where |О»(k) | вүӨ 1, |a0 | < n, |ai | вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ 1} for i = 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1.
Deriving the upper bound of Оҙ. Next, we will derive the upper bound for Оҙ by using the inequality
in Eq. (40). Let us plug in the expression of A(k) into the Eq. (40), and obtain
                M
                             !            M
                                                         !                     M
                                                                                         !!
                     m                        m                                  m

                                               k   (k)                           k   (k)
               X                         X                                    X
     (m)             k   (k)     p+Оҙ                         вҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1
   uМ„    =           n О»       n     +         n aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 n          + В·В·В· +       n a0       uМ„(1)
               k=1     k                        k=1   k                               k=1   k
                                                                                                 (49)

According to Lemma 3, we have the following assertion:
                                                                    M
                                                                    X     m0

                                                                          k   (k)
                           вҲғ m0 вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ M },             n О»     Мё= 0           (50)
                                                                    k=1   k

This can be proven by contradiction: if for any m вҲҲ {n, n вҲ’ 1, В· В· В· , n вҲ’ M }, we all have
PM (mk0 ) (k)
  k=1 (n) О»    = 0, then according to Lemma 3, we obtain О»(k) = 0 for all 1 вүӨ k вүӨ M .
        k
                                          вҲ—
However, we have mentioned above that |О»(k ) | = 1, which leads to contradiction.
                                m                               m
                  def PM ( k0 ) (k)          def PM ( 0 ) (k)
Let us denote О» =      k=1 (n) О»    Мё= 0, ai = k=1 nk ai for i = 0, 1, В· В· В· , вҢҠpвҢӢ вҲ’ 1, therefore
                                k                    ( )        k
using the inequality in Eq. (40) for m = m0 we can write

   0 вүӨ uМ„(m0 ) = О»np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a1 n + a0 uМ„(1) вүӨ mp0 В· uМ„(1) вүӨ np В· uМ„(1) .    (51)

When О» > 0, by using the right-side inequality, we obtain

                                     1         aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1        a0
                        Оҙ вүӨ logn        1 вҲ’ pвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1 вҲ’ В· В· В· вҲ’ p     .                            (52)
                                     О»        n              n
Similarly, when О» < 0, by using the left-side inequality, we obtain

                                         1   aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1                a0
                           Оҙ вүӨ logn                      + В· В· В· +        .                      (53)
                                       вҲ’О» npвҲ’вҢҠpвҢӢ+1                 np



B.4 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3 IN THE MAIN PAPER
Theorem 6. R(k) has the following upper bound:
                                      uМ„(1)                  (k)                     (k)
                        R(k) вүӨ                 |О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a0 |.        (54)
                                    П„ |О· (k) |

Proof. According to the definition of A(k) , we have
                       X
              A(k) =             I(S)                                                            (55)
                           |S|=k
                            X
                    = О· (k)           |I(S)| // according to the definition of О· (k)             (56)
                                      |S|=k

Then, we obtain
             A(k)    X
               (k)
                   =        |I(S)|                                                               (57)
             О·        |S|=k
                     X
                   вүҘ               |I(S)|                                                        (58)
                             |S|=k,|I(S)|вүҘП„

                     вүҘ П„ R(k)       // according to R(k) = |{S вҠҶ N | |S| = k, |I(S)| вүҘ П„ }|      (59)


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  (k)
Note that A(k) always has the same sign as О· (k) , making A
                                                          О· (k)
                                                                > 0. Therefore, we can simply add
                                                                                          (k)
absolute value to the left-hand side of the above equation and get |A     |
                                                                   |О· (k) |
                                                                            вүҘ П„ R(k) .

Since П„ > 0, we can obtain
                            |A(k) |        uМ„(1)                  (k)                     (k)
                R(k) вүӨ                 =            |О»(k) np+Оҙ + aвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 nвҢҠpвҢӢвҲ’1 + В· В· В· + a0 |.                   (60)
                            П„ |О· (k) |   П„ |О· (k) |


B.5 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4 IN THE A PPENDIX
Before proving Theorem 4, we first prove the following lemma, which can serve as the foundation
for proofs of Theorem 4, 5, and 6.
Lemma 4 (Connection to the marginal benefit). вҲҶuT (S) = LвҠҶT (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| u(L вҲӘ S) denotes the
                                                                                  P
marginal benefit (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999) of variables in T вҠҶ N \ S given the environment S .
We have proven that вҲҶuT (S) can be decomposed     into the sum of interaction utilities inside T and
sub-environments of S , i.e. вҲҶuT (S) = S вҖІ вҠҶS I(T вҲӘ S вҖІ ).
                                      P


Proof. By the definition of the marginal benefit, we have
                      X
         вҲҶuT (S) =          (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| u(L вҲӘ S)
                      LвҠҶT
                      X                           X
                  =         (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L|                 I(K) // by the universal matching property
                      LвҠҶT                       KвҠҶLвҲӘS
                      X                         X X
                  =         (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L|                       I(LвҖІ вҲӘ S вҖІ )   // since L вҲ© S = вҲ…
                      LвҠҶT                       LвҖІ вҠҶL S вҖІ вҠҶS
                               пЈ®                                              пЈ№
                      X            X            |T |вҲ’|L|
                                                         X
                  =            пЈ°         (вҲ’1)                   I(LвҖІ вҲӘ S вҖІ )пЈ»
                      S вҖІ вҠҶS       LвҠҶT                  LвҖІ вҠҶL
                               пЈ®                                              пЈ№
                      X пЈҜX X
                             (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| I(LвҖІ вҲӘ S вҖІ )пЈә
                                                      пЈә
                  =     пЈҜ
                        пЈ°                             пЈ»
                      S вҖІ вҠҶS       LвҖІ вҠҶT LвҠҶT
                                         LвҠҮLвҖІ
                               пЈ®                                                                             пЈ№
                                              пЈ«                                                             пЈ¶пЈә
                                                  |T |
                           пЈҜ                                                        !
                     X пЈҜ                                               |T | вҲ’ |LвҖІ |
                                         X       X                                                           пЈә
                               вҖІ                                                          |T |вҲ’|L|    вҖІ   вҖІ пЈёпЈә
                  =        пЈҜI(S вҲӘ T ) +                                               (вҲ’1)         I(L вҲӘ S ) пЈә
                           пЈҜ                  пЈӯ
                                                                               вҖІ
                                                                        l вҲ’ |L |
                    S вҖІ вҠҶS пЈ°
                           пЈҜ| {z }
                                        LвҖІ вҠҠT   l=|LвҖІ |
                                                                                                             пЈә
                              LвҖІ =T                                                                          пЈ»
                                        |                                          {z                       }
                                                                                  LвҖІ вҠҠT
                               пЈ®                          пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                             |T |
                                                                                !
                                                                   |T | вҲ’ |LвҖІ |
                           пЈҜ                  пЈ¬                                                пЈ·пЈә
                     X пЈҜ         вҖІ
                                         X пЈ¬      вҖІ   вҖІ
                                                            X                         |T |вҲ’|L| пЈ·пЈә
                                                                                               пЈ·пЈә
                  =        пЈҜI(S вҲӘ T ) +       пЈ¬I(L вҲӘ S ) В·                        (вҲ’1)
                           пЈҜ                  пЈ¬
                                                                    l вҲ’  |LвҖІ|                  пЈ·пЈә
                    S вҖІ вҠҶS пЈ°            LвҖІ вҠҠT пЈӯ            l=|LвҖІ |                             пЈёпЈ»
                                                           |               {z                }
                                                                           =0
                     X
                  =        I(S вҖІ вҲӘ T )
                      S вҖІ вҠҶS


Then, let us prove Theorem 4.
Theorem 4. Let П•(i) denote the Shapley value of an input variable i. Then, the Shapley value П•(i)
can be explained as the result of uniformly assigning attributions of each Harsanyi interaction to
                                                   1
                                       P
each involving variable i, i.e., П•(i) = SвҠҶN \{i} |S|+1 I(S вҲӘ {i}).


                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By the definition of the Shapley value, we have

        П•(i) =E          E     [u(S вҲӘ {i}) вҲ’ u(S)]
               m SвҠҶN \{i}
                    |S|=m

                      |N |вҲ’1
                  1 X                1            X             h                 i
             =                  |N |вҲ’1
                                                                 u(S вҲӘ {i}) вҲ’ u(S)
                 |N | m=0

                                  m            SвҠҶN \{i}
                                                |S|=m

                      |N |вҲ’1
                  1 X                1            X
             =                  |N |вҲ’1
                                                                вҲҶu{i} (S)
                 |N | m=0

                                  m            SвҠҶN \{i}
                                                |S|=m
                                                                пЈ®                         пЈ№
                    |N |вҲ’1
                1 X                  1            X                 X
             =                  |N |вҲ’1
                                                                пЈ°       I(L вҲӘ {i})пЈ»               // by Lemma 4
               |N | m=0

                                  m            SвҠҶN \{i}          LвҠҶS
                                                |S|=m

                                   |N |вҲ’1
                  1        X         X              1               X
             =                                   |N |вҲ’1
                                                                            I(L вҲӘ {i})
                 |N |

                        LвҠҶN \{i} m=0               m            SвҠҶN \{i}
                                                                 |S|=m
                                                                  SвҠҮL

                                     |N |вҲ’1
                  1        X          X             1               X
             =                                    |N |вҲ’1
                                                                            I(L вҲӘ {i}) // since S вҠҮ L, |S| = m вүҘ |L|.
                 |N |

                        LвҠҶN \{i} m=|L|              m           SвҠҶN \{i}
                                                                 |S|=m
                                                                  SвҠҮL

                                     |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                     !
                1          X          X             1                 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
             =                                    |N |вҲ’1
                                                             В·                        I(L вҲӘ {i})
               |N |                                                      m вҲ’ |L|
                        LвҠҶN \{i} m=|L|              m

                                                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                                                                               !
                1          X                                    X             1               |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
             =                     I(L вҲӘ {i})                               |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                      В·
               |N |                                                                                 k
                        LвҠҶN \{i}                                k=0         |L|+k
                                                        |                            {z                        }
                                                                                     wL


Then, we leverage the following properties of combinatorial numbers and the Beta function to sim-
plify the term wL = |N
                    P |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1      1     |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1

                      k=0       |N |вҲ’1 В·      k
                                                     .
                                               ( |L|+k )
                                             n       nвҲ’1

(i) A property of combinitorial numbers. m В· m = n В· mвҲ’1 .

R(ii) The definition of the Beta function. For p, q > 0, the Beta function is defined as B(p, q) =
   1 pвҲ’1
  0
     x   (1 вҲ’ x)1вҲ’q dx.
(iii) Connections between combinitorial numbers and the Beta function.
  в—Ұ When p, q вҲҲ Z+ , we have B(p, q) = qВ· p+qвҲ’1
                                           1
                                                .
                                                                 ( pвҲ’1 )
                                                                n
  в—Ұ For m, n вҲҲ Z+ and n > m, we have                                        1

                                                                m
                                                                    = mВ·B(nвҲ’m+1,m) .

                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                            !
                           X               1 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
            wL =                         |N |вҲ’1
                                                В·
                                                   k
                        k=0      |L|+k
                    |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                 !
                        X         |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
                  =                                В· (|L| + k) В· B(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k, |L| + k)
                                         k
                        k=0
                    |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                      !
                        X              |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
                  =            |L| В·                    В· B(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k, |L| + k)      В·В·В·вғқ1
                                              k
                        k=0
                       |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                       !
                           X            |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
                    +              kВ·                     В· B(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k, |L| + k)     В·В·В·вғқ2
                                               k
                             k=0


Then, we solve вғқ
               1 and вғқ
                     2 respectively. For вғқ,
                                         1 we have


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
               Z 1                                           !
                                X          |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
        вғқ
        1 =          |L|                                         В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’kвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+kвҲ’1 dx
                0                                k
                                k=0
                            пЈ®                                                                     пЈ№
                                |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
               Z 1                                               !
                                     X          |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1         |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’kвҲ’1
           =         |L| В· пЈ°                                          В·x              В· (1 вҲ’ x)   kпЈ»
                                                                                                       В·(1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx
                0                                     k
                                     k=0
                            |                                    {z                                }
                                                                 =1
               Z 1
           =         |L|(1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx = 1
                0


For вғқ,
    2 we have



         |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’1
                                                           !
            X                            |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 2
   вғқ
   2 =                (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1) В·                      В· B(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k, |L| + k)
                                              kвҲ’1
          k=1
                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’2
                                                          !
                            X          |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 2
      =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1)                                     В· B(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ kвҖІ вҲ’ 1, |L| + kвҖІ + 1)
                                              kвҖІ
                            kвҖІ =0
                        Z 1 |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’2                        !
                                  X         |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 2                     вҖІ                    вҖІ
      =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1)                              вҖІ
                                                                 В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k вҲ’2 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+k dx
                         0                         k
                                 kвҖІ =0
                             пЈ®                                                                     пЈ№
                        Z 1 |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’2                           !
                                    X         |N | вҲ’   |L| вҲ’   2      |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k вҖІ
                                                                                   вҲ’2            вҖІ
      =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1)      пЈ°
                                                        вҖІ
                                                                   В·x                 В· (1 вҲ’ x) пЈ» В·(1 вҲ’ x)|L| dx
                                                                                               k

                         0                           k
                                   kвҖІ =0
                             |                                   {z                                }
                                                                           =1
                                Z 1
                                                |L|        |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1
      =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1)               (1 вҲ’ x)         dx =
                                 0                             |L| + 1


Hence, we have


                                                                  |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ 1     |N |
                                      wL = вғқ
                                           1 +вғқ
                                              2 =1+                              =
                                                                      |L| + 1      |L| + 1


Therefore, we proved П•(i) = |N1 |                                                                1
                                             P                                   P
                                                 SвҠҶN \{i} wL В· I(L вҲӘ {i}) =           SвҠҶN \{i} |S|+1 I(S вҲӘ {i})    .


B.6   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 IN THE A PPENDIX
Theorem 5. Given a subset of P     input variables T вҠҶ N , the Shapley interaction index I Shapley (T ) can
                     Shapley                  1
be represented as I          (T ) = SвҠҶN \T |S|+1 I(S вҲӘ T ). In other words, the index I Shapley (T ) can be
explained as uniformly allocating I(S ) s.t. S вҖІ = S вҲӘ T to the compositional variables of S вҖІ , if we
                                          вҖІ

treat the coalition of variables in T as a single variable.



Proof. The Shapley interaction index (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999) is defined as I Shapley (T ) =
P        |S|!(|N |вҲ’|S|вҲ’|T |)!
  SвҠҶN \T    (|N |вҲ’|T |+1)!
                              вҲҶuT (S). Then, we have


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               X        |S|!(|N | вҲ’ |S| вҲ’ |T |)!
        I Shapley (T ) =                                         вҲҶuT (S)
                                           (|N | вҲ’ |T | + 1)!
                              SвҠҶN \T
                                                |N |вҲ’|T |
                                     1            X              1              X
                         =                                   |N |вҲ’|T |
                                                                                          вҲҶuT (S)
                              |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1

                                                 m=0             m          SвҠҶN \T
                                                                            |S|=m
                                                                                          пЈ®                   пЈ№
                                                |N |вҲ’|T |
                                  1               X              1              X             X
                         =                                   |N |вҲ’|T |
                                                                                          пЈ°         I(L вҲӘ T )пЈ»    // by Lemma 4
                           |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1

                                                 m=0             m          SвҠҶN \T            LвҠҶS
                                                                            |S|=m

                                                            |N |вҲ’|T |
                                     1            X           X                 1             X
                         =                                               |N |вҲ’|T |
                                                                                                     I(L вҲӘ T )
                              |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1

                                                LвҠҶN \T m=|L|                 m            SвҠҶN \T
                                                                                          |S|=m
                                                                                           SвҠҮL

                                                            |N |вҲ’|T |
                                                                                                      !
                                  1               X           X                 1   |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
                         =                                               |N |вҲ’|T |
                                                                                                       I(L вҲӘ T )
                           |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1                                              m вҲ’ |L|

                                                LвҠҶN \T m=|L|                    m

                                                                            |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                                                                                                              !
                                  1               X                                 X                1      |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
                         =                                  I(L вҲӘ T )                           |N |вҲ’|T |
                           |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1                                                                          k

                                                LвҠҶN \T                              k=0          |L|+k
                                                                            |                           {z                    }
                                                                                                         wL


Similar to the proof of Theorem 4, we leverage the properties of combinatorial numbers and the
Beta function to simplify wL .


            |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                                        !
                  X                 1 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
     wL =                |N |вҲ’|T |            k

               k=0         |L|+k
          |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                            !
               X          |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
        =                                      В· |L| + k В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ k + 1, |L| + k
                                    k
               k=0
          |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                                 !
               X               |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
        =               |L| В·                       В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ k + 1, |L| + k    В·В·В·вғқ1
                                        k
               k=0
             |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                                  !
                  X              |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
          +                kВ·                        В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ k + 1, |L| + k    В·В·В·вғқ2
                                         k
                        k=0


Then, we solve вғқ
               1 and вғқ
                     2 respectively. For вғқ,
                                         1 we have


                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
            Z 1                                                 !
                              X           |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
     вғқ
     1 =          |L|                                                В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |вҲ’k В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+kвҲ’1 dx
             0                                    k
                              k=0
                         пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
                             |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
            Z 1                                                !
                                 X           |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |      |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |вҲ’k
        =         |L| В· пЈ°                                        В·x                 В· (1 вҲ’ x) В·(1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx
                                                                                             kпЈ»

             0                                       k
                                 k=0
                         |                                  {z                                }
                                                                  =1
            Z 1
        =         |L| В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx = 1
             0


For вғқ,
    2 we have


                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |
                                                              !
          X                             |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ 1
вғқ
2 =            (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |)                              В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ k + 1, |L| + k
                                                kвҲ’1
        k=1
                       |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |вҲ’1
                                                                 !
                              X            |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ 1
  =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |)                                вҖІ
                                                                   В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ kвҖІ , |L| + kвҖІ + 1
                                                    k
                             kвҖІ =0
                       Z 1 |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T
                                   X |вҲ’1 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ 1
                                                                     !
                                                                                           вҖІ                    вҖІ
  =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |)                                     вҖІ
                                                                        В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |вҲ’k вҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+k dx
                        0                                k
                                  kвҖІ =0
                            пЈ®                                                                                  пЈ№
                       Z 1 |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T
                                     X |вҲ’1 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T | вҲ’ 1
                                                                       !
                                                                                             вҖІ               вҖІ
                                                                             |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’|T |вҲ’k   вҲ’1
  =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |)      пЈ°                                             В·x                      В· (1 вҲ’ x) пЈ» В·(1 вҲ’ x)|L| dx
                                                                                                           k

                        0             вҖІ
                                                           kвҖІ
                                    k =0
                            |                                       {z                                         }
                                                                          =1
                          Z 1
                                                  |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |
   =(|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |)         (1 вҲ’ x)|L| dx =
                            0                          |L| + 1


Hence, we have


                                                     |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ |T |   |N | вҲ’ |T | + 1
                            wL = вғқ
                                 1 +вғқ
                                    2 =1+                              =
                                                          |L| + 1            |L| + 1


Therefore, we proved that I Shapley (T ) = |N |вҲ’|T
                                                1                                                      1
                                                           P                               P
                                                   |+1          LвҠҶN \T wL В· I(L вҲӘ T ) =                            .
                                                                                              LвҠҶN \T |L|+1 I(L вҲӘ T )


B.7    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6 IN THE A PPENDIX
Theorem 6. Given a subset of input variables T вҠҶ N , the k-th order Shapley Taylor interaction
index I Shapley-Taylor (T ) can be represented as weighted sum of interaction effects, i.e., I Shapley-Taylor (T ) =
                                                         вҲ’1
I(T ) if |T | < k; I Shapley-Taylor (T ) = SвҠҶN \T |S|+k     I(S вҲӘ T ) if |T | = k; and I Shapley-Taylor (T ) = 0 if
                                          P
                                                     k
|T | > k.



Proof. By the definition of the Shapley Taylor interaction index,

                                                 пЈұ
                                                 пЈҙ
                                                 пЈҙ вҲҶuT (вҲ…)                             if |T | < k
                                                 пЈІ
                        Shapley-Taylor(k)            k
                                                        P           1
                      I                   (T ) =   |N |   SвҠҶN \T |N |вҲ’1 вҲҶuT (S)        if |T | = k
                                                 пЈҙ
                                                 пЈҙ               ( |S| )
                                                   0                                   if |T | > k
                                                 пЈі



When |T | < k, by the definition in Eq. (1) of the main paper, we have

                                                               X
                        I Shapley-Taylor(k) (T ) = вҲҶuT (вҲ…) =         (вҲ’1)|T |вҲ’|L| В· u(L) = I(T ).
                                                               LвҠҶT


When |T | = k, we have


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              k      X             1
               I Shapley-Taylor(k) (T ) =                      |N |вҲ’1
                                                                          В· вҲҶuT (S)
                                             |N |
                                                    SвҠҶN \T       |S|

                                                  |N |вҲ’k
                                              k X X                       1
                                         =                              |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                   В· вҲҶuT (S)
                                             |N | m=0 SвҠҶN \T
                                                                          |S|
                                                             |S|=m
                                                                                  пЈ®                        пЈ№
                                                    |N |вҲ’k
                                            k X X                         1           X
                                         =                              |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                  пЈ°        I(L вҲӘ T )пЈ»           // by Lemma 4
                                           |N | m=0 SвҠҶN \T
                                                                          |S|        LвҠҶS
                                                             |S|=m

                                                             |N |вҲ’k
                                              k      X        X              1        X
                                         =                              |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                              I(L вҲӘ T )
                                             |N |

                                                    LвҠҶN \T m=|L|          |S|        SвҠҶN \T
                                                                                     |S|=m
                                                                                      SвҠҮL

                                                             |N |вҲ’k
                                                                                                !
                                            k        X        X              1   |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                                         =                              |N |вҲ’1
                                                                                                  I(L вҲӘ T )
                                           |N |                                     m вҲ’ |L|

                                                    LвҠҶN \T m=|L|          |S|

                                                                             |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                                                                                       !
                                            k        X                           X                1     |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                                         =                   I(L вҲӘ T )                        |N |вҲ’1
                                           |N |                                                               m

                                                    LвҠҶN \T                       m=0          |L|+m
                                                                             |                       {z                }
                                                                                                      wL


Similar to the proof of Theorem 4, we leverage the properties of combinatorial numbers and the
Beta function to simplify wL .


                      |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                           !
                            X             1 |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
           wL =                      |N |вҲ’1       m

                         m=0     |L|+m
                     |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                  !
                         X        |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                   =                                В· |L| + m В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ m, |L| + m
                         m=0
                                        m
                     |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                       !
                         X             |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                   =            |L| В·                    В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ m, |L| + m     В·В·В·вғқ1
                         m=0
                                              m
                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                        !
                            X            |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                     +             mВ·                      В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ m, |L| + m     В·В·В·вғқ2
                            m=0
                                                m


Then, we solve вғқ
               1 and вғқ
                     2 respectively. For вғқ,
                                         1 we have


                        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
          Z 1                                                !
                             X           |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
   вғқ
   1 =          |L| В·                                            В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’mвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+mвҲ’1 dx
           0                 m=0
                                               m
                        пЈ®                                                                                  пЈ№
                            |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
          Z 1                                                  !
                               X          |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k                |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’mвҲ’k
      =         |L| В· пЈ°                                            В·x                      В· (1 вҲ’ x)      mпЈ»
                                                                                                               В·xkвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx
           0                  m=0
                                                m
                        |                                        {z                                        }
                                                                 =1
          Z 1
                                                                                              1
      =         |L| В· xkвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|вҲ’1 dx = |L| В· B(k, |L|) =                        |L|+kвҲ’1

           0                                                                              kвҲ’1


For вғқ,
    2 we have


                                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’k
                                                                         !
               X                                  |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k вҲ’ 1
вғқ
2 =                    (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k) В·                                    В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ m, |L| + m
               m=1
                                                        mвҲ’1
        |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’kвҲ’1
                                                                             !
                X                                   |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k вҲ’ 1
    =                    (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k) В·                                      В· B |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ mвҖІ вҲ’ 1, |L| + mвҖІ + 1
                                                            mвҖІ
               mвҖІ =0
                                  |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’kвҲ’1
        Z 1                                                                      !
                                          X              |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k вҲ’ 1                         вҖІ                     вҖІ
    =          (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k)                                                      В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’m вҲ’2 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L|+m dx
           0                                                     mвҖІ
                                          mвҖІ =0
                                  пЈ®                                                                                           пЈ№
                                      |N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’kвҲ’1
        Z 1                                                                       !
                                            X             |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k вҲ’ 1                             вҖІ                вҖІ
    =          (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k) пЈ°                                             В· x|N |вҲ’|L|вҲ’m вҲ’kвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)m пЈ» В·xkвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L| dx
           0                                                      mвҖІ
                                           mвҖІ =0
                                  |                                        {z                               }
                                                                                 =1
        Z 1
    =          (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k) В· xkвҲ’1 В· (1 вҲ’ x)|L| dx = (|N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k) В· B(k, |L| + 1)
           0
         |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
    =
        (|L| + 1) |L|+k

                   kвҲ’1


Hence, we have

                                                             1            |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k
                              w L =вғқ
                                   1 +вғқ
                                      2 =                 |L|+kвҲ’1
                                                                     +
                                                                         (|L| + 1) |L|+k

                                                            kвҲ’1                     kвҲ’1
                                        |L|! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!      |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k (|L| + 1)! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!
                                      =                   +                   В·
                                        (|L| + k вҲ’ 1)!           |L| + 1             (|L| + k)!
                                        |L|! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!      |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k |L|! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!
                                      =                   +                   В·
                                        (|L| + k вҲ’ 1)!           |L| + k        (|L| + k вҲ’ 1)!

                                               |N | вҲ’ |L| вҲ’ k       |L|! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!
                                      = 1+                        В·
                                                   |L| + k          (|L| + k вҲ’ 1)!
                                          |N |      |L|! В· (k вҲ’ 1)!
                                      =          В·
                                        |L| + k (|L| + k вҲ’ 1)!
                                        |N |    |L|! В· k!
                                      =      В·
                                         k     (|L| + k)!
                                        |N |       1
                                      =      В· |L|+k
                                         k
                                                     k


Therefore, we proved that when |T | = k, I Shapley-Taylor (T ) =                                   k
                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                  |N |       LвҠҶN \T wL   В· I(L вҲӘ T ) =
 k                |N |   1                                               |L|+k вҲ’1
       P                                  P
|N |       LвҠҶN \T k В· |L|+k В· I(L вҲӘ T ) =  LвҠҶN \T                          k
                                                                                  I(L вҲӘ T )   .
                       (   )  k


C       E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS FOR VISUALIZING INTERACTION PRIMITIVES
C.1 M ODELS AND DATASETS
We used the models (including MLP, ResMLP, LeNet, AlexNet, VGG, PointNet, and PointNet++)
provided by Li & Zhang (2023b) and followed their experimental settings. The MLPs and ResMLPs
used in this experiment all had 5 fully-connected layers. Each hidden layer had 100 neurons. The
tic-tac-toe dataset, the wifi dataset, and the phishing dataset refer to the UCI tic-tac-toe endgame
dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), the UCI wireless indoor localization dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), and
the UCI phishing website prediction dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), respectively. The MNIST-3 dataset
is a binary classification dataset, where images of the digit вҖңthreeвҖқ in the MNIST dataset (LeCun
et al., 1998) were taken as positive samples, while images of other digits were taken as negative
samples. The CelebA-eyeglasses dataset is a binary classification dataset, where images with the
attribute вҖңeyeglassesвҖқ in the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015) were taken as positive samples, while


                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


other images were taken as negative samples. The heavy computational cost did not allow us to test
on all samples in these datasets. Thus, similar to previous studies Li & Zhang (2023b), we used a
subset of samples to compute interactions. For all models except for LLMs, we followed the setting
of testing samples in Li & Zhang (2023b), in which 50 samples from the CelebA-eyeglasses dataset,
100 samples from the ShapeNet dataset and the MNIST-3 dataset, and 500 samples from each of the
three tabular datasets have been selected to compute interactions.
C.2 T HE ANNOTATION OF SEMANTIC PARTS
As mentioned in Section 3.1, given an input sample with n input variables, the DNN may encode at
most 2n potential interactions. The computational cost for extracting salient interaction primitives is
high, when the number of input variables n is large. For example, if each 3D point of a point-cloud
(or each pixel of an image) is taken as a single input variable, the computation is usually prohibitive.
In order to overcome this issue, Li & Zhang (2023b) annotated 8-10 semantic parts in each input
sample, and the annotated semantic parts are aligned over different samples. Then, each semantic
part in an input sample is taken as a вҖңsingleвҖқ input variable to the DNN.
вҖў For the ShapeNet dataset (Yi et al., 2016), Yi et al. have provided annotations for semantic parts
for input samples    in the motorbike category. The semantic parts include gas tank, seat, handle,
          Segment version-3
light, wheel, and frame. Based
          1_cluster_00пјҢSample 642on the original annotation, Li & Zhang (2023b) further divided the
annotation1_cluster_01пјҢSample
            for each motorbike489sample into more fine-grained semantic parts, including gas tank,
          1_cluster_02пјҢSample
seat, handle,                 116back wheel, front frame, mid frame, and back frame.
              light, front wheel,
           1_cluster_03пјҢSample 372
         1_cluster_04пјҢSample
вҖў For images  in the MNIST-334dataset, we used the semantic parts annotated by Li & Zhang (2023b).
The annotation of different parts was based on some key points in each image. Figure 6 shows
examples of these semantic parts.


         Figure 6: Examples of annotated semantic parts for samples of the MNIST-3 dataset.


D       E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AND MLP S
D.1 M ODELS AND DATASETS
We used off-the-shelf trained LLMs (including the OPT-1.3B6 model, the LLaMA-7B7 model, and
BAAI Aquila-7B8 model) provided by Huggingface in all our experiments. The detailed information
on these models and the training data can be found on the corresponding web pages.
To construct input sentences, for each paragraph in the SQuAD dataset, we first took the initial 30
words. Then, starting from the 31st word, we evaluated the following two conditions: 1) the current
word had a specific meaning and was not a stop word in NLTK (Bird et al., 2009), 2) there were
no punctuations like the period or the semicolon in the five positions preceding the current word. If
both conditions were satisfied, we stopped this process and considered the current word as the target
word for the LLM to predict. We considered the words before this target word as the input sentence
for the LLM. If either condition was not satisfied, we incorporated the current word into the input
sentence and continued evaluating the next word until this process stopped. For each input sentence,
we used 10 meaningful words (words that are not NLTK stop words or punctuations) annotated by
Shen et al. (2023) to construct the set of input variables N , so that we have n = |N | = 10. When
masking the input sentence, we only masked words in N , without changing other вҖңbackgroundвҖқ
words. We tested on the first 1000 sentences in the SQuAD dataset. It was because the heavy
computational cost did not allow us to test on all 20000+ sentences in the dataset.
    6
      https://huggingface.co/facebook/opt-1.3b
    7
      https://huggingface.co/linhvu/decapoda-research-llama-7b-hf
    8
      https://huggingface.co/BAAI/Aquila-7B


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Another potential way to determine the set N is to select regions with significant Shapley values.
It is because Theorem 4 shows that the Shapley value П•(i) can be explained as the result of uni-
formly assigning attributions of each Harsanyi interaction to each involved variable i. Therefore,
the Shapley value can serve as a reasonable metric to measure the saliency of input variables.
In order to ensure the inference logic of the network was meaningful, we discarded sentences for
which the LLM predicted meaningless words, such as вҖңtheвҖқ, вҖңaвҖқ, and other stop words. In addition,
we discarded sentences on which the classification confidence of the LLM is low. Specifically, we
set a threshold Оҫ for v(x) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ). Given an input sentence x, if v(x) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ) < Оҫ, then we
discarded this sentence. We set Оҫ = 1 for the OPT-1.3B model, Оҫ = 2 for the LLaMA-7B model,
and Оҫ = 3 for the BAAI Aquila-7B model and the MLP.
D.2 OR INTERACTIONS AS A SPECIFIC KIND OF AND INTERACTIONS
In addition to the Harsanyi interaction defined in Eq. (1), which represents the AND relationship
between input variables, Li & Zhang (2023a) have also defined OR interactions, as follows.
                                 X
                     Ior (S) = вҲ’         (вҲ’1)|S|вҲ’|T | u(N \ T ), s.t. S Мё= вҲ…,                (61)
                                      T вҠҶS

where u(N \ T ) = v(xN \T ) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… ). The OR interaction represents the OR relationship between
input variables. In particular, Ior (вҲ…) = u(вҲ…) = 0. In later discussions, we use Iand (S) to denote the
Harsanyi interaction (or the AND interaction) in order to distinguish it from the OR interaction. It
is worth noting that an OR interaction can be regarded as a specific AND interaction, if we inverse
the definition of the masked state and the unmasked state of an input variable.
Simultaneously extracting AND-OR interactions. In fact, a well-trained DNN usually encodes com-
plex interactions between input variables, including both AND interactions and OR interactions. Li
& Zhang (2023a) proposed a method to simultaneously extract AND interactions Iand (S) and OR
interactions Ior (S) from the network output. Given a set S вҠҶ N and the corresponding masked sam-
ple xS , Li & Zhang (2023a) proposed to learn a decomposition u(S) = uand (S) + uor (S), towards
the sparsest interactions. The uand (S) term was explained by AND interactions, and the uor (S) term
was explained by OR interactions, subject to Iand (вҲ…) = uand (вҲ…) = 0, Ior (вҲ…) = uor (вҲ…) = 0.
                                               X                            X
          u(S) = uand (S) + uor (S), uand (S) =         Iand (T ), uor (S) =          Ior (T ).  (62)
                                                    T вҠҶS                       T вҲ©SМё=вҲ…

Specifically, they decomposed u(S) into uand (S) = 0.5 В· u(S) + ОіS and uand (S) = 0.5 В· u(S) вҲ’ ОіS ,
where {ОіS }SвҠҶN are a set of learnable variables that determine the decomposition of output scores
for AND and OR interactions. Then, they learned the parameters {ОіS } by minimizing the following
LASSO-like loss to obtain sparse interactions:
                                      X
                                min            |Iand (S)| + |Ior (S)|                         (63)
                                  {ОіS }      SвҠҶN


Removing noises. As discussed in Section 3.3, a small noise ПөS in the network output may signif-
icantly affect the extracted interactions, especially for high-order interactions. Thus, Li & Zhang
(2023a) proposed to learn to remove the noise term ПөS from the computation of AND-OR inter-
actions. Specifically, the decomposition was rewritten as uand (S) = 0.5 В· (u(S) вҲ’ ПөS ) + ОіS and
uor (S) = 0.5 В· (u(S) вҲ’ ПөS ) + ОіS . Thus, the parameters {ПөS }, and {ОіS } are simultaneously learned
by minimizing the loss function in Eq. (63). The values of {ПөS } were constrained in [вҲ’О¶, О¶] where
О¶ = 0.04 В· |v(x) вҲ’ v(xвҲ… )|.
When illustrating the near-zero effects of high-order interactions in Figure 4, we extracted both
AND and OR interactions (can be regarded as a specific kind of AND interactions) and removed the
noises from the network output as mentioned in Section D.2. When computing the number of valid
(salient) interactions in Table 1 and 2, we only extracted AND interactions and we still removed the
noises from network output.
When comparing the real number of valid interactions with the derived bound in Table 2, we only
considered the first M -order interactions. This was because the theoretical bound can only be com-
puted for the first M -order interactions, due to the Assumption 1-Оұ (interactions higher than the
M -th order have zero effects). In this way, we only considered the first M -order interactions for fair
comparison. Nevertheless, it is already shown in Figure 4 that high-order interactions usually had
small effects, so ignoring interactions higher than the M -th order did not affect the conclusion.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E          M ORE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
E.1         M ORE RESULTS TO ILLUSTRATE THE NEAR - ZERO EFFECT OF HIGH - ORDER
            INTERACTIONS
                                                        (m)
We visualize the average strength of interactions Istr = E|S|=m [|I(S)|] of the m-th order on more
samples.
  Opt: ж ·жң¬ 4,Figure
             9, 10, 16,7,
                       20, 8,
                           22, and 9 all 50show that high-order interactions on these LLMs usually have effects
                               35пјҢ38пјҢ48,
that are close to zero.

                 Sample 1          Sample 2            Sample 3               Sample 4         Sample 5
    рқ‘ҡ
     рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ                order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ

                  Sample 6         Sample 7            Sample 8               Sample 9          Sample 10
    рқ‘ҡ
     рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ                order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ

                                                                 (m)
Figure 7: Visualization of the average strength of interactions Istr = E|S|=m [|I(S)|] of the m-th
order   on the
 llama: ж ·жң¬      OPT-1.3B model.
           1, 13пјҢ15пјҢ18пјҢ22пјҢ25пјҢ28пјҢ29пјҢ30пјҢ33


                 Sample 1         Sample 2            Sample 3             Sample 4            Sample 5
    рқ‘ҡ
    рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ

                 Sample 6          Sample 7           Sample 8             Sample 9            Sample 10
    рқ‘ҡ
    рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ             order рқ‘ҡ

                                                                 (m)
Figure 8: Visualization of the average strength of interactions Istr = E|S|=m [|I(S)|] of the m-th
order
 aquila: on
         ж ·жң¬the LLaMA-7B model.
            20пјҢ31пјҢ35пјҢ38пјҢ39пјҢ40пјҢ41пјҢ42пјҢ47пјҢ50


                 Sample 1          Sample 2            Sample 3               Sample 4          Sample 5
    рқ‘ҡ
    рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ              order рқ‘ҡ               order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ

                 Sample 6          Sample 7            Sample 8               Sample 9          Sample 10
    рқ‘ҡ
    рқҗјstr


                 order рқ‘ҡ           order рқ‘ҡ              order рқ‘ҡ               order рқ‘ҡ            order рқ‘ҡ

                                                                        (m)
Figure 9: Visualization of the average strength of interactions Istr           = E|S|=m [|I(S)|] of the m-th
order on the BAAI Aquila-7B model.


E.2         C OMPARISON BETWEEN THE REAL NUMBER OF VALID INTERACTIONS AND THE BOUND
            ON EXAMPLE SENTENCES

In this section, we show several example input sentences along with their real number of valid
(salient) interactions and the derived upper bound. We also show the strength of the normalized
             Лң
interaction I(S)   = I(S)/ maxS вҖІ |I(S вҖІ )| on these examples in descending order, similar to Fig-
ure 3. Figure 10, 11, and 12 shows the results on OPT-1.3B, LLaMA-7B, and BAAI Aquila-7B,
respectively.


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Opt: ж ·жң¬ 14пјҢ32



           Input sentence: The Panthers beat the Seattle Seahawks in the
           divisional round, running up a 31вҖ“0 halftime lead and then holding
           off a furious second half comeback attempt to win 31вҖ“24, avenging                salient


                                                                                |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |
           their elimination from a

           Predicted word: playoff                                                                     noisy

           Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 8
           Upper bound: 65.20                                                               index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ


           Input sentence: CBS provided digital streams of the game via
           CBSSports.com, and the CBS Sports apps on tablets, Windows 10,
           Xbox One and other digital media players (such as Chromecast and                 salient


                                                                                |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |
           Roku). Due to Verizon Communications exclusivity, streaming on
           smartphones was only
                                                                                                       noisy
           Predicted word: available
           Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 15
                                                                                             index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ
           Upper bound: 119.03



Figure 10: Comparison between the real number of valid interactions and the derived upper bound,
and visualization of normalized interaction strength in descending order on the OPT-1.3B model.
Words in bold are the input variables in the set N for which we compute interactions.


llama: ж ·жң¬ 19, 31


           Input sentence: With Rivera having been a linebacker with the
           Chicago Bears in Super Bowl XX, and Kubiak replacing Elway at                     salient
           the end of the Broncos' defeats in Super Bowls XXI and
                                                                                  |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |


           Predicted word: XX                                                                           noisy

           Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 22
           Upper bound: 132.23                                                               index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ



           Input sentence: On December 28, 2015, ESPN Deportes announced
           that they had reached an agreement with CBS and the NFL to be                     salient
           the exclusive Spanish-language broadcaster of the game, marking
                                                                                  |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |


           the third dedicated Spanish-language
                                                                                                        noisy
           Predicted word: broadcast

           Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 20
                                                                                             index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ
           Upper bound: 93.54


Figure 11: Comparison between the real number of valid interactions and the derived upper bound,
and visualization of normalized interaction strength in descending order on the LLaMA-7B model.
Words in bold are the input variables in the set N for which we compute interactions.


                                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
aquila: ж ·жң¬ 0, 44



            Input sentence: Super Bowl 50 was an American football game to
            determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for
            the 2015 season. The American Football Conference (AFC)                         salient


                                                                                  |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |
            champion Denver Broncos

            Predicted word: defeated                                                                  noisy

            Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 46
            Upper bound: 168.25                                                             index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ



            Input sentence: After a punt from both teams, Carolina got on track
            with a 9-play, 73-yard scoring drive. Newton completed 4 of 4                   salient


                                                                                  |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |
            passes for 51 yards and rushed twice for 25
                                                                                                      noisy
            Predicted word: yards

            Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 15
            Upper bound: 104.95                                                              index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ



Figure 12: Comparison between the real number of valid interactions and the derived upper bound,
and visualization of normalized interaction strength in descending order on the BAAI Aquila-7B
model. Words in bold are the input variables in the set N for which we compute interactions.


E.3   M ORE DISCUSSIONS AND EXPERIMENTS ABOUT THE VALUE OF p
Although Assumption 3 does not constrain the upper bound for the constant p, we have conducted
experiments on LLMs to measure the true value of p in real applications. Figure 5(b) shows that
the value of p across different samples was around 0.9 to 1.5. According to either Theorem 3 or
experimental verification in Table 2, interactions encoded by these LLMs were sparse.
Despite the lack of the bound for p, our theory is still complete. It is because the contribution of
our study is to clarify the conditions that lead to the emergence of sparse interaction primitives,
instead of guaranteeing sparse interaction in every DNN. In most tasks (e.g., the aforementioned
classification tasks), these conditions are commonly satisfied, so that our theory has guaranteed the
sparsity of interactions without a need of actually computing the interactions. Section 3.3 discusses
a few special cases that do not satisfy the three common conditions. Therefore, instead of showing
that sparse interaction primitives will emerge in all scenarios, the goal of this paper is to identify
common conditions that provably ensure the emergence of sparse interaction primitives.
In addition, let us analyze how the sparsity of interactions depends on the value of p. Some special
tasks heavily rely on the global information of all input variables, e.g., the task of judging whether
the number of 1вҖҷs in a binary sequence is odd or even (i.e., judging the parity). Then, in these
tasks, the value of p may be large. Therefore, we conducted experiments to train an MLP to judge
whether the number of 1вҖҷs in a binary sequence (e.g., the sequence [0,1,1,1,0,0,1,0,1,1]) is odd
or even. Specifically, each binary sequence contains 10 digits. The MLP has 3 layers, and each
layer contains 100 neurons. We trained the MLP on 1000 randomly generated samples for 50000
iterations, with the learning rate set to 0.01, and the MLP achieved 100% accuracy on these samples.
We then tested the value of p and found that p was around 9.9 to 19.7, which is relatively large.
Fortunately, in most classification tasks as shown in Figure 5(b), the network usually shows a certain
level of robustness to the masking of input samples. Therefore, the value of p will not be very large
in most classification tasks, thus ensuring the sparsity of interactions encoded by the network.

E.4   S IZE OF IMAGE REGIONS DOES NOT AFFECT THE SPARSITY OF INTERACTIONS
We would like to clarify that the objective, i.e., the proof of the emergence of sparse interactions, is
agnostic to the selection of input variables for interactions. To better illustrate this, we conducted
experiments on the MNIST-3 dataset to show that the interactions were still sparse when the size of
image regions varied. Specifically, the original image parts annotated by Li & Zhang (2023b) were
of the size of 3 Г— 3 pixels. Then, we enlarged the size of image parts to 5 Г— 5 pixels and 7 Г— 7 pixels.
Figure 13 shows that the use of input variables of different sizes did not clearly affect the sparsity of
interactions.


                                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Region size = рқҹ‘ Г— рқҹ‘                             Region size = рқҹ“ Г— рқҹ“                           Region size = рқҹ• Г— рқҹ•


                                     salient                                         salient                                       salient
               |рқҗјбҲҡ рқ‘Ҷ |


                                                noisy                                          noisy                                        noisy



                                index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ                            index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ                          index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ


Figure 13: Normalized interaction strength in descending order. We compared the sparsity of inter-
actions when we extracted interactions by setting different sizes of image regions as input variables.
Interactions were still sparse when the size of image regions varied.


E.5 E XPERIMENTS ON RNN S
We conducted experiments on an RNN (i.e., the LSTM) to explore the possibility of applying the
Harsanyi interaction to a wider range of tasks. Specifically, we trained LSTMs with 2 layers on the
SST-2 dataset (Socher et al., 2013) (for sentiment classification) and the CoLA dataset (Warstadt
et al., 2019) (for linguistic acceptability classification). The LSTM can be considered to take natural
language as sequential data. Although these tasks are not equivalent to other prediction tasks on
sequential    data,ж ·жң¬:
       Lstm SST-2   they
                       17, provide
                            23, 46, 49 potential insights into how we can extend the Harsanyi interaction.
FigureLstm
         14 CoLA
             shows  that 8,the
                 ж ·жң¬пјҡ0,           network encodes relatively sparse interactions.
                             9, 31


                                     Sample 1                             Sample 2                         Sample 3                               Sample 4
       SST-2

                   |рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ |


                                                                                                                                                                       рқ‘ӣ
                            0   index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ   2рқ‘ӣ   0       index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ   2рқ‘ӣ   0   index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ     2рқ‘ӣ   0     index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ 2

                                     Sample 1                             Sample 2                         Sample 3                               Sample 4
       CoLA

                   |рқҗј рқ‘Ҷ |


                            0   index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ   2рқ‘ӣ       0   index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ 2
                                                                                               рқ‘ӣ
                                                                                                    0   index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ    2рқ‘ӣ    0     index of interaction рқ‘Ҷ   2рқ‘ӣ


 Figure 14: Interaction strength in descending order. The LSTMs also encode sparse interactions.


F    D ISCUSSION ON THE SETTING OF THRESHOLD П„ IN S ECTION 3.2
In fact, the setting of П„ is quite reasonable, because most interactions with |I(S)| < П„ actually
have zero interaction effect I(S) = 0,Pinstead of having an extremely small yet non-zero effect
by coincidence. According to I(S) = T вҠҶS (вҲ’1)|S|вҲ’|T | В· u(T ), interaction I(S) is computed by
adding and subtracting an exponential number of non-zero terms. In this case, we usually obtain
two types of interaction effects. First, we may obtain I(S) = 0, if the DNN does not encode an
AND relationship between an exact set of variables in S. Then, different u(T ) values for T вҠҶ S
will eliminate each other, as long as the DNN does not bring random noises to the output u(T ).
Alternatively, we may obtain I(S) with considerable value |I(S)| вүҘ П„ . In real applications, it is
unrealistic for a DNN to be so elaborately trained that adding up 2|S| terms results in an extremely
small yet non-zero interaction I(S), although we do not fully deny the negligible possibility that we
may have a few interactions with extremely small interaction effects.


                                                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    B ROADER IMPACT OF PROVING THE EMERGENCE OF SYMBOLIC ( SPARSE )
     INTERACTIONS
Proving the emergence of symbolic (sparse) interactions provides an alternative methodology for
deep learning, i.e., communicative learning. In contrast to end-to-end learning from the data, in
communicative learning, people may directly communicate with the middle-level concepts encoded
by the DNN to examine and fix the representation flaws of the DNN. Communicative learning may
include, but is not limited to, (i) the extraction and visualization of symbolic concepts, (ii) the
alignment of such implicitly encoded concepts and explicitly annotated human knowledge, (iii) the
diagnosis of representation flaws of a DNN, (iv) the discovery of new concepts from DNNs to enrich
human knowledge, and (v) interactively fixing/debugging incorrect concepts in a DNN.

H    A N EXAMPLE TO ILLUSTRATE THE VALIDITY OF A SSUMPTION 2
Assumption 2 assumes that the average network  output uМ„(m) = E|S|=m [u(S)] monotonically in-
                                                    n
crease with the order m, which considers all m          possible subsets S with size m, and the average
network output is much stabler and more robust than the output on a specific masked state u(S).
This assumption is common for most models, without requiring all input variables to carry useful
information. For example, let us explain the target model v(x) = x1 x2 x3 + x1 x2 + x2 x3 + x2 + x3 ,
where the input x = [x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ] contains 5 input variables indexed by N = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5},
and each input variable xi вҲҲ {0, 1} is binary. Here, x1 , x2 , and x3 are related to the classifi-
cation, while x4 and x5 are unrelated to the classification. Then, for |S| = 2, the value of all
possible u(S) are listed as follows: u({1, 2}) = 2, u({1, 3}) = 1, u({1, 4}) = 0, u({1, 5}) = 0,
u({2, 3}) = 3, u({2, 4}) = 1, u({2, 5}) = 1, u({3, 4}) = 1, u({3, 5}) = 1, u({4, 5}) = 0.
Similarly, for |S| = 3, the value of all possible u(S) are listed as follows: u({1, 2, 3}) = 5,
u({1, 2, 4}) = 2, u({1, 2, 5}) = 2, u({1, 3, 4}) = 1, u({1, 3, 5}) = 1, u({1, 4, 5}) = 0,
u({2, 3, 4}) = 3, u({2, 3, 5}) = 3, u({2, 4, 5}) = 1, u({3, 4, 5}) = 0. We can see that
E|S|=2 [u(S)] = 1 вүӨ 1.8 = E|S|=3 [u(S)], which satisfies the monotonicity assumption.

I   C AN WE HAVE AN EFFICIENT WAY TO VERIFY A SSUMPTION 2 AND
    A SSUMPTION 3 ( APPROXIMATING p VALUE ) ON A SPECIFIC SAMPLE
In order to efficiently test whether Assumption 2 and Assumption 3 are satisfied, given an input
sample x, we can simply sample a set of subsets (not all subsets) {S1 , S2 , В· В· В· , St } for each order m
s.t. |Si | = m, to approximate uМ„(m) and the value of p, which significantly reduces the computational
                                             Pt
cost. Mathematically, we have uМ„(m) вүҲ 1t i=1 u(Si ), where |Si | = m for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ t. Then, we
can simply use the above approximated uМ„(m) to compute the value p. In this way, the computational
cost of empirically testing the monotonic increase of uМ„(m) and a rough estimation of the value of p
is O(nt), which is much less than O(2n ).


                                                   34
