Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ROKKING AS A F IRST O RDER P HASE T RANSITION IN
T WO L AYER N ETWORKS
 Noa Rubin∗              Inbar Seroussi†            Zohar Ringel ‡



                                             A BSTRACT

          A key property of deep neural networks (DNNs) is their ability to learn new fea-
          tures during training. This intriguing aspect of deep learning stands out most
          clearly in recently reported Grokking phenomena. While mainly reflected as a
          sudden increase in test accuracy, Grokking is also believed to be a beyond lazy-
          learning/Gaussian Process (GP) phenomenon involving feature learning. Here we
          apply a recent development in the theory of feature learning, the adaptive kernel
          approach, to two teacher-student models with cubic-polynomial and modular addi-
          tion teachers. We provide analytical predictions on feature learning and Grokking
          properties of these models and demonstrate a mapping between Grokking and the
          theory of phase transitions. We show that after Grokking, the state of the DNN
          is analogous to the mixed phase following a first-order phase transition. In this
          mixed phase, the DNN generates useful internal representations of the teacher
          that are sharply distinct from those before the transition.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Feature learning is a process wherein useful representations are inferred from the data rather than
being engineered. The success of deep learning is often attributed to this process. This is reflected, in
part, by the performance gap between actual deep neural networks and their infinite-width Gaussian
Process (GP) counterparts (Williams, 1996; Novak et al., 2018; Neal, 1996). It is also key to transfer
learning applications (Weiss et al., 2016) and interpretability (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Chakraborty
et al., 2017). Yet despite its importance, there is no consensus on how to measure or let alone classify
feature learning effects.
Several recent results Li & Sompolinsky (2021); Ariosto et al. (2022) began shedding light on this
matter. One line of work (adaptive kernel approaches) treats the covariance matrices of activation
within each layer (kernels) as the key quantities undergoing feature learning. Feature learning would
manifest as a deviation of these kernels from those of a random network and their adaptation to the
task at hand. While providing a quantification of feature learning in quite generic settings, the equa-
tions governing these latent kernels are quite involved and may host a variety of learning phenomena.
One such phenomenon (Seroussi et al., 2023), capable of providing a strong performance boost, is
that of Gaussian Feature Learning (GFL) : A gradual process in which the covariance matrices of
neuron pre-activations change during training so as to increase their fluctuations along label/target
relevant directions. Remarkably, despite this smooth adaptation, the pre-activations’ fluctuations,
across width and training seeds, remain Gaussian. At the same time, the latent kernel itself develops
notable spikes in the target direction, indicating feature learning.
Another phenomenon often associated with feature learning is Grokking. This abrupt phenomenon,
first observed in large language models running on simple mathematical tasks, involves fast changes
to the test accuracy following a longer period of constant and poor performance (Power et al., 2022).
Though usually described as a time-dependent phenomenon, Grokking as a function of other param-
eters, it also occurs as a function of other parameters, such as sample size Power et al. (2022); Gro-
mov (2023); Liu et al. (2022a). More broadly, DNNs behaviour as a function of time and dataset size
    ∗
     Hebrew University, Racah Institute of Physics, Jerusalem, 9190401, Israel
    †
     Department of Applied Mathematics, School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
69978, Israel
   ‡
     Hebrew University, Racah Institute of Physics, Jerusalem, 9190401, Israel


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is often similar as reflected for instance the use of One Pass SGD You et al. (2014). Several authors
provided quantitative explanations in the context of specific toy models wherein one can handcraft
or reverse engineer the solution obtained by the network (Gromov, 2023; Nanda et al., 2023) or in
suitably tailored perceptron models (Liu et al., 2022a; Žunkovič & Ilievski, 2022) where, however,
representation learning is tricky to define. Given the aforementioned adaptive kernel approaches to
deep learning, as well as the universality of Grokking across different DNNs and hyperparameters,
it is natural to look for a more unifying picture of Grokking using a formalism that applies to generic
deep networks.
In this work, we study Grokking as an equilibrium (or Bayesian) phenomenon driven by sample
size, noise, or network width. Utilizing the aforementioned theoretical advancements, we show that
Grokking in large-scale models can be classified and predicted through the mean field theory of
phase transitions in physics (Landau & Lifshitz, 2013). Studying two different models, a teacher-
student with cubic teacher and modular algebra arithmetic, we show the internal state of the DNN
before Grokking is well described by GFL. In contrast, during Grokking, it is analogous to the
mixed phase in the theory of first-order phase transitions, and the statistics of pre-activations are
described by a mixture of Gaussian (GMFL). In this GMFL state, the latent kernels associated with
the DNNs develop entirely new features that alter their sample complexity compared to standard
infinite-width GP limits. After Grokking the weights are all specialized to the teacher. Besides pro-
viding a framework to classify feature learning effects, our approach provides analytically tractable
and quantitative accurate predictions for the above two models.
Our main results are as follows:

• We establish a concrete mapping between the theory of first-order phase transitions, internal
  representations of DNNs, and Grokking for two non-linear DNN models each having two tunable
  layers.
• We identify three phases related to Grokking, one which is smoothly connected to the GP limit
  and two distinct phases involving different GP mixtures.
• For both our models, we simplify the task of learning high-dimensional representations to solv-
  ing a non-linear equation involving either two (cubic teacher) or one (modular addition teacher)
  variables. Moreover, for the latter, we determine the location of the phase transition analytically.
• We flesh out a Grokking-based mechanism that can reduce the sample complexity compared to
  the GP limit.

Prior works. Phase transitions are ubiquitous in learning theory (e.g. Refs. Gardner & Derrida
(1988); Seung et al. (1992); Györgyi (1990)), often in the context of replica-symmetry breaking.
Connections between Grokking and phase transition were suggested by Nanda et al. (2023) but as
far as analytic predictions go, prior work mainly focused on one trainable layer Žunkovič & Ilievski
(2022); Arnaboldi et al. (2023) some suggesting those as an effective theory of representation learn-
ing Liu et al. (2022a). This can be further investigated by analyzing the loss landscape Liu et al.
(2022b). Varma et al. (2023) suggest that the generalizing solution learned by the algorithm is more
efficient but slower to learn than the memorizing one, using this interpretation they define regimes
of semi-grokking, and ungrokking. The formalism of Refs. Arnaboldi et al. (2023); Saad & Solla
(1995) can potentially be extended to online Grokking with two trainable layers, but would require
reducing the large matrices involved. Phase transitions in representation learning have been studied
in the context of bifurcation points in the information bottleneck approach (e.g. Tishby & Za-
slavsky (2015)), nonetheless, the connection to deep learning remains qualitative. To the best of our
knowledge, we provide a novel first-principals connection between grokking and phase transition in
representation learning.

2     M ODELS
2.1   N ON - LINEAR T EACHER M ODEL

Our first setting consists of a student Erf-network learning a single index non-linear teacher. The
                                                                  n
student is trained on a training set of size n, D = {xµ , y (xµ )}µ=1 with MSE loss. In the following,
bold symbol represents a vector. The input vector is xµ ∈ Rd with iid Gaussian entries of variance


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. The target function y, is a scalar linear function of x, with an orthogonal non-linear correction.
Specifically, y is given by-

                                     ∗             ∗     3       ∗ 2   ∗
                         y(x) = w | {z· x} +  (w · x) − 3 |w | w · x .                            (1)
                                       ∗
                                 H1 (w ·x)    |             {z             }
                                                             H3 (w∗ ·x)


where H1 , H3 are the first two odd Hermite polynomials, and w∗ ∈ Rd are the teacher weights. For
simplicity we take here the norm of the teacher weights to be 1, but this has no qualitative effect on
the theory as long as we require |w∗ | ∼ O(1). We consider a fully connected non-linear student
network with one hidden layer of width N given by
                                                N
                                                X
                                      f (x) =         ai erf (wi · x) .                                (2)
                                                i=1

where wi ∈ Rd for i ∈ [1, N ] are the students weights. Evidence that this model Groks can be
found in App. (D).

2.2   G ROKKING MODULAR ALGEBRA

Here we consider the setting of Ref. Gromov (2023), where the learning task is addition modulo P
where P is prime. The network is trained on the following data set

                                  D = {xnm , y (xnm ) |m, n ∈ ZP }                                     (3)

where xnm ∈ R2P , is a vector such that it is zero in all its coordinates except in the coordinates n
and P + m where it is 1 (a “two-hot vector”). The target function y ∈ RP is given by

                                  yp (xnm ) = δp,(n+m) mod P − 1/P,                                    (4)

where δ is the Kronecker delta and mod P denotes the modulo operation which returns the remainder
from the division by P . For the student model, we consider a two-layer deep neural network with a
square activation function, given by
                                              XN
                                  fp (xnm ) =     api (wi · xmn )2                             (5)
                                                 i=1

where wc ∈ R2P for c ∈ [1, N ] are the students weights. For brevity, we denote yp (xmn ) = ynm
                                                                                             p
                                                                                                ,
                 p
and fp (xnm ) = fmn .

2.3   T RAINING THE MODELS

In both cases, we consider networks that are trained with MSE loss to equilibrium using Langevin
dynamics via algorithms such as Durmus & Moulines (2017); Neal et al. (2011). The continuum-
time dynamics of the parameters are thus
                                    γ
                      θ̇(t) = −∇θ      kθ(t)k2 + L (θ(t), D) + 2σξ(t)                        (6)
                                     2
 where θ(t) is the vector of all network parameters in time t, γ is the strength of the weight decay, L is
the loss function, the noise ξ is given by hξi (t)ξj (t0 )i = δij δ (t − t0 ) and σ is the magnitude of the
noise. We set the weight decay of the output layer so that with no data a2i , a2pc both average to σa2 /N
under the equilibrium ensemble of fully trained networks. The input layer weights are required to
                         2                                           2
have a covariance of σw    /d in the teacher-student model with σw      = O(1) and a covariance of 1 in
the modular algebra model. Note that the covariance of the hidden layer is given by σ 2 /γ. The
posterior induced by the above training protocol coincides with that of Bayesian inference with a
Gaussian prior on the weights defined by the above covariance and measurement noise σ 2 Naveh
et al. (2021).


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.4     D ERIVATION OVERVIEW

2.4.1    B RIEF I NTRODUCTION TO M EAN F IELD T HEORY P HASE T RANSITIONS

Phase transitions Landau & Lifshitz (2013); Tong (2011), such as the water-vapour transition, are
ubiquitous in physics. They are marked by a singular behavior of some average observables as a
function of a control parameter (say average density as a function of volume). As the laws of physics
are typically smooth, phase transitions are inherently large-scale, or thermodynamic, phenomena
loosely analogous to how the sum of many continuous functions may lead to a non-continuous one.
In a typical setting, the probability p(x), of finding the system at a state x can be approximately
marginalized to track a single random variable called an order parameter (Φ). As the latter is typ-
ically a sum of many variables (i.e. macroscopic), it tends to concentrate yielding a probability of
the type log(p(Φ)) ∝ −dS̃(Φ) where d is a macroscopic scale (e.g. number of particles) and S̃(Φ)
is some well behaved function that does not scale with d. Given this structure, the statistics of Φ can
be analyzed using saddle point methods, specifically by Taylor expanding to second order around
minima of S̃.
Phase transitions occur when two or more global minima of S̃(Φ) appear. First-order phase transi-
tions occur when these minima are distinct before the phase transition and only cross in S̃ value at
the transition. Notably, the effect of such crossing is drastic since, at large d, the observed behaviour
(e.g. the average Φ) would undergo a discontinuous change. Depending on the setup, such sharp
change may be inconsistent as it would immediately change the constraints felt by the system. For
instance, in the water-vapour transition, as one lowers volume the pressure on the vapour mounts.
At some point, this makes a high-density minima of Φ as favourable as the low-density minima,
signifying the appearance of water droplets. However, turning all vapor to droplets would create a
drop in pressure making it unfavourable to form droplets. Instead, what is then observed is a mixture
phase where as a function of the control parameter, a fraction of droplets forms so as to maintain
two exactly degenerate minima of S̃. Lowering the volume further, a point is reached where all the
vapour has turned into droplets and one is in the liquid phase.
In our analysis below, Φ will be a property of the weights in each neuron of the input layer, say
their overlap with some given teacher weights. A high input dimension will be analogous to the
large-scale limit, and the density loosely corresponds to the discrepancy in predictions. The phase
transitions are marked by a new minima of S̃(Φ) which captures some feature of the teacher network
useful in reducing the discrepancy. What we refer to as droplets corresponds to some input neurons
attaining Φ values corresponding to the teacher feature while others fluctuate around the teacher
agnostic minima. However the spatial notion associated with droplets is not relevant in this case as
in the mean field theory of phase transitions.

2.4.2    A DAPTIVE K ERNEL A PPROACH AND ITS E XTENSION TO G AUSSIAN M IXTURES

Our main focus here is the posterior distribution of weights in the input layer (p(wi )) and posterior
averaged predictions of the network (f (x)). Such posteriors are generally intractable for deep and/or
non-linear networks. Hence, we turn to the approximation of Ref. Seroussi et al. (2023) where a
mean-field decoupling between the read-out layer and the input layer is performed. This is exact
in the limit of N → ∞ and vanishing σa2 (i.e. mean-field scaling). Following this, the posterior
decouples to a product of two probabilities, a Gaussian probability for the read-out layer outputs
and a generally non-Gaussian probability for the input layer weights. These two probabilities are
coupled via two non-fluctuating quantities. The average kernel induced by the input layer and the
discrepancy in predictions. As shown in Seroussi et al. (2023), specifically for a two-layer FCN,
the resulting probability further decouples into iid probabilities over each neuron p(wi ). Below, we
thus omit the neuron index i. The action (− log(p(wi )) up to constant normalization factors) for
each neuron’s weights is then given by the following form
                             |w|2   σa2 X
                    S[w] =     2
                                  −        t(xµ )T t(xν ) φ(w · xµ )φ(w · xν ),                      (7)
                             2σw    2N µ,ν                |       {z        }
                                                                      −2
                                                                   :=σa  Q̃µν


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where φ is the activation function and t̄ is the discrepancy between the averaged network output and
the target given by
                                   t (xµ ) = (y (xµ ) − f (xµ ))/σ 2 .                                (8)

Notably t̄ is not given but determined by solving the following two mean-field self-consistency
equations                                              −1
                                    f = Q Q + σ 2 In

                                                          y                                  (9)

where the kernel Q is defined via
                              Qµν = σa2 hφ (w · xµ ) φ (w · xν )iS[w]                                (10)
and h...iS[w] denotes averaging over w with the probability implied by S[w].In this work we use the
equivalent kernel (EK) approximation, allowing the sums appearing in eqs. 7,9 to be replaced by
integrals. This approximation washes out the generalization phenomena associated with Grokking,
while capturing underlying feature learning mechanisms. As demonstrated in App. D, the feature
learning effects hold also for finite datasets, in which a generalization gap can be observed. Theo-
retical corrections due to finite datasets can be made as shown in Cohen et al. (2021); Seroussi et al.
(2023); Naveh & Ringel (2021), here we focus on the EK limit for simplicity.
Even if t̄ is given, the remaining action is still non-linear. Ref. Seroussi et al. (2023) proceed by
performing a variational Gaussian approximation on that action. Here we extend this approximation
into a certain variational Gaussian mixture approximation. Specifically, we show that as one scales
up d, N, n in an appropriate manner, and following some decoupling arguments between, S[w] has
the form dŜ[Φ(w)] where d   1 and Ŝ[Φ(w)] has O(1) coefficients and Φ(w) is some linear
combination of the weights. This allows us to treat the integration underlying h...iS[w] within a
saddle-point approximation. Notably when more than one Global saddle appears the saddle-point
treatment corresponds to p(w) having a Gaussian mixture form.
    Width - 𝑁
                                              The three phases of learning described in the introduction
                                              correspond to the following behavior of the saddles (see
         GFL      GMFL-I     GMFL-II
                                              also illustration in Fig. 1). At first, a single saddle cen-
                                              tered around Φ(w) = 0 exists and weights fluctuate in a
                                              Gaussian manner around these minima, as in GFL. In the
                                              next phase, the distribution is comprised of a weighted
                                Data size - 𝑛
                                              average of this zero-saddle and other |Φ(w)| > 0 sad-
                                              dles. This marks a new learning ability of the network
Figure 1: Schematic phase diagram of and hence the beginning of Grokking. We name this mix-
learning phases. The inset plots in the ture phase the first Gaussian Mixture Feature Learning
different phases correspond to the nor- phase (GMFL-I). This phase corresponds to the mixed
malized negative log posterior (Ŝ). A (“droplets”) phase. In this phase, picking a random neu-
transition between the different phases ron, there is a finite chance it is in the GFL phase and
can be achieved by varying either n or hence fluctuates around the target agnostic minima at
N.                                            w = 0. Similarly, there is a finite chance it fluctuates
                                              around one of the non-trivial saddles. At some later point,
after more data has been presented, only the saddles with |w| > 0 dominate the average (GMFL-II).
The phase phenomenology is shared by both models, however, the details of the new saddles that
appear, as well as the decoupling scheme between the different components of w differ between
both models. We next turn our attention to these details.

3     R ESULTS
3.1     N ON - LINEAR T EACHER STUDENT MODEL

Scaling setup and effective interaction. Consider the following two scaling variables (α, β) which
we would soon take to infinity together and consider scaling up the microscopic parameters in the
following manner
                                  p                 p            α
                 N → βN d → βd σa2 → σa2 / β , σ 2 → σ 2 n → αn                               (11)
                                                                 β


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we comment that α can be seen as a continuum approximation allowing us to replace data
summation with integrals over the data measure and β is a combination of mean-field-type scaling
Mei et al. (2018) together with a thermodynamic/saddle-point limit. Notably the following combi-
                                     n2 σ 2
nation (u) of hyper-parameter u = σ4 dNa , which we refer to as the effective interaction, is invariant
under both α and β.
                                                                                         √
Claim I. Two relevant discrepancy modes before the transition. For β → ∞ and β/α → 0,
and u ≤ uc ( ) (≈ 30.2 for   = −0.3) the discrepancy takes the following form
                                   σ 2 t (x) = bH1 (x) + cH3 (x)                                   (12)
where b, c ∈ R are some O(1) constant coefficients. We comment that ub2 is proportional to the
emergent scale of Ref. Seroussi et al. (2023). For further detail see App. A.2.
Claim II. One-dimensional posterior weight distribution. In the same scaling limit, u ≤ uc
the negative log probability (action in physics terminology) of weights along the teacher direction,
decouples from the rest of the w modes, and takes the following form
                                                                                                 2 
                         ∗ 2        2 2                ∗ 2                               ∗ 2
                 (w · w )       2n σa           (w · w )                      2c (w · w )
S[w · w∗ ] = d        2
                              −     4
                                                                   b −                             
                     2σw         πσ dN 1 + 2 σ 2 + (w · w∗ )   2                                2
                                                                                                      
                                                                                  2
                                                                         1 + 2 σ + (w · w )   ∗
                                                   w                                  w

                                                                                                  (13)
Notably, this expression reduces the high-dimensional network posterior into a scalar probability
involving only the relevant order parameter (Φ = w · w∗ ). We further note that all the expressions
in the brackets are invariant under α and β. Heuristically, this will also be the action for a small
∆u after the phase transition since the resulting corrections to the discrepancy have a parametrically
small effect. For further detail see App. A.2.
Claim III. Exactness of Gaussian Mixture Approximation. In the same scaling limit, the proba-
bility described by the above action is exactly a mixture of Gaussians each centred around a global
minimum of S.
Claim IV. First-order phase transition. For u < uc the only saddle is that at Φ = 0. Exactly
at u = uc three saddles appear two of which are roughly at Φ = ±|w∗ |2 = ±1. For some finite
interval u ∈ [uc , uc + ∆u], these saddles stay degenerate in Ŝ value.

3.1.1   T EACHER -S TUDENT E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
  (a)                             (b)                              (c)
                                                             (c)


Figure 2: GFL to GMFL-I Theory and Experiment in the teacher-student model. Panel (a)
and (b) show the negative log posterior before and after the phase transition induced by varying
the noise σ 2 . A good match with the experimental values (crosses) and theory (solid lines) for
rarer and rarer events is obtained as we scale up the model according to Table 1. (colour coding).
Turning to network outputs, panel (c) shows the expected phase transition in learning the cubic
teacher component and the inset shows the discrepancy in the linear teacher component. As our
analytics holds before and at the phase transitions, discrepancies in f¯ · H3 close to the transition are
an expected finite-size effect made pronounced by its low absolute value.
To validate our theoretical approach, we trained an ensemble of 200 DNNs for different α = β
values using our Langevin dynamics at sufficiently low learning rates and for a sufficiently long


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


time to ensure equilibration. Our initial N, d, σ 2 , σa2 (i.e. at α = β = 1) were: N = 700, n =
                   2
3000, d = 150, σw     = 0.5, σa2 = 8/N and we took   = −0.3. Our training ensemble consisted
of both different initialization seeds and different data-draw seeds. These, together with the neuron
indices associated N , provided 200N draws from w∗ · w used for estimated p(w). The discrepancy
was estimated using a dot product of the outputs with H1/3 (x) sampled over 3000 test points and
then averaged over the 50 seeds.
Our experimental results are given in Fig. 2. Panel (c) shows how the linear (inset) and cubic
target components learned, as a function of σ 2 . Notably, reducing σ 2 is similar to increasing n,
hence one expects more feature learning at lower σ 2 . As we increase α = β (see color coding) a
sharp phase transition develops around σ 2 = 0.18 where the cubic component begins its approach
to the teacher’s value ( ). Panels (a) and (b) track − log(p(w · w∗ )) at two points before and after
the phase transition, respectively. As α = β increases, the theory predicts a finite probability for
Φ(w) = w · w∗ ≈ 1. This means that picking a random neuron has a finite chance of fluctuating
around the teacher-aware minima. Such neurons are what we refer to as our droplets. All graphs
show a good agreement with theory as one scales up α = β before the transition. The remaining
discrepancies are attributed to finite size (i.e. finite α, β) effects which, as expected, become more
noticeable near the transition.
The above experiment also points to some potentially powerful complexity aspects of feature learn-
ing. Notably, an FCN NNGP kernel induces a uniform prior over cubic polynomials (i.e. all l = 3
hyper-spherical harmonics). As there are n = O(d3 ) of those, it requires n = 0.5e + 6 datapoints
to learn such target components in our setting (see also Ref. Cohen et al. (2021)). Here this occurs
two orders of magnitudes earlier (n = 3000). This occurs because the complex prior induced by a
finite DNN learns the features from the readily accessible linear components of the target and applies
them to the non-linear ones. Proving that such “assisted learning” of complex features changes the
sample complexity compared to NNGPs requires further work. In App. A.1 we provide an analytical
argument in support of this.

                                       Table 1: Scaling laws

       Model                Width         Input-dimension
                                                  √             Data size    Noise strength    Weight decay
                                                                                                          √
 Polynomial regression     N → βN            d → βd             n → αn        σ2 → α  βσ
                                                                                         2
                                                                                               σa2 → σa2 / β
                                                  √
   Modular Theory          N → β2N          P → βP             P 2 → βP 2      2
                                                                              σ → σ /β2
                                                                                                σa2 → σa2 /β


3.2   M ODULAR A LGEBRA T HEORY

Scaling setup and effective interaction.
Similar to the polynomial regression problem, we consider a scaling variable (β) which we later
take to infinity together, and consider scaling up the microscopic parameters. The precise scaling is
given in Table 1.
                                             p
                         N → β 2 N P → βP σa2 → σa2 /β σ 2 → σ 2 /β                              (14)
Note that, here, we do not need additional scale for the continuum limit of the dataset, since the
continuum limit is taken by considering all combinations of data points. As before, β is a combina-
tion of mean-field scaling together with a thermodynamic/saddle-point limit. Notably, the following
                                            2σ 2 P 2
combination (u) of hyperparameter u = Naσ4 , which we refer to as the effective interaction, is
invariant under β.
Problem Symmetries
The following symmetries of S[w] (which is also a function of t̄) help us decouple the posterior
probability distribution into its Fourier modes and simplify the problem considerably:

 I. Taking [n, m] → [(n + q) mod P, (m + q 0 ) mod P ], and fp → f(p+q+q0 ) mod P with q, q 0 ∈ ZP
II. Taking [n, m] → [qn mod P, qm mod P ] and fp → fqp mod P for q ∈ ZP but different than zero.

Claim I. Single discrepancy mode. Several outcomes of these symmetries are shown in App.
(B.1). First, we find that the adaptive GP kernel Q (given explicitly in Eq. 21) is diagonal in the


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     0
basis φk,k0 (xn,m ) = P −1 e2πi(kn+k m)/P , where k, k 0 ∈ {0, 1, ..., P −1}. Considering eigenvalues,
the second symmetry implies that φk,k0 would be degenerate with φck,ck0 . For prime, P this implies,
in particular, that all φk,k eigenvectors with k > 0 have the same eigenvalue (λ). Notably, the target
itself is spanned by this degenerate subspace specifically
                              −1
                            P
                                                            "P −1                        #
                             X                                X
                p        −1        −i2πkp/P i2πk(n+m)/P             −i2πkp/P
              ynm = P            e         e             =        e          φk,k (xn,m )         (15)
                           k=1                               k=1


As a result, one finds that the target is always an eigenvector of the kernel and σ 2 t̄pmn = aynm
                                                                                                p
                                                                                                   where
a ∈ R. Thus there is only one mode of the discrepancy which is aligned with the target.
Claim II. Decoupled two-dimensional posterior weight distribution for each Fourier mode.
We decouple all the different fluctuating modes by utilizing again the symmetries of the problem
and making a judicial choice of the non-linear weight decay term (Γ). To this end, we define
                                                                            PP −1       − 2πikn
the following Fourier transformed weight variables (wk , vk ): wn =            k=0 wk e
                                                                                            P   , wm =
PP −1          2πikm
              − P
   k=0  v k e         which  when placed  into action yields
                       P −1             P −1                          P −1
                 "                                  !                                   #
                     1X               1X                  2σa2 a2 P 2 X
    S[ŵ] = P               wk w−k +         vk v−k −                      wk w−k vk v−k + Γ[w] (16)
                     2                2                     N σ4
                     k=0                 k=0                       k=1

 (see App. B.2) where apart from the non-linear weight-decay term, all different k modes
                                                                                         have been
                                                                          3          3
decoupled. For simplicity, we next choose, Γ[w] = k P γ6 (wk w−k ) + (vk v−k ) . Here there
                                                     P

are technically two order parameters- Φ = wk w−k , Ψ = vk v−k , but from the symmetry of the
                                                points where Φ = Ψ . We comment that the analysis
action, we obtain that the saddles occur only atP
of a more natural weight decay terms such as n wn6 + wm     6
                                                              , using a certain GP mixture ansatz of
p(wi ) as an approximation, we obtained similar qualitative results.
Claim III. Exactness of Gaussian Mixture Approximation. Following the presence of a large
factor of P in front of the action, the above non-linear action, per k−mode, can be analyzed using
standard saddle point treatment. Namely, treating Q as a function of a, and with it λ, can be evaluated
through a saddle-point approximate on the probability associated with this action. In the limit of
β → ∞, we obtain that this approximation is exact. Following, this a can be calculated using the
                     σ2
GPR expression − λ+σ    2 , and in this limit the value of λ can be computed exactly. Demanding this

latter value of a matches the one in the action results in an equation for a.
Claim IV. First-order phase transition. Since the quadratic term is constant in the scaled action, as
long as no other saddles become degenerate (in action value) with the Φ = Ψ = 0 saddle, the saddle-
point treatment truncates the action at this first term. By increasing u the quartic term becomes more
negative, and hence a first-order symmetry-breaking transition must occur at some critical value of
u. Past this point, a begins to diminish. If it will diminish too rapidly, the feedback on the action
will be such that it is no longer preferential for a to diminish, and thus a probability distribution
will have two degenerate minima at a zero and non zero value of Φ representing the GFML-I phase.
Further increasing u will break the degeneracy resulting in the global minimum of the log posterior
distribution being non trivial. Notably a measures the test-RMSE here, thus the fact that it remains
constant and suddenly begins to diminish can also be understood as Grokking.

3.2.1   M ODULAR A LGEBRA N UMERICAL S IMULATIONS
Solving the implied equation for a numerically yields the full phase diagram here (see App. B.3 for
technical details of solution) supporting the assumptions in Claim IV. Fig. (3) plots the negative-
log-probability of weights for an arbitrary k taking Φ = Ψ for simplicity, since at the global minima
this is anyways true. Here we increase u by decreasing σ 2 and find the action by solving the equation
for a(σ 2 ) numerically. The Φ 6= 0 saddles are exponentially suppressed in P , yet nonetheless
become more probable as σ 2 decreases. At around, σ 2 ≈ 0.227 they come within O(1) of the saddle
at Sk (Φ = 0, Ψ = 0) (O(1/P ) in the plot, given the scaled y-axis). This marks the beginning of the
mixed phase (GMFL-I), wherein all action minima contribute in a non-negligible manner. Further,
in this phase, decreasing σ 2 does not change the height of the Φ 6= 0 minima (see inset) in any
appreciable manner. Had we zoomed in further, we would see a very minor change to these saddle’s


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


height throughout the mixed phase, as they go from being O(1) above the Φ = 0 saddle to O(1)
below that saddle at σ 2 ≈ 0.175, this is shown in the inset graph in Fig. (3). This latter point marks
the beginning of the GMFL-II phase, where it is the contribution of the minimum at Φ = 0 which
becomes exponentially suppressed in P . Notably a, which measures here the test-RSME, goes from
−1 at the beginning of GMFL-I to −0.7 at its end. Over this small interval of σ 2 we observe a
30% reduction in the magnitude of the discrepancy which can be thought of as a manifestation of
Grokking.
Our analytical results are consistent with the experiments carried out in Ref. Gromov (2023). In-
deed, as we enter GMFL-I, weights sampled near the Φ, Ψ 6= 0 saddle, correspond to the cosine
                  (1)
expressions for Wk of that work. As our formalism marginalizes over readout layer weights, the
phase constraint suggested in their Eq. (12) becomes irrelevant, and both viewpoints retrieve the
freedom of choosing cosine phases. In our case, this stems from the U (1) × U (1) complex-phase
freedom in our choice of saddles at Φ, Ψ > 0.
          (a)                                  (b)


Figure 3: GFL to GMFL-I to GMFL-II (a) Probability distribution of weights as predicted by our
approach. The GFL phase is represented by the red graphs, where the minimum of the action at zero
(shared also by the GP limit) dominates the probability distribution. The GMFL-I phase can be seen
in the inset graph, and the final GMFL-II phase is shown in purple.(b) The target component of the
average network output. Here singularities can be observed at the σ 2 values where the phase transi-
tions occur. The Parameters taken in this calculation are: N = 1000, P = 401, σa2 = 0.002/N, γ =
0.0001

4   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we studied two different models exhibiting forms of Grokking and representa-
tion/feature learning. We argue that Grokking is a result of a first order phase transition. To analyze
this analytically, we extended the approach of Seroussi et al. (2023) to include mixtures of Gaussian.
The resulting framework led to concrete analytical predictions for rich feature learning effects expos-
ing, in particular, several phases of learning (GFL,GMFL-I,GMFL-II) in the thermodynamic/large-
scale limit. Our results also suggest that feature learning in finite FCNs with mean-field scaling can
change the sample complexity compared to the associated NNGP. Certainly, these describe very dif-
ferent behavior compared to the recently explored kernel-scaling Li & Sompolinsky (2021); Ariosto
et al. (2022) approach, wherein feature learning amounts to a multiplicative factor in front of the
output kernel. A potential source of difference here is their use of standard scaling, however, this
remains to be explored.
As our results utilize a rather general formalism Seroussi et al. (2023), we believe they generalize
to deep networks and varying architecture. As such, they invite further examination of feature
learning in the wild from the prism of the latent kernel adaptation . Such efforts may provide, for
instance, potential measures of when a model is close to Grokking by tracking outliers in the weight
or pre-activation distributions along dominant kernel eigenvectors. As latent kernels essentially
provide a spectral decomposition of neuron variance, they may help place empirical observations on
neuron sensitivity and interpretability Zeiler & Fergus (2014) on firmer analytical grounds. Finally,
they suggest novel ways of pruning and regulating networks by removing low-lying latent kernel
eigenvalues from internal representations.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
S Ariosto, R Pacelli, M Pastore, F Ginelli, M Gherardi, and P Rotondo. Statistical mechanics of
  deep learning beyond the infinite-width limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04882, 2022.
Luca Arnaboldi, Ludovic Stephan, Florent Krzakala, and Bruno Loureiro. From high-dimensional
  & mean-field dynamics to dimensionless ODEs: A unifying approach to SGD in two-layers net-
  works. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2302.05882, February 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.05882.
Gerard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Online stochastic gradient descent on
  non-convex losses from high-dimensional inference. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  22(1):4788–4838, 2021.
Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with
  shallow neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9768–9783,
  2022.
Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan. Self-consistent dynamical field theory of kernel evolution
  in wide neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:32240–32256,
  2022.
Supriyo Chakraborty, Richard Tomsett, Ramya Raghavendra, Daniel Harborne, Moustafa Alzan-
  tot, Federico Cerutti, Mani Srivastava, Alun Preece, Simon Julier, Raghuveer M. Rao, Troy D.
  Kelley, Dave Braines, Murat Sensoy, Christopher J. Willis, and Prudhvi Gurram. Interpretabil-
  ity of deep learning models: A survey of results. In 2017 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous In-
  telligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computed, Scalable Computing & Communica-
  tions, Cloud & Big Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation (Smart-
  World/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI), pp. 1–6, 2017. doi: 10.1109/UIC-ATC.2017.
  8397411.
Omry Cohen, Or Malka, and Zohar Ringel. Learning curves for overparametrized deep neural
 networks: A field theory perspective. Physical Review Research, 3(2):023034, 2021.
Alain Durmus and Eric Moulines. Nonasymptotic convergence analysis for the unadjusted langevin
  algorithm. The Annals of Applied Probability, 27(3):1551–1587, 2017.
David Gamarnik, Eren C Kızıldağ, and Ilias Zadik. Stationary points of shallow neural networks
  with quadratic activation function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01599, 2019.
E. Gardner and B. Derrida. Optimal storage properties of neural network models. Journal of Physics
   A Mathematical General, 21:271–284, January 1988. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/21/1/031.
Andrey Gromov. Grokking modular arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02679, 2023.
Géza Györgyi. First-order transition to perfect generalization in a neural network with binary
  synapses. Phys. Rev. A, 41:7097–7100, Jun 1990. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.41.7097. URL
  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.41.7097.
Lev Davidovich Landau and Evgenii Mikhailovich Lifshitz. Statistical Physics: Volume 5, volume 5.
  Elsevier, 2013.
Qianyi Li and Haim Sompolinsky. Statistical mechanics of deep linear neural networks: The back-
  propagating kernel renormalization. Phys. Rev. X, 11:031059, Sep 2021. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.
  11.031059. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.031059.
Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas Nolte, Eric J Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams.
  Towards understanding grokking: An effective theory of representation learning. In Alice H.
  Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  6at6rB3IZm.
Ziming Liu, Eric J Michaud, and Max Tegmark. Omnigrok: Grokking beyond algorithmic data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01117, 2022b.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1806579115. URL https://www.pnas.org/
  content/115/33/E7665.
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Sejun Park, Manuela Girotti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Neural networks efficiently learn low-dimensional representations with sgd. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14863, 2022.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023.
Gadi Naveh and Zohar Ringel. A self consistent theory of gaussian processes captures feature
  learning effects in finite cnns. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Gadi Naveh, Oded Ben David, Haim Sompolinsky, and Zohar Ringel. Predicting the outputs of finite
  deep neural networks trained with noisy gradients. Physical Review E, 104(6), Dec 2021. ISSN
  2470-0053. doi: 10.1103/physreve.104.064301. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
  PhysRevE.104.064301.
Radford M Neal. Priors for infinite networks. In Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, pp. 29–53.
  Springer, 1996.
Radford M Neal et al. MCMC using hamiltonian dynamics. Handbook of markov chain monte
  carlo, 2(11):2, 2011.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Greg Yang, Daniel A. Abolafia, Jef-
  frey Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Bayesian Deep Convolutional Networks with Many
  Channels are Gaussian Processes. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:1810.05148, October 2018.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning
  (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning). The MIT Press, 2005. ISBN 026218253X.
David Saad and Sara A. Solla. Exact solution for on-line learning in multilayer neural networks.
  Phys. Rev. Lett., 74:4337–4340, May 1995. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.4337. URL https:
  //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.4337.
Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and Lenka Zdeborová. Optimization and gener-
  alization of shallow neural networks with quadratic activation functions. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:13445–13455, 2020.
Inbar Seroussi, Gadi Naveh, and Zohar Ringel. Separation of scales and a thermodynamic descrip-
  tion of feature learning in some CNNs. Nature Communications, 14(1):908, 2023.
H. S. Seung, H. Sompolinsky, and N. Tishby. Statistical mechanics of learning from examples.
  Phys. Rev. A, 45:6056–6091, Apr 1992. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.6056. URL https://
  link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.45.6056.
Yan Shuo Tan and Roman Vershynin. Online stochastic gradient descent with arbitrary initialization
  solves non-smooth, non-convex phase retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12837, 2019.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle, 2015.
David Tong. Statistical physics. University of Cambridge, 2011.
Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
  grokking through circuit efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02390, 2023.

Bojan Žunkovič and Enej Ilievski. Grokking phase transitions in learning local rules with gradient
  descent. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2210.15435, October 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.15435.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Karl Weiss, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. A survey of transfer learning. Journal of
  Big data, 3(1):1–40, 2016.
Christopher Williams. Computing with infinite networks. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 9, 1996.
Zhao You, Xiaorui Wang, and Bo Xu. Exploring one pass learning for deep neural network training
  with averaged stochastic gradient descent. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6854–6858, 2014. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2014.
  6854928.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In David
 Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014,
 pp. 818–833, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-10590-1.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
A     T EACHER - STUDENT MODEL
A.1   S CALING LIMIT OF TEACHER - STUDENT MODEL AND SAMPLE COMPLEXITY ASPECTS

Here we detail the scaling limits in which we believe our results become exact. To this end, we first
point to the factors controlling the three approximations we employ and discuss scaling limits in
which these factors all vanish.
Our first approximation is the mean-field decoupling between the read-out layer and the input layer.
Specifically we follow Mei et al. (2018); Seroussi et al. (2023); Bordelon & Pehlevan (2022), and
introduce a mean-field scaling parameter χ define σa2 = σ̃a2 /χ (i.e. the microscopic variance of each
readout layer weight is σ̃a2 /(χN ) and σ 2 = σ̃ 2 /χ (i.e. the noise variance on the gradients is σ 2 ).
Notably, since b, c ∝ σ 2 /[σ 2 + K] and K ∝ σa2 , we finds that χ has no effect on b or c. Examining
the action, this yields an additional constant factor of χ in front of the non-linear term, as expected
since mean-field scaling increases feature learning. Taking χ   1 controls the accuracy of our
mean-field decoupling between the read-out and input layer.
Our second approximation is the continuum limit, where we trade summation over data-points with
integrals. This approximation is closely related to the EK approximation Rasmussen & Williams
(2005); Cohen et al. (2021). Taking n to be large while keeping n/(σ̃ 2 ) ≡ neff fixed, corrections to
this approximation scale as 1/σ̃ 2 . Notably taking large σ̃ 2 while keeping neff fix does not change
b, c or the action of the weights as the latter contains only the combination n/σ̃ 2 .
The third approximation we carry is the saddle-point approximation or Gaussian-mixture approxi-
mation for p(w). Examining our action
                                                                                   !2 
                          2        2 2          ∗ 2                             ∗ 2
                       |w|    2χn     σ̃
                                   eff a (w · w  )                 2c[ ] (w · w  )
           S [w] = d  2 −                            b[neff /d] −                         (1)
                       2σw      πdN 1 + 2 |w|2                       1 + 2 |w|
                                                                               2


where we further indicated the dependencies of b and c which arise through GPR, d comes out as
controlling the saddle point approximation, provided the other coefficients in the action do not scale
down with d.
We thus find that the following family of scaling limits controlled by two scaling parameters (α, β →
∞) ensures S[w] is exact and its saddle points dominate w
                                       N → βN                                                        (2)
                                             p
                                        d → βd
                                             p
                                        χ → βχ
                                              α          α
                                      σ̃ 2 → √ σ̃ 2 σ 2 → σ 2
                                               β         β
                                        n → nα
Notably increasing α makes the continuum approximation exact Cohen et al. (2021) whereas in-
creasing β makes both the saddle point and the mean-field decoupling exact. Furthermore, it can
be verified that both α and β have no effect on S̃ and in particular keep the coefficient in front of
the non-linear term invariant. The only conflict between these two limits is in σ̃ 2 hence we require
α2 > β, but otherwise one is free to scale these up differently.
We conjecture that the teacher-student model has a better sample complexity than the infinite-width
network described by the GP limit. Namely, the GP limit is able to learn the cubic target at, n ∝ d3
whereas the former can reach good accuracy at n ∝ d. Replacing n with the above, neff the latter is
implied by the linear scaling of and d, neff together with our analytical results, which show that the
cubic component is being learned. In general, reduction of complexity has been seen in the context
of Gradient descent in Bietti et al. (2022); Sarao Mannelli et al. (2020); Gamarnik et al. (2019) as
well as in online learning up to logarithmic factors Arous et al. (2021); Mousavi-Hosseini et al.
(2022); Tan & Vershynin (2019).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Establishing this more rigorously requires showing √   that n itself, and not n/σ̃ 2 can be kept propor-
tional to d. Alternatively
                 √         stated, that α can scale as   β while introducing corrections to the theory
proportional to β/α, which one can then take to be as small as desired. This scenario seems to be
consistent with the corrections to EK derived in Ref. Cohen et al. (2021), which when evaluated in
simple
√       settings (random data on a hypersphere and a rotationally invariant kernel) indeed show that
   β/α controls corrections to EK.

A.2    C ONTINUUM ACTION AND MODE DECOUPLING

Our first step here consists of removing the randomness induced by the specific choice of training
set. To this end, we consider taking a large n limit while keeping n/σ 2 fixed. This has several
merits. At large, n it is natural to replace summations in Eq. (7) by integrals, which can be eval-
uated directly. Furthermore, in this limit, one obtains an analytical handle on Gaussian processes
regression via the equivalence kernel (EK) approximation Rasmussen & Williams (2005); Cohen
et al. (2021). Notably, previous works have found reasonable convergence to this approximation, in
similar scenarios to ours, for values as low as n = 100 and σ 2 = 0.1 Cohen et al. (2021). A key
element in the EK approximation is the spectrum of the kernel defined by
                                   Z
                                      dµz Q(x, z)φλ (z) = λφλ (x)                               (3)

where µz is the dataset measure, which corresponds here to i.i.d. standard Gaussians. Denoting by
gλ the spectral decomposition of the target function on φλ (x), the GPR predictions (Eq. 9) are given
by
                                           X        λ
                                  f¯(x) =                  gλ φλ (x)                               (4)
                                                λ + σ 2 /n
                                              λ

where λ+σλ2 /n are the learnability factors. Notably, n only enters through the combination, n/σ 2
which we treat as the effective amount of data. Hence, we can control the amount of learning in two
equivalent ways, by either providing more data points or by reducing the noise.
The resulting limit also enables us to identify the two relevant directions in function space, being
H1 (x) and H3 (x). Specifically we argue that at large d the operator Q(x, y) is block-diagonal
within the space spanned by H1 (x) and H3 (x). Since it acts on a target having support only on
H1 (x), H3 (x), this limits f¯(x) to this space and hence also t̄(x) = [y(x) − f¯(x)]/σ 2 . Our claim is
shown to be self-consistent in App. A namely, that making this assumption results in Q and t̄ which
obey the same assumption. Operationally, we thus take the ansatz
                                    σ 2 t (x) = bH1 (x) + cH3 (x)                                   (5)
where b, c ∈ R are some unknown constant coefficients. Later, we derive self-consistent equations
determining these constants. Given
                               Pn the above
                                          R ansatz, we turn to the action in Eq. 7, take the
continuum approximation where µ=1 → n dµy and find that the integral appearing in the action
can be solved exactly- t (x) = bH1 (w∗ · x) + cH3 (w∗ · x), we can compute the action in the
continuum limit-
                                                                                              2
            2
      d |w|     n2 σa2                  Z
                                                                       Z                           
                                    ∗ 2            ∗                            ∗      3
S≡            −           b − 3c |w  |     dµ   (w   · x) φ (w · x) +c   dµ  (w   · x)   φ (w · x)
                                                                                                  
          2                                   x                            x
       2σw      2N σ 4 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                         |           {z           }    |          {z             }
                                                         I0                           I1
                                                                                                    (6)
                                                                     !2 
              2                     2                             2
           |w|   2n2 σa2 (w · w∗ )            2c (w · w∗ )
  = d         −                         b−                             
             2
           2σw   πdN σ 4 1 + 2 |w|2               1 + 2 |w|
                                                              2


we the integrals I0 , I1 are computed in App. A.4.
In principle, one could perform saddle point analysis in two variables. A simplification can be made
by noting that the dominant fluctuations are in the direction of w∗ . We are therefore projecting


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


w into the subspace of w∗ , such that, w = Pw? w + Pw  ⊥
                                                        ∗ w, with Pw ∗ =
                                                                            1     ∗   ∗ T
                                                                          |w∗ |2 w (w ) , and
              ⊥                 ∗                  ⊥
Pw∗ = Id − Pw∗ , Denote α = w · w and α⊥ = |Pw∗ w| the action is given by
                                                                                    !2
                                                     2                      2
                d 2        d 2       4n2 σa2   |w∗ | α2             2c |w∗ | α2
       S[w] =    2
                   α + 2 α⊥ −                            2)   b−                 2)    ,   (7)
               2σw      2σw         π2N σ 4 1 + 2 (α2 + α⊥        1 + 2 (α2 + α⊥
                                                            2
By concentration of the norm, we replace α⊥ by its average σw yields the following action-
                                                                                              2 
                         ∗ 2      2 2                ∗ 2                                ∗ 2
                 (w · w )     2n σa          (w · w )                        2c (w · w )
S̃[w · w∗ ] = d       2
                             −                                  b −                             
                     2σw       πσ 4 dN 1 + 2 σ 2 + (w · w∗ )2                                2
                                                                                                   
                                                  w                    1 + 2 σ 2 + (w · w∗ )
                                                                                   w

                                                                                                   (8)

A.3   S OLVING THE EQUATIONS FOR b, c

Since the kernel does not mix polynomials of higher order, we can write the GPR expression for
the mean network output in the function space spanned by the components of the target. Namely,
any function in this two-dimensional function space is given by a linear combination of Ĥ1 (x) =
H1 (x), Ĥ3 (x) = √16 H3 (x). The factor of √16 results from the requirement that the basis of this
space will be normal. In this basis, the discrepancy and the target is given by,

                                             √ b          √1
                                       t=          ,y =                                         (9)
                                               6c           6
In this basis, the two dimensional kernel Q̃ is given by
               R                                  R
                 dµ dµ Ĥ (x) Q (x, z) Ĥ1 (z) R dµx dµz Ĥ3 (x) Q (x, z) Ĥ1 (z)
          Q̃ = R x z 1                                                                           (10)
                 dµx dµz Ĥ1 (x) Q (x, z) Ĥ3 (z)   dµx dµz Ĥ3 (x) Q (x, z) Ĥ3 (z)
where µx is the standard Gaussian measure, Q is the mean continuum limit kernel defined as
                                     Z −S(w;b,c)
                                   2   e
                       Q (x, z) = σa               φ (x · w) φ (z · w) dw                  (11)
                                            Z

Next, we proceed by calculating the matrix element of Q̂. As shown in the integral appendix A.4,
we have
                                                      2 (w∗ · w)
                      Z
                         dµx Ĥ1 (x) φ (x · w) =     r
                                                 √                 2

                                                   π     1 + 2 |w|
                                                                        3
                                                             4 (w∗ · w)
                        Z
                            dµx Ĥ3 (x) φ (x · w) = −        r
                                                        √                  2
                                                                              3
                                                          6π     1 + 2 |w|
                                                                                    2
Since the fluctuations in the directions orthogonal to w∗ are small, the quantity |w| appearing in the
                                                      2            σ2
denominator can be approximated to (w · w∗ ) + (d − 1) dw as explained in the main text. Since
we are taking large values of d, then d−1     ∼                                               ∗
                                           d = 1. Additionally, we denote q = w · w , so that .
                             R                                                              
                                     2q 2 e−S(q;b,c)                  8q 4 e−S(q;b,c)
                                                                 R
                        σa2       π(1+2(q 2 +σw  2 )) dq      − √6π(1+2(q     2 +σ 2 ))2
                                                                                          dq
                  Q̃ =                    4 −S(q;b,c)           R 8q6 e−S(q;b,c) w           
                        Z − √         8q   e
                                R
                                     6π(1+2(q 2 +σw  2 ))2
                                                           dq      3π(1+2(q 2 +σw2 ))3 dq

Where Z = dqe−S(q;b,c) . These integrals are computed numerically, given, b, c to obtain self-
              R

consistent equations. Thus, Q̃ is a function of b, c, and on the other hand we can use Q̃ to obtain an
expression for b, c through the GPR formula in this two-dimensional subspace,
                                                2
                                                       −1                     −1
                                                                      σ2

                       √b = t = Q̃ + σ I2                   y = Q̃ +      I2        √ 1
                                                                                                  (12)
                         6c                    n                       n               6

                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using a saddle point approximation, the action can be expanded near it’s minima to a quadratic
polynomial, in order to solve the integrals appearing in the matrix elements of Q̃. This results in two
equations for b, c which can be solved numerically.

A.4   I NTEGRAL CALCULATIONS FOR THE TEACHER - STUDENT MODEL
                                                 2n+1
Here we compute the integral (w∗ · x)         φ (w · x) x where x ∼ N (0, Id ). This integral
appears both in the computation of the action and in the calculation of the matrix elements of Q̃.
Denote-                           Z
                                1          1 2                    2n+1
                         In ≡        dxe− 2 x φ (w · x) (w∗ · x)       .                     (13)
                               Z
Where Z = (2π)d/2 is a normalizing factor. This integral is given by

                 Z
              1         1 2                    2n+1
         In ≡      dxe− 2 x φ (w · x) (w∗ · x)                                                              (14)
              Z
               2       w · w∗         D
                                                 2n
                                                    E
                                                                                  2
             =√ p                       (w∗ · x)                        + 2n |w∗ | In−1
                π det (1 + 2wwT )                    N (0,(1+2wwT )−1 )

               2    w · w∗      D
                                         2n
                                            E
                                                                           2
             =√ q                (w∗ · x)                       + 2n |w∗ | In−1
                π             2              N (0,(1+2wwT )−1 )
                    1 + 2 |w|

By Sherman Morrison’s formula,
                                                      −1               2wwT
                                  1 + 2wwT                 =1−                       2.                     (15)
                                                                     1 + 2 |w|
Therefore, a recursive expression for In can be obtained in terms of w and In−1
                      Z
                   1          1 2                    2n+1
             In =       dxe− 2 x φ (w · x) (w∗ · x)                                                         (16)
                   Z
                    2     w · w∗     D
                                               2n
                                                  E
                                                                                2
                =√ q                   (w∗ · x)                       + 2n |w∗ | In−1 .
                     π             2               N (0,(1+2wwT )−1 )
                         1 + 2 |w|

The cases n = 0, 1 are the ones used in this work. For n = 0 the integral is simply-

                                              2  w · w∗
                                        I0 = √ q            .                                               (17)
                                               π          2
                                                 1 + 2 |w|

For n = 1 the calculation is slightly more complicated. We have
                D
                           2
                             E X                         X        h          −1 i
                  (w∗ · x) =          wi0 wj0 hxi xj i =   wi0 wj0 1 + 2wwT                                 (18)
                                                                                                       ij
                                  ij                            ij
                                                 "                             #
                                  X                            2wi wj
                              =        wi0 wj0       δij −                 2
                                  ij                         1 + 2 |w|
                                                               2
                                       2     2 (w · w∗ )
                              = |w∗ | −                        2 .
                                                 1 + 2 |w|
Which yield,
                                                                                                   !
                                                                                               2
                             2  (w · w∗ )                            ∗ 2       2 (w · w∗ )
                       I1 = √ r                                3 |w | −                    2                (19)
                              π            2

                                                                                   1 + 2 |w|
                                 1 + 2 |w|


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     M ODULAR ALGEBRA

B.1    M ODULAR ALGEBRA KERNEL AND S YMMETRIES

We are first concerned with the spectral properties of Qnm,n0 m0 , the latter being the average of
Q̃nm,n0 m0 with respect S[w]. To this end note some useful model symmetries that occur when
ntrain spans the entire training set. By symmetries here we mean that the training algorithm, neural
network, and the data-set are invariant remain invariant under the following transformations:

      I. Taking [n, m] → [(n + q) mod P, (m + q 0 ) mod P ], and fp → f(p+q+q0 ) mod P with q, q 0 ∈
         ZP
      II. Taking [n, m] → [qn mod P, qm mod P ] and fp → fqp mod P for q ∈ ZP but different than
          zero.

Notably, Q does not contain any reference to a specific label (p). Hence, both these symmetries are
symmetries of Q (both before and after any potential phase transition). Specifically, let us denote
by T1 (T2 ) the orthogonal transformation taking [n, m] → [n + 1, m] mod P ([n, m] → [n, m +
1] mod P ) and by Cq the transformation taking [n, m] → [qn, qm] mod P . Then the following
commutation relations holds,
                                  [Q, T1 ] = [Q, T2 ] = [Q, Cq ] = 0                              (20)
                                                        [T1 , T2 ] = 0
This implies that Q, T1 and T2 can be diagonalized on the same basis. The Fourier basis (φk,k0 ),
discussed in the main text, clearly diagonalizes T1 and T2 simultaneously. Furthermore, as no two
φk,k0 share the same eigenvalues of T1 and T2 , each φk,k0 must be an eigenfunction of Q.
Next, we notice that since [Q, Cq ] = 0, Cq φk,k0 must also be an eigenvector of Q with the same
eigenvalue. However, since [T1,2 , Cq ] 6= 0 Cq shifts us between, φk,k0 hence implying degenerates.
Based on the definition of the Fourier modes, we find Cq φk,k0 = φqk,qk0 hence all pairs of momen-
tum (k, k 0 ,g, g 0 ) such that k = qg, k 0 = qg 0 must have degenerate eigenvalues. Notably for prime
P for any k, g 6= 0 there exists a q such that qk = g. We furthermore note that an additional “flip”
symmetry exists, implying that k, k 0 are associated with the same eigenvalue as k 0 , k.
The above results for Q hold exactly regardless of network width, noise, or other hyperparameters.
Next, we focus on Q at the NNGP limit (N → ∞), which according to our saddle-point treatment,
is also the kernel at any point before the phase transition (at large P ). Here we find an enhanced
symmetry which explains its poor performance. Indeed, before the phase transition, The kernel Q is
given
                   Qnm,n0 m0 = σa2 Knm,nm Kn0 m0 ,n0 m0 + 2Knm,n2

                                                                     0 m0                      (21)
                  Knm,n0 m0 = h(Wn + Wm+P )(Wn0 + Wm0 +P )iw∼N [0,I2P ×2P ]
                             = δn,n0 + δm+P,m0 +P + δn,m0 +P + δm+P,n0
                             = δn,n0 + δm,m0
where we recall that n, m ∈ [0...P − 1]. Given that, one can act with symmetry II separately on
each index. This extra symmetry implies, via the above arguments, that all k, k 0 , and q, q 0 with
k = ck 0 and q = c0 q 0 are equivalent. For prime, P this results in only 3 distinct eigenvalues - the
one associated with k, k 0 = 0, 0, the one associated with all 0, k 6= 0 and k 6= 0, 0 modes and the
one (λ) associated with k 6= 0, k 0 6= 0. Notably, the target is supported only on this last (P − 1)2 -
dimensional degenerate subspace. The equal prior on (P − 1)2 eigenfunctions then implies O(P 2 )
examples are needed for the GP to perform well on the task here, namely the entire multiplication
table.

B.2    F OURIER TRANSFORM OF THE ACTION

Here we compute the action in Fourier space without the weight decay term which appears in the
main text. To construct the Fourier transformed action, we start from the fluctuating kernel term (Q̃)


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


given by
                                   P
                                   X           2P
                                                X −1
                                                                         2                   2
                      σa−2 Q̃ =                        (wm + wn ) (wm0 + wn0 ) |n, mi hn0 , m0 |                          (22)
                                  n,n0 =0 m,m0 =P

where we have used physics-style bra-ket notation to denote the basis on which the operator Q̃ is
presented. For instance, Q̃n0 m0 ,n00 m00 is given by acting with hn0 , m0 | from the left and |n00 , m00 i
from the right and using hn0 , m0 |n1 , m1 i = δn0 ,n1 δm0 ,m1 .
Based on the symmetries of the problem we consider the following coordinate transformation
                                             P −1                                  P −1
                                                           2πi                                   2πi
                                             X                                     X
                                  wm 7→             wk e− P kn , wn 7→                    vk e− P km                      (23)
                                             k=0                                   k=0


Substituting this in the equation for Q̃:
            X X               2πi          2πi
                                                       2πi 0          2πi 0

      Q̃ =               wk e− P kn + vk e− P km wk0 e− P k n + vk0 e− P k m |n, mi                                       (24)
            kk0 qq 0 m,n
                       |                                                {z                                            }
                                                                         J
                  X               2πi    0           2πi    0
                                                                       2πi 0 0       2πi 0 0

              ·            wq e P qn + vq e P qm                  wq0 e P q n + vq0 e P q m hn0 , m0 |
                  m0 ,n0
                  |                                                {z                                           }
                                                                   J0

Where we can simplify further
   X                      0                   0                   0                         0

        wk wk0 e− P (k+k )n + vk vk0 e− P (k+k )m + wk0 vk e− P (k n+km) + wk vk0 e− P (kn+k m) |n, mi
                  2πi                  2πi                   2πi                    2πi
J=
     mn
                                                                                                                          (25)
                            0                               0                       0                  0
  ≡ P (wk wk0 |k + k , 0i + vk vk0 |0, k + k i + wk vk0 |k, k i + wk0 vk |k , ki) ,
(which also serves as the definition of the Fourier transformed bra-ket notation) and similarly for the
conjugated term:
   J 0 = P (h−q, −q 0 | wq vq0 + h−q 0 , −q| wq0 vq + h− (q + q 0 ) , 0| wq wq0 + h0, −(q + q 0 )| vq vq0 )
                                                                                                          (26)
We next turn to the quadratic term
                                        P −1           P −1 P −1
                                                                                             0
                                                                        wk wk0 e P (k+k )n
                                        X              X    X                      2πi
                                               wn2 =                                                                      (27)
                                        n=0            n=0 k,k0 =0
                                                           P
                                                           X −1
                                                    =P            wk w−k ,
                                                           k=0

                     0
using n=0 e P (k+k )n = P δk,−k . The quadratic term in the action (main text equation 3.2) |w|
       PP −1 2πi                                                                                2

is given by
                         −1         −1              −1             −1
                       P         2P               P              P
                                                                             !
                    2
                       X          X               X               X
                             2          2
                 |w| =      wn +       wm = P          wk w−k +       vk v−k                 (28)
                                  n=0               m=P                      k=0                 k=0

The target can be also expressed in terms of the Fourier basis, noting that the mode zero is zero for
P prime

                                  P
                                  X −1                                                      P
                                                                                            X −1
               p
              ynm = P −1                 e−i2πkp/P ei2πk(n+m)/P = hn, m|                           e−2πiqp/P |q, qi       (29)
                                   k=1                                                      q=1


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The remaining term in the action (main text equation 23) following the anzats σ 2 t = ay, and
considering the whole dataset. the involves the kernel and is given by
             X
                    p
                   ynm  y pn0 m0 Q̃nmn0 m0                                               (30)
              p,mn,m0 n0
                                           P −1
                        X                  X                                        X            0
              =                   hn, m|          e−2πiqp/P |q, qi hn0 , m0 |            e2πiq p/P |q 0 , q 0 i Q̃nmn0 m0
                  p,mn,m0 n0                q=1                                     q0
                                 P −1
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                     e−2πi(q −q)p/P
                       X         X                                                          X
              =                          hn, m | q, qi hn0 , m0 | q 0 , q 0 i Q̃nn0 mm0
                  mn,m0 n0 q,q 0 =1                                                          p
                          X        X
                                                              0     0       0   0
              =P                         hn, m | q, qi hn , m | q , q i Q̃nn0 mm0 δq,q0
                        mn,m0 n0 q,q 0
                                                                                   
                        X                 X
              =P              hq, q|              Q̃nn0 mm0 |n, mi hn0 , m0 | |q, qi
                         q              mn,m0 n0
                        P
                        X −1
              =P               hq, q| Q̃ |q, qi
                        q=1


Note that the chosen basis is orthonormal, so that ht | ki = δk,t and thus all terms with |0i vanish
and, and we are left with-
     P
     X −1
 P          ht, t| Q̃ |t, ti                                                                                                (31)
     t=1
                −1
             X PX
  =P   3
                             ht, t| (wk vk0 |k, k 0 i + wk0 vk |k 0 , ki) (wq vq0 h−q, −q 0 | + wq0 vq h−q 0 , −q|) |t, ti
            kk0 qq 0   t=1
                −1
             X PX
  = P3                       (wk vk0 δk,t δk0 ,t + wk0 vk δk,t δk0 ,t ) (wq vq0 δ−q,t δ−q0 ,t + wq0 vq δ−q,t δ−q0 ,t )
            kk0 qq 0 t=1
             P
             X −1
  = 4P 3               wt vt w−t v−t .
              t=1

The action in Fourier space is then given by
                          P −1              P −1                      P −1
                    "                                  !                                #
                        1X                1X              2σa2 a2 P 2 X
         S[ŵ] = P             wk w−k +          vk v−k −                  wk w−k vk v−k .                                  (32)
                        2                 2                 N σ4
                                     k=0                      k=0                                    k=1

Note that since the weights are all real, the Fourier transforms obey wk = w−k , we can therefore
rewrite S in terms of the parameters |wk | , |vk |
                            " P −1                                  −1
                                                                                    #
                              1 X                      2σ 2 a2 P 2 PX
                                           2       2        a               2     2
                S [ŵ] = P            |wk | + |vk | −                  |wk | |vk | .         (33)
                              2                            N σ4
                                             k=0                                            k=1


So that the action can be separated into independent actions Sk that each depend on different values
of k
                  P −1                         2σ 2 a2 P 2
                  X       1       2        2                  2     2     1       2        2

         S[ŵ] =       P     |wk | + |vk | − a 4 |wk | |vk | +               |w0 | + |v0 |
                          2                       Nσ                      2
                         k6=0
                                                  P
                                                  X −1
                    ≡ S0 (|w0 | , |v0 |) +               Sk (|wk | , |vk |)                                                 (34)
                                                  k6=0


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3    S OLVING THE EQUATION FOR a

As done in the teacher-student model, obtaining a self-consistent equation for the discrepancy re-
quires averaging the kernel with respect to the weights. Here, Q̃ is given by-

               X
      Q̃ =                 (wk wk0 |k + k 0 , 0i + vk vk0 |0, k + k 0 i + wk vk0 |k, k 0 i + wk0 vk |k 0 , ki) ·           (35)
             k,k0 ,q,q 0

          · (h−q, −q 0 | wq vq0 + h−q 0 , −q| wq0 vq + h− (q + q 0 ) , 0| wq wq0 + h0, −(q + q 0 )| vq vq0 )

Since the action in Fourier space depends only on the magnitude of the weights and not on the
phase, we deduce that the phases are uniformly distributed on the unit circle and are independent of
the magnitudes. There are multiple types of terms that appear in Q̃, and we will calculate each part
individually:

       1. For         terms       Dtheof   form-     wkEvk0 wq vq0 ,    we     have-hwk vk0 wq vq0 i =
                                     i(φk +φq +θk0 +θq0 )
          h|wk | |v | |wq | |v |i e
                       k0              q0                 .    Since the phases of v, w are indepen-
                        D                        E                   D             E
                            i(φk +φq +θk0 +θq0 )
          dents, then e                            = e    i(φk +φq )
                                                                      ei(θk0 +θq0 ) . If q 6= ±k then
           ei(φk +φq ) = eiφk eiφq and since the phases are uniformly distributed over [0, 2π]
                                                            i(φk +φq )
          these averages vanish and if q = k then eD                   =E e2iφk which vanishes too,
          so that ei(φk +φq ) = δk,−q . Similarly, ei(θk0 +θq0 ) = δk0 ,−q0 .Thus, we have-
                                           D              E
                                                 2      2
          hwk vk0 wq vq0 i = δk0 ,−q0 δk,−q |wk | |vk0 |
       2. For terms such as- hwk wk0 wq vq0 i, by averaging over the phases of vq0 the term vanishes,
          and similarly terms like hwk vk0 vq vq0 i vanish.
       3. We are left with terms of the form- hwk wk0 wq wq0 i, for this not to vanish, we require φk +
          φq + φk0 + φq0 = 0 so that either k = −k 0 and q = −q 0 , k = −q and k 0 = −q 0 or
          k = −q 0 , k 0 = −q. The same is true for hvk vk0 vq vq0 i.

In conclusion, the average kernel is given by-
                                     P
                                     X −1     D              E
                                                    2      2
                    σa−2 Q =                   |wk | |vk0 | |k, k 0 i hk, k 0 |                                            (36)
                                    k,k0 =0
                                     P
                                     X −1     D              E
                                                    2      2
                                +              |wk | |wk0 | (2 |k + k 0 , 0i hk + k 0 , 0| + |0, 0i h0, 0|)
                                    k,k0 =0
                                     P
                                     X −1     D              E
                                                    2      2
                                +              |vk | |vk0 | (2 |0, k + k 0 i h0, k + k 0 | + |0, 0i h0, 0|)
                                    k,k0 =0


Since the target has no |0i component, it is orthogonal to the vectors hk + k 0 , 0| , h0, k + k 0 | and
h0, 0| so that these terms don’t contribute when Q acts on the target. We are left with-
                                P −1                        P −1             P −1     D              E
                                        2πi                         2πi
                                X                           X                X              2      2
             σa−2 Qy p =               e P pt Q |t, ti =           e P pt              |wk | |vk0 | |k, k 0 i δt,k δt,k0   (37)
                                t=1                         t=1             k,k0 =0
                                P −1         D             E
                                        2πi
                                X                  2     2
                            =          e P pk |wk | |vk | |k, ki = σa−2 λy P
                                k=1

Since for all k 6= 0 the actions are identical, the mean
                                                   R       2     2

                             D            E           |wk | |vk | e−Sk (|wk |,|vk |;a)
                                   2    2
                    λ = σa2 |wk | |vk | = σa2            R                             ,
                                                             e−Sk (|wk |,|vk |;a)

                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is a constant function of a for every k. Thus, it can be deduced that the target in an eigenvector of Q,
with an eigenvalue λ. A self-consistent equation for a is obtained using the GPR formula, where-
                                                          σ2
                                              a=−                                                       (38)
                                                      λ (a) + σ 2

B.4    C ALCULATING THE EIGENVALUE OF THE TARGET
                                   D             E
                                         2     2
In the limit of P   1, the quantity |wk | |vk | can be estimated using a saddle point approxima-
tion. The minimum of the action can be found by minimizing with respect to |wk | , |vk |-
                                             8σ 2 a2 P             2          5
                                 0 = |wk | − a 4 |wk | |vk | +   |wk |                                  (39)
                                               N  σ
                                                  8σa2 a2 P

                                                                 2          4
                                   = |wk | 1 −              |vk | +   |wk |
                                                    N σ4
                                             8σ 2 a2 P      2               5
                                 0 = |vk | − a 4 |wk | |vk | +   |vk |                                  (40)
                                              N   σ
                                                 8σ 2 a2 P

                                                                 2        4
                                   = |vk | 1 − a 4 |wk | +   |vk |
                                                   Nσ

                                                                                  2       2
If |wk | , |vk | are both nonzero, then from symmetry we assume that |wk | = |vk | , so that
                                                       s                     
                                                                        2
                          2       2   1  2σa2 a2 P 2      2σa2 a2 P 2              2
                     |vk | = |wk | =                  ±                   − γ  := w±
                                      γ      N σ4            N σ4

                                                −1
If |wk | = 0 then either |vk | = 0 or (−γ) 4 , but since we chose a positive γ this is not possible.
                                                                                                 2
Similarly choosing |vk | = 0 results in |wk | = 0 so that either both are zero, or we have- |vk | =
     2     2
|wk | = w±   . Using saddle point approximation, we have for k 6= 0

                                4e−Sk (w+ ,w+ ) δ (|wk | − w+ ) δ (|vk | − w+ ) + δ (|wk |) δ (|vk |)
          P (|wk | , |vk |) =                                                                           (41)
                                                         1 + 4e−Sk (w+ ,w+ )
In principle the leading order fluctuations near zero should appear in the probability distribution.
However, this term can be discarded since the fluctuations in wk , vk are of order P −1 and so this
contributes to λ terms of order P −2 so these are higher order corrections and can be ignored. With
this discrete probability distribution, the matrix elements of Q can be computed as follows
                                                       4 −Sk (w+ ,w+ )
                                    D
                                          2     2
                                                  E 4w+  e
                                     |wk | |vk | =                                                      (42)
                                                    1 + 4e−Sk (w+ ,w+ )

C     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Networks were trained for 360000 epochs, with lr 2 · 10−3 with varying noise and as detailed in
the graphs. The networks were trained on 50 different randomly generated datasets, with at least
4 different networks trained on each dataset. Parameters of the networks for the β = 1 case were
given by-
                                                   2
                    N = 700, n = 3000, d = 150, σw   = 0.5, σ̃a2 = 8,   = −0.3              (43)
with σ 2 ∈ {0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3}. This was repeated for β = 1/8, 1/2, 2 and in each case took
α = β. The error bars on the negative log posterior plots were calculated by dividing up the set of
200 trained networks into 5 subsets and computing the histogram of the weights in the w∗ direction
in each subset. The error was obtained by dividing the std of the different histograms by the square
root of the number of samples per ensemble. In the calculation for the average network output, the
value for b, c was computed as an average over the different datasets, and the error is given by the
std divided by the number of ensembles.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    T IME D EPENDENT G ROKKING
The equations appearing in section [3] rely on the equivalent kernel (EK) approximation, where the
number of data points is taken to infinity, allowing the substitution of summations with integrals.
This approximation captures the underlying feature learning aspect of Grokking, but phenomena
resulting from differences between the train and the test data such as delayed generalization remain
obscured. Here we provide numerical evidence that, away from the EK limit (i.e. for finite datasets
and finite GPR noise) the phase transition behavior we predicted using EK persists and becomes
accompanied by the expected generalization behavior of models which Grok.
To showcase this, we demonstrate experimentally in the teacher student setup, that for finite sized
datasets the qualitative phenomena described in the EK limit hold as well. Namely, a first order
phase transition into a GMFL phase is observed also for networks not in the EK limit. Moreover, in
this case delayed generalization between the train and test data is observed during training.
Here we study the teacher-student setup, we train an ensemble of 50 networks for 7 · 106 epochs,
each with:
                                      n = 600, d = 150   = −1.2                                   (44)
                                  2
                                σ = 0.05,     σa2 = 0.011,    2
                                                             σw = 0.5

We drive a phase transition by reducing the width of the network, N , from N = 2800 to N = 700
as done in Gromov (2023). As the width of the network approaches infinity the network would not
learn the cubic component as these require n ∝ d3 Cohen et al. (2021). Lowering the width of
the network allows the network to learn the cubic component. We comment that opposed to the
experiments shown in fig. (3), we do not use σ 2 to drive the phase transition, since taking vanishing
values of σ 2 puts us in the EK limit, and for large values of σ 2 the network would fail to learn both
train and test, artificially minimizing the difference between the two.


Figure 4: Phase transition to GMFL-I phase for networks trained on finite sized data sets. Here
we use N to drive the phase transition, and observe that for the smaller N s two new local minima
appear in the action, which become more significant by decreasing the width.

Our experimental results are given in Figs. 4,5 and 6. Fig. 4 tracks the action S, where S =
− log(p(w · w∗ )) for different values of N : before the phase transition (N = 2800) shortly after the
phase transition (N = 1400) and into the GMFL-I phase (N = 700). The error bars were computed
by calculating the action for five subsets of the ensemble separately. The phase transition appearing
here is also a first order phase transition, as demonstrated above for the EK limit.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     4000
                     3750
                     3500
             Loss    3250
                     3000
                     2750           Test
                                    Train
                                    N=700
                     2500           N=1400
                                    N=2800

                                    8          10          12          14          16
                                                ln(epoch)
Figure 5: Dynamic delayed generalization. Here the train and test loss of an ensemble of 50
networks was tracked over the course of 7 · 106 epochs, for networks of three different width. The
average loss is shown in color, and the individual networks in gray. At N = 700 a sharp drop in
the test can be observed, as is commonly associated with Grokking Nanda et al. (2023); Gromov
(2023).


Fig. 5 plots the train and test loss and Fig. 6 tracks the projection of the average network output
on different normalized components of the target, as a function of the number of training steps for
the different network widths and averaged over an ensemble of 50 networks. Where we define the
linear component of the network to be- H1 (w∗ · x), and the cubic component as-  H3 (w∗ · x), and
x is taken either from the test or the train dataset. Thus if the projection of the network on a certain
normalized component is near one, it has been learned entirely by the network.
Both figures represent different ways in which there is delayed generalization. In Fig. 5, we observe
the delayed generalization associated with Grokking in Nanda et al. (2023), where after an extended
period of no change to the test loss or even a slight increase, a sharp drop appears. Another mea-
sure of generalization is improving how well the test and train compare in terms of learning output
components. In Fig. 6, a delayed generalization is observed in the sense that the narrower networks
(ie after the phase transition), continue learning the cubic component of the target for the test data,
whereas the learning of the train data saturates and slows down.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that feature learning phase transitions discussed in the main
text are accompanied by delayed generalization associated with Grokking. The above result, to-
gether with the known Grokking behavior of the second model Gromov (2023), supports our con-
jecture that first-order phase transitions are a potential underlying mechanism of Grokking. We note
that our formalism naturally extends to the finite size dataset regime by applying Cohen et al. (2021)
to augment the EK results as also used in Refs. Naveh & Ringel (2021); Seroussi et al. (2023) in
the context of kernel adaptation. Our focus on the EK limit in the analytical analysis was mainly for
simplicity.


                                                  11
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        0.30
      1.0
                                                        0.25
                                                                                                      Test
      0.8                                               0.20                                          Train
                                                ²kH3 k 2

                                                                                                      N=700
kH1 k 2
f̄ · H1


                                                 f̄ · H3



                                                                                                      N=1400
                                                                                                      N=2800
                                                        0.15                                          GP test
      0.6                                                                                             GP train

                                                        0.10
      0.4                                               0.05
            7.5     10.0 12.5 15.0                             7.5     10.0 12.5 15.0
                    ln(epochs)                                        ln(epochs)
  Figure 6: Learnability of target components. Here we track the output projection of network onto
  linear (lhs) and cubic (rhs) components of the target, both for test and train data, as a function of
  the ln of the epochs. The linear component of the target is given by the vector in data-space, whose
  components are given by- H1 (w∗ ·xµ ), with xµ drawn either from the train or the test. Similarly, the
  cubic component is given by-  H3 (w∗ · xmu ), where the   factor is from the definition of the target.
  The average output as a function of either the train data or the test data can was be projected onto
  these normalized components. This computation was preformed on an ensemble of 50 networks,
  for networks of three different width. The average quantities are shown in color, and the individual
  networks in gray.


                                                   12
