Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G EOMETRICALLY A LIGNED T RANSFER E NCODER
FOR I NDUCTIVE T RANSFER IN R EGRESSION TASKS

 Sung Moon Ko∗ , Sumin Lee∗ , Dae-Woong Jeong∗ , Woohyung Lim, Sehui Han
 LG AI Research
 {sungmoon.ko, sumin.lee, dw.jeong, w.lim, hansse.han}@lgresearch.ai



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Transfer learning is a crucial technique for handling a small amount of data that is
             potentially related to other abundant data. However, most of the existing methods
             are focused on classification tasks using images and language datasets. Therefore,
             in order to expand the transfer learning scheme to regression tasks, we propose a
             novel transfer technique based on differential geometry, namely the Geometrically
             Aligned Transfer Encoder (GATE). In this method, we interpret the latent vectors
             from the model to exist on a Riemannian curved manifold. We find a proper dif-
             feomorphism between pairs of tasks to ensure that every arbitrary point maps to
             a locally flat coordinate in the overlapping region, allowing the transfer of knowl-
             edge from the source to the target data. This also serves as an effective regularizer
             for the model to behave in extrapolation regions. In this article, we demonstrate
             that GATE outperforms conventional methods and exhibits stable behavior in both
             the latent space and extrapolation regions for various molecular graph datasets.


1       I NTRODUCTION

A machine learning model requires abundant data to learn and perform effectively. However, col-
lecting sufficient amounts of data often consumes substantial amounts of energy and time. One of
the most practical approaches to addressing this issue is to make use of large datasets correlated with
the target data. Transfer learning stands out as one of the potential contenders. Transfer learning
focuses on transferring knowledge from source to target data. Recently, there has been immense
development in various domains such as languages (Zhuang et al., 2011; Long et al.; Zhuang et al.,
2013; 2014; Pan et al., 2020), computer vision (Quattoni et al., 2008; Kulis et al., 2011; Raghu et al.,
2019; Yu et al., 2022) and biomedical domain (Wang et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2021).
Despite these achievements, the primary area of concern is mostly limited to classification tasks in
the vision and language domains. Moreover, identifying an architecture that effectively addresses
regression problems has proven to be challenging. Hence, our primary objective is to develop an
algorithm that can be generally applied to regression problems. In this article, our main focus centers
on molecular property prediction tasks (Scarselli et al., 2009; Bruna et al., 2013; Duvenaud et al.,
2015; Defferrard et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2018; Coley et al., 2019; Ko et al., 2023). Molecular datasets
tend to be small in size, have a large number of task types, and are mainly regression. This makes
molecular property prediction a good application to test our novel algorithm.
The fundamental concept of our method rests on a geometric interpretation of the encoding space.
Given that the encoding process within a model involves intricate non-linear mappings, it is reason-
able to regard the encoding space as non-linear and curved. As it is illustrated in Figure 1, we assume
a data point in each task is on a manifold, and its collection formulates a coordinate patch that can be
interpreted as a task coordinate. Each task coordinate has a chart to map to another correlated task
to form a manifold. Additionally, machine learning models are obligated to exhibit continuity and
differentiability to facilitate training through backpropagation. This requirement extends to the en-
coding space, which should ideally possess smoothness properties. These observations collectively
suggest the possibility of interpreting the encoding space as a Riemannian manifold.

    *
        These authors contributed equally to this work


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑑 ℳ
                                                                                   𝑠

                                                      𝑠
                    𝜙1−1
                                                                                       𝜙2
                              𝜙1                                       𝜙2−1
               𝑧1                                                             𝑧2
                                                𝜙1 ∙ 𝜙2−1


            𝑪𝒐𝒐𝒓𝒅𝒊𝒏𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝒕𝒂𝒔𝒌𝟏                𝜙2 ∙ 𝜙1−1                𝑪𝒐𝒐𝒓𝒅𝒊𝒏𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝒕𝒂𝒔𝒌𝟐



Figure 1: Two different coordinate frames are demonstrated in the figure, with coordinate trans-
formation maps to each individual coordinate choice. One can interpret each coordinate frame as
task-specific coordinates and map them with transformation models. An arbitrary point in the over-
lapping region of the manifold can be transformed from one task coordinate to another by combining
mapping functions ϕ. Moreover, by introducing perturbation points, as demonstrated in the figure,
one can define the distance between points to match the geometrical shape in the overlapping region.


In general, a curved space is considerably more intricate than a flat space. For instance, when deal-
ing with a curved space, determining the distance between points requires the computation of entire
geodesic equations based on a specific metric. Consequently, the straightforward calculation of sim-
ilarities between data points using Euclidean distance no longer applies, making it challenging to
discern meaningful similarities between points. However, when the manifold is regarded as a Rie-
mannian manifold, there are strategies that can help navigate these challenges. One such strategy
involves finding diffeomorphisms that allow points to be situated in a locally flat frame (LF). As a
result, it becomes feasible to develop models specifically designed to identify appropriate diffeo-
morphisms. These models aim to confine individual data points to LF within overlapping regions
that align with other coordinate patches. This approach simplifies the process of establishing cor-
respondence between similar points across different coordinate systems, as each point is effectively
situated within a Euclidean environment on a local scale.
In essence, the act of matching overlapping points on a manifold ensures the alignment of their ge-
ometries. This alignment is crucial because the encoding space’s inherent geometry in the source
data contains relevant information for the target data. By achieving this alignment, the model fa-
cilitates the flow of information from the source to the target. In effect, this approach establishes a
strong foundation for the model’s capabilities and extends its capacity to generalize effectively.
Our main contribution of the article is as follows.

       • We design a novel transfer algorithm (GATE) based on Riemannian differential geometry.
       • The GATE is utilizable on regression tasks for inductive transfer learning.
       • The GATE outperforms conventional methods in various molecular property regressions.
       • The GATE exhibits stable underlying geometry and robust behavior in extrapolation tasks.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   T RANSFER L EARNING

Given a source domain Ds with source task T s and a target domain Dt with target task T t , transfer
learning aims to improve the learning of a better mapping function f t (·) for the target task T t with
the transferable knowledge gained from the Ds and T s (Pan & Yang, 2009). Depending on the
relationship between the source and target domains and tasks, transfer learning can be divided into
three categories: inductive, transductive, and unsupervised transfer learning. Our problem setting
is inductive transfer learning, where the target task is different from the source task (T s ̸= T t ),


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


regardless of whether the source and target domains are the same (Yang et al., 2020). Additionally,
molecular property prediction is a regression task. In transductive transfer learning, studies have
been done on regression tasks such as domain adaptation regression (DAR) (Chen et al., 2021).
However, recent studies on regression tasks in an inductive transfer learning setting were only found
in papers that applied it to a specific domain (Li & Fourches, 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2023).

2.2   M ULTI - TASK L EARNING AND K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

Multi-task learning (MTL) can be viewed as a form of inductive transfer learning that learns multiple
related tasks simultaneously. By using a shared representation, the knowledge gained from one
task can help the learning of other tasks (Caruana, 1997). MTL and transfer learning both aim to
generalize knowledge across different tasks. However, MTL aims to improve performance on a set
of target tasks with equal importance, whereas transfer learning only focuses on one target task.
Studies using MTL in various domains can be found (Lee & Kim, 2019; Liu et al., 2022).
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a training paradigm where the knowledge from a large teacher model
is transferred to a small student model. According to (Gou et al., 2021), distillation techniques
can be classified by knowledge types: response-based, feature-based, and related-based knowledge.
Response-based knowledge, also called “dark knowledge”, uses the output of the last layer, such as
logits (Hinton et al., 2015). Feature-based knowledge distillation utilizes the output of intermediate
layers, which are feature representations, to guide the student model. Relation-based KD transfers
the relationships between features or data samples. For molecular property prediction, (Joshi et al.,
2022) introduced feature-based distillation for GNNs by preserving global topology. Studies using
cross-modal KD can also be found (Zhang et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023).

2.3   G EOMETRICAL D EEP L EARNING

Methods that extend deep neural networks to Euclidean and non-Euclidean domains, such as graphs
and manifolds, are collectively referred to as geometric deep learning(GDL) (Bronstein et al., 2017).
Regarding “how to transfer”, transfer learning can be categorized into instance-based, feature-based,
model-based, and relation-based transfer learning. A feature-based approach aims to find a feature
representation that is effective for both the source and target domains. In the context of domain
adaptation, the subspace spanned by the features in the source and target domains is the knowledge
that is transferred (Yang et al., 2020). Manifold feature learning can learn tight representations that
are invariant across domains. Some studies have used the property of manifold to perform unsu-
pervised domain adaptation. By embedding datasets into Grassmann mainfolds, (Gopalan et al.,
2011) obtained intermediate subspaces by sampling points along the geodesic between the source
and target subspaces. (Gong et al., 2012) extended on this by learning a geodesic flow kernel (GFK)
between domains. (Baktashmotlagh et al., 2014) embedded the probability distributions on a Rie-
mannian manifold and used a Hellinger distance to approximate the geodesic distance. (Luo et al.,
2020) proposed a Riemannain manifold embedding and alignment framework that used intra-class
similarity and manifold metric alignment loss to achieve discriminability and transferability, respec-
tively. However, to our best knowledge, we could not find geometrical deep learning approaches for
inductive transfer learning in regression tasks.

3     G EOMETRICALLY A LIGNED T RANSFER E NCODER
The latent vector is believed to capture the essence of information for a given task. Therefore, one
may consider if two different but correlated tasks may share a similar underlying geometry of latent
spaces. Hence, if the latent spaces of given tasks can be aligned smoothly, mutual information will
flow through the latent spaces from one another. This will lead to the superior performance of a
target task not only in interpolation but also in extrapolation cases, which is the basic strategy of the
GATE. However, deep learning models are designed to mimic non-linear functions by excavating
information from the training dataset. The underlying geometry of models should inherently exhibit
non-linearity and non-trivial curvature, as well as latent spaces, which are induced by non-linear
models. This makes it challenging to match the underlying geometry of latent spaces.
There are several assumptions required to put geometrical concept into practice: 1) A pair of source
and target tasks should be correlated; 2) a pair of tasks should have an overlapping region; 3) a


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Embedding
               𝑥                                                    𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛


                                               𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑠
          Encoder (Source)                                                                  Encoder (Target)
                                Transfer (Source)           𝐿𝐹          Transfer (Target)

         𝑧𝑠                                                                                               𝑧𝑡
                                 Transfer -1 (Source)                Transfer -1 (Target)
           Head (Source)                                                                     Head (Target)

                                 𝑙𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑙𝑟𝑒𝑔 + α𝑙𝑎𝑢𝑡𝑜 + β𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠 + γ𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑝 + δ𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑠
                 𝑦ො𝑠                                                                              𝑦ො𝑡

                             Figure 2: Schematic diagram for the GATE algorithm


mathematically well-defined underlying geometry is preferred, such as a Riemannian. Molecular
datasets provide a perfect proving ground since they satisfy the first two assumptions, and with some
proper constraints, the third assumption can also be established. First, there exist numerous sets of
correlated tasks proven by scientific research. Also, the majority of molecules possess values for
multiple properties, which ensures a large area of overlapping regions across a pair of tasks. Finally,
by imposing the mathematical characters of Riemannian geometry as constraints, the underlying
geometry can be interpreted as a Riemannian manifold. Moreover, every molecule can be expressed
in a single corresponding universal string in, for instance, the SMILES format(Weininger, 1988).

3.1   R IEMANNIAN G EOMETRY

In Figure 2 we first take an input SMILES and embed it into the corresponding vector. After em-
bedding, latent space is formulated by encoders, which consist of DMPNN(Yang et al., 2019) and
MLP layers. The latent vector is fed into task-corresponding heads for inference properties. Here
we utilize MSE for basic regression loss in the training scheme as follows:
                                                            N
                                                         1 X
                                                lreg =       (yi − ŷi )2                                      (1)
                                                         N i

Where N , yi , and ŷi are the number of data points, target, and predicted value, respectively. This is
a simple, basic loss to train a molecular property, yet to match the latent space and design a transfer
scheme requires more mathematically advanced techniques.
The Riemannian manifold enjoys isometries induced by diffeomorphisms, which guarantee freedom
of coordinate choices on the manifold. Thus, one can find a LF around a point on a manifold. A
LF means the coordinate patch can be interpreted as Euclidean around its infinitesimal boundary.
Note that the input vector can be embedded on a smooth manifold, and its latent space can also be
assumed to be smooth since the ML model should always be smooth at an arbitrary point due to the
backpropagation training scheme. Hence, by utilizing the model to map encoder space to a LF, the
inner product of vectors satisfies a positive semi-definite property. Considering these aspects, we
can fix the latent space to a Riemannian. This whole process is closely described in later sections.

3.2   M ATCHING C OORDINATE PATCHES

As we mentioned earlier, we interpret the latent vector from the encoder model to be on a Rieman-
nian manifold. Moreover, we assume each downstream task corresponds to a specific coordinate
patch on the manifold with a vast overlapping region in molecular property prediction cases. Since
one can always find a mapping relation between different coordinate patches, it is crucial to find
the specific analytic form of the mapping function. Yet, it is almost impossible to find an analytic
form of the mapping function of an unknown manifold with little numerical information. Hence, we
utilize a deep learning model to learn the mapping relation instead of finding one with hands.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The coordinate mapping is induced by a Jacobian on a point. Since a vector enjoys isometry on dif-
feomorphism on a Riemannian manifold and is written in fundamental representation, the coordinate
transformation can be expressed as follows:
                                                    X ∂z ′i
                                           z ′i ≡                 zj                                 (2)
                                                     j
                                                           ∂z j

By introducing a model that mimics the above Jacobian and predicts the transformation matrix for a
given vector, one can freely transform between coordinates. However, its inverse may not be stable,
and moreover, its derivative may also not be stable and cause instability in the backpropagation
process. Resolving the issue is critical for training the model. Therefore, we tweak the problem to
not just mimic the Jacobian itself but to predict a transformed vector. Furthermore, we utilize an
autoencoder scheme to ensure its inverse behavior is accurate and stable.
                             z ′ = Transfer(z),           ẑ = Transfer−1 (z ′ )                     (3)
We indeed utilize MSE loss for the autoencoder which consists of transfer and its inverse modules.
                                          lauto = MSE(z, ẑ)                                         (4)
Here, we restrict the model by imposing an autoencoder loss to match the overlapping region of
coordinates. But this is insufficient; thus, stronger conditions are necessary to match coordinates.
Since we are expecting transformations to occur between coordinate patches, the transfer and inverse
modules should have the same input and output dimensions. Moreover, as we are trying to match the
underlying geometry of overlapping regions, which are in fact the latent space of the autoencoder,
one can realize that we can require another condition for the autoencoder. We consider two distinct
autoencoders for source and target coordinates that map coordinate patches to same LF back and
forth; the transfer output from both should be equal in order to match the geometry of the overlapping
region.
                      zs′ = Transfers→LF (zs )            ẑs = Transfer−1LF →s (zs′ )               (5)
                      zt′ = Transfert→LF (zt )            ẑt = Transfer−1LF →t (zt′ )               (6)
Where Models→LF indicate a model from source to LF frame and vice versa.
                                         lcons = MSE(zs′ , zt′ )                                     (7)
This loss, we call it a consistency loss, pivots points on overlapping regions to glue the underlying
geometry. Furthermore, one can induce information flow from the source domain to the target
domain by utilizing a mixture of autodencoders.
                    zs′ = Transfers→LF (zs )             ẑs→t = Transfer−1LF →t (zs′ )              (8)
The above equation indicates a vector from the source domain that is transformed to the target
domain, retaining its mutual information. Therefore, this mapped vector ẑs→t should also predict
the same label as the original vector zt on the target side. This fact gives rise to another form of loss
function, namely a mapping loss.
                                       lmap = MSE(yt , ŷs→t )                                       (9)
Here yt indicates the label for corresponding vectors and ŷs→t indicates predicted value from ẑs→t .
Above loss ensures mutual information flow by matching overlapping coordinates on pivot points.
This particular loss is applied to reverse case too which maps zt to ŷt→s .
Now the question is, ‘Is this enough?’. The answer is ‘No!’. The reason is actually not intricate to
find. If we start with immensely much data on both the source and target domains, then the answer
will be ‘Yes’. However, in most cases, we lack data points to glue coordinates together. If points are
not enough, there are always overfitting issues that cause the geometry to crumple outside the pivot
point region. There are two solutions to this issue. One is gathering more data points and hoping to
work smoothly, and the other is by adding a stronger condition to the geometry.
Our idea is not only to focus on point data but also on its geometries by considering the geodesics
of two different points. Here, there are two issues to compute the geodesics in curved space: one is
that the space itself is curved, and the Pythagorean theorem no longer holds on the space in general.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The other is that the shortest path between two points in a curved space is no longer intuitive. In
curved space, one can calculate distance using the following equation:
                                          Z XX
                                    S2 =             gµν dxµ dxν                               (10)
                                                 l µ       ν
                                             µ     ν
Here, gµν is a metric on the surface, dx , dx are infinitesimal displacements, and l is the geodesic
path between two points. The geodesic of a curved space can be defined as a curve whose parallel
transport along the curve preserves the tangent vector to the curve. Which indicates,
                                                 ∇γ̇(t) γ̇(t) = 0                                  (11)
Where γ(t) is a curve on a manifold, γ̇(t) is the derivative respect to a parameter t, and ∇ is a
covariant derivative with an affine connection Γµνρ . It is clear that solving the geodesic equation is
not a simple task since one must know the explicit form of the metric of space, and the equation itself
is a non-linear partial differential equation. Thus, as depicted in Figure 2, we introduce infinitesimal
perturbation points around a data point to detour the issue. The infinitesimal perturbation makes
things easy to tackle since a data point can always be expressed on a LF, where a geodesic becomes
trivial. Then one can easily compute the distance between a data point and perturbed points since it
can be interpreted to be on a flat Euclidean space.
The distance between two different points on a space is a key quantity to match the task coordinates
since, as shown in eq. 10, distance always requires metric on a space. By restricting neighbor points
to an infinitesimal region around a pivot data point, the metric can now be considered a Euclidean
metric, ηµν . Than the eq. 10 simplified as follows:
                        Z XX                      Z XX                      Z b
                    2                    µ    ν                    µ   ν
                  S =              gµν dx dx =              ηµν dx dx =         dx2              (12)
                         l µ      ν                        l µ      ν                     a

Where a and b are the pivot data point and its perturbation point, respectively. If perturbation is
infinitesimal, one can take off the integral and find displacement in a simplified form.
                                                  S = |b − a|                                      (13)
Since it is possible to find a LF on a Riemannian manifold, for a given data point, two different
task coordinates can always be transformed by their diffeomorphisms to be on a flat coordinate. If
we utilize the above distance between pivot and perturbation points, each task coordinate is now
glued together by not only a given pivot point but also by their neighbors. It is closely depicted in
Figure 2. Right after the embedding, we find perturbation points around given data points and feed
them to each task-specific model for encoding. After encoding, models will be entangled together
by mapping loss, consistency loss, and distance loss, forcing the distances between pivot points and
their perturbations to be equal between tasks.
                                                       M
                                                 1 X
                                        ldis =       MSE(sis , sit )                               (14)
                                                 M i
Where M is the number of perturbations and sis is the displacement between pivot data points and
their perturbations.
                               sis ≡ |(zs′ ) − (zs′i )|        sit ≡ |(zt′ ) − (zt′i )|            (15)
                                  zs′i = Transfers→LF (Encoders (xi ))                             (16)
                                  zt′i = Transfert→LF (Encodert (xi ))                             (17)
       i
Here x denotes ith perturbation of embedded x, and Encoders and Encodert are encoder parts of
source and target model respectively. Finally, by gathering all losses with individual hyperparame-
ters, we obtain the complete form of the loss function used in the GATE algorithm.
                           ltot = lreg + αlauto + βlcons + γlmap + δldis                           (18)
Each hyperparameter tunes the corresponding weight of loss. In most cases, it is sufficient to let
all the hyperparameters to 1, but in some cases, one can fine-tune the hyperparameters to achieve
superior performance. The most critical hyperparameter is δ since the distance loss manages the
regularization effect of the model. This result will be closely examined in the ablation section. And
with the proper hyperparameters, our novel transfer model GATE outperforms conventional models
in inductive transfer settings for regression tasks, as shown in the experiment section.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     EXPERIMENTS


4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

To test our algorithms, we used a total of 14 datasets from three different open databases named
PubChem(Kim et al., 2022), Ochem(Sushko et al., 2011), and CCCB(III, 2022), as described in
Appendix Table 3. The training and test split is an 80:20 ratio, and two sets of data were prepared:
random split and scaffold-based split(Bemis & Murcko, 1996). Every experiment is tested in a four-
fold cross-validation setting with uniform sampling for accurate evaluation, and a single NVIDIA
A40 is used for the experiments. For the evaluation, we compare the performance of GATE against
that of single task learning (STL), MTL, KD, global structure preserving loss based KD (GSP-
KD) (Joshi et al., 2022), and transfer learning (retrain all or head network only). We used the same
architecture for encoders and heads in both the baselines and our model for all experiments. More
detailed experimental setups can be found in Appendix. We performed experiments with a total of
23 target and source task pairs, respectively.


4.2   R ESULTS


                    DS                                         DS

                    HV                                         HV
                      1.4                                        1.4
                      1.0                                        1.0



                                                                 0.5                    GATE
                      0.5
                                                                                        STL
                                                                                        MTL
                                                                 0.0                    KD
                      0.0
                                                                                        GSP-KD
                                                                                        Transfer (Retrain All)
                                                                                        Transfer (Retrain Head)


                Random split                               Scaffold split


Figure 3: The RMSE of GATE divided by the RMSE of the corresponding methods are illustrated
in the radar chart. Experiments were performed with 23 target and source task pairs in random split
(left) and scaffold split (right) datasets. Inner characters correspond to the target tasks, and outer
characters are for the source tasks. The full names of the tasks can be found in Appendix Table 3.


The result of the training for the 23 task pairs with both random and scaffold split is demonstrated
in Figure 3. The figure illustrates the relative regression accuracy, calculated as the RMSE of GATE
divided by the RMSE of the corresponding method. As shown in the figure, in the majority of cases,
GATE outperforms baseline methods by significant margins. Note that, even though the KD and
GSP-KD outperforms the GATE for some task pairs, they show critically low accuracy for several
task pairs. On the other hand, as we can see in the Appendix Table 4-7, GATE exhibited the best
performance in more than half of task pairs, specifically 12 pairs in random split and 13 pairs in
scaffold split out of 23 pairs. Considering that the method with the second-highest number of best-
performing task pairs had only 4 task pairs in random split and 5 task pairs in scaffold split, this can
be regarded as a dramatic difference. Also, when considering the second-best performance, GATE
maintained consistently high performance in the majority of pairs, reaching 18 pairs in random split
and scaffold split. For the average RMSE over all task pairs, GATE demonstrates significantly lower
RMSE compared to the second-best method, 9.8 % lower in random split (GSP-KD) and 14.3 %
lower in scaffold split (MTL). This indicates that GATE performs even better in extrapolation tasks.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Only Mapping                                                                       Mapping + Consistency
      1.0                                                                                            1.0
                                                                   training loss                                                                             training loss
      0.8                                                          validation loss                   0.8                                                     validation loss

      0.6                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                               MSE
MSE


      0.4                                                                                            0.4
      0.2                                                    lowest validation loss                  0.2                                               lowest validation loss

      0.0                                                                                            0.0
            0           100            200            300          400               500                   0         100          200            300         400               500
                                             Epochs                                                                                     Epochs

                   Mapping + Consistency + Distance                                                                          Multitask Learning
      1.0                                                                                            1.0
                                                                   training loss                                                                             training loss
      0.8                                                          validation loss                   0.8                                                     validation loss

      0.6                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                               MSE
MSE


      0.4                                                                                            0.4
      0.2                                                                                            0.2   lowest validation loss
             lowest validation loss                                                                        lowest validation loss of GATE
      0.0                                                                                            0.0
            0           100            200            300          400               500                   0         100          200            300         400               500
                                             Epochs                                                                                     Epochs


Figure 4: Training and validation loss curves of GATE and MTL models with different sets of loss
terms. Upper left: GATE trained without consistency and distance loss; upper right: GATE trained
without distance loss; lower left: plain GATE, lower right: plain MTL.


5      A BLATIONS STUDIES AND FURTHER ANALYSIS
5.1         ROLE OF DISTANCE LOSS

The most distinguishable aspect of GATE is the distance loss, which connects task coordinates not
only through labeled data points but also surrounding perturbation points. Since learning signals
from consistency and distance loss do not require regression target labels, these two losses can
be applied in an unsupervised manner. GATE directly leverages this advantage in distance loss
and regularizes the overall latent space to be geometrically transferable to a LF. To verify this, we
trained GATE using different sets of losses: 1) only mapping, 2) mapping and consistency, and 3)
mapping, consistency, and distance losses. As a result, we observed that the addition of distance
loss significantly suppresses overfitting during the training process, as shown in Figure 4. Note that
the training loss curve of MTL never reached the lowest validation loss of GATE (grey dashed line).
These results indicate that the regression model can be strongly regularized by the distance loss
while having a minimal adverse impact on the regression task itself.

                         Surface tension                    Kovats retention index                         Viscosity               Abraham descriptor S
                                                                                                                                                                         2.0

                                                                                                                                                                         1.0
      GATE                                                                                                                                                               0.0

                                                                                                                                                                        -1.0


                                                                                                                                                                         2.0

                                                                                                                                                                         1.0
      MTL                                                                                                                                                                0.0

                                                                                                                                                                        -1.0


Figure 5: PCA on latent space of GATE and MTL model trained with collision cross section dataset
as a target task and surface tension, Kovats retention index, viscosity, and Abraham descriptor S as
source tasks, respectively. The color indicates the predicted value of the collision cross section.


                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   S TABILITY OF LATENT SPACE

For further investigation on the regularization effect of GATE, we examined the shape of the la-
tent space of the GATE and MTL models. Transfer learning offers a way to leverage information
from source tasks, but undesired interfering information can cause negative transfer. Ideally, if a
model is well-guided by the right information and regularized properly, the overall geometry of the
latent space may remain stable and not depend on the type of source tasks. (Zhang et al., 2023;
Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) However, if the target task is overwhelmed by the source task and
regularization is not enough, latent space will be deformed according to the source tasks. To check
this effect, we trained regression on the same target task using GATE or MTL with four different
source tasks and then performed principal component analysis. Figure 5 effectively illustrates that
the latent space of GATE exhibits relatively stable characteristics compared to that of MTL.

5.3   ROBUSTNESS TO DATA CORRUPTION

We examined the robustness against data corrup-
tion in order to directly verify the regularization
effect. To artificially introduce significant cor-                 Heat of vaporization   Collision cross section

ruption to the dataset, data points with labeled              3                                                 0.6
values outside the standard deviation were ran-              2.8
                                                                                                                0.55
domly selected, and the values of these data points
were altered to be twice the standard deviation              2.6


                                                                                                                       MSE
                                                       MSE                                                      0.5
with negation. And then, after training with the             2.4
corrupted dataset, we assessed the mean squared                                                                 0.45
                                                             2.2
error (MSE) between the model’s predictions on
the corrupted data points used during training and            2                                                 0.4
the original values before the corruption. If the                   MTL       GATE          MTL       GATE
model exhibits overfitting to the corrupted data, it
will manifest substantial errors, whereas effective
model regularization will lead to error reduction.     Figure 6: GATE and MTL models are trained
Figure 6 shows the result of the test for GATE         with artificially corrupted data points and MSEs
and MTL. The GATE model exhibits considerably          between predicted values and original values
lower errors compared to MTL. This result indi-        before the corruption is recorded. The target
cates that the regularization effect of the GATE al-   task is heat of vaporization (left) or collision
gorithm leads to high robustness against data cor-     cross-section (right), with the opposite side be-
ruption and successful generalization.                 ing used as the source task.


6     D ISCUSSION
We demonstrated a novel transfer algorithm based on the geometrical interpretation of latent space.
By assuming latent space to be on a Riemannian manifold with a curved metric, the conventional
Euclidean interpretation is no longer valid. However, since diffeomorphism invariance guarantees
freedom of coordinate choices, one can always find a LF for each task coordinate. Hence, it is
possible to impose consistency loss by matching an encoded vector from one task to another. Fur-
thermore, we showed that the distance loss of displacement from a point in an overlapping region to
its perturbations is crucial. All together, we demonstrated that the GATE outperforms conventional
methods in the majority of molecular prediction task setups and proved its robustness.
In this article, we focused on regression tasks for molecular property prediction. Yet, the algorithm
itself is not restricted to regression tasks. Thus, it is interesting to expand the algorithm to other
domains such as images, languages, or, further, multi-modal setups. Another technical point is that
we considered the neighboring region of a pivoting point to compute displacement on a flat space.
However, to match the entire geometry, it is necessary to consider not only perturbations but also
points in finite-distance regions. In this scheme, one must solve a geodesic equation instead of
merely computing the Euclidean distance. It is incomparably complicated since one must consider
1) finding an explicit form of curved metric and 2) solving highly non-linear differential geodesic
equations analytically or numerically. Yet, considering GATE’s performance, by imposing geometric
characters on fully curved backgrounds, the performance gains may be substantial. Hence, this could
be another interesting research topic to expand GATE’s horizons.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, Mehrtash T Harandi, Brian C Lovell, and Mathieu Salzmann. Domain
 adaptation on the statistical manifold. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
 and pattern recognition, pp. 2481–2488, 2014.

Guy W Bemis and Mark A Murcko. The properties of known drugs. 1. molecular frameworks.
  Journal of medicinal chemistry, 39(15):2887–2893, 1996.

Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geomet-
 ric deep learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42,
 2017.

Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann Lecun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. 12 2013.

Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41–75, 1997.

Xinyang Chen, Sinan Wang, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Representation subspace distance
  for domain adaptation regression. In ICML, pp. 1749–1759, 2021.

Connor W. Coley, Wengong Jin, Luke Rogers, Timothy F. Jamison, Tommi S. Jaakkola, William H.
  Green, Regina Barzilay, and Klavs F. Jensen. A graph-convolutional neural network model for
  the prediction of chemical reactivity. Chem. Sci., 10:370–377, 2019. doi: 10.1039/C8SC04228D.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C8SC04228D.

Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on
 graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. 06 2016.

David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Timo-
  thy Hirzel, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning
  molecular fingerprints. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 13, 09 2015.

Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven contin-
  uous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.

Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geodesic flow kernel for unsupervised
  domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  2066–2073. IEEE, 2012.

Raghuraman Gopalan, Ruonan Li, and Rama Chellappa. Domain adaptation for object recognition:
  An unsupervised approach. In 2011 international conference on computer vision, pp. 999–1006.
  IEEE, 2011.

Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge distillation: A
   survey. International Journal of Computer Vision, 129:1789–1819, 2021.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
  In NIPS Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1503.02531.

Noah Hoffmann, Jonathan Schmidt, Silvana Botti, and Miguel AL Marques. Transfer learning on
  large datasets for the accurate prediction of material properties. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03000,
  2023.

Russell D. Johnson III. Nist computational chemistry comparison and benchmark database. NIST
  Standard Reference Database, 101, 2022. URL http://cccbdb.nist.gov/.

Wengong Jin, Kevin Yang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Learning multimodal graph-to-
 graph translation for molecular optimization, 12 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chaitanya K Joshi, Fayao Liu, Xu Xun, Jie Lin, and Chuan Sheng Foo. On representation knowledge
  distillation for graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2022.
Sunghwan Kim, Jie Chen, Tiejun Cheng, Asta Gindulyte, Jia He, Siqian He, Qingliang Li, Ben-
  jamin A Shoemaker, Paul A Thiessen, Bo Yu, Leonid Zaslavsky, Jian Zhang, and Evan E Bolton.
  PubChem 2023 update. Nucleic Acids Research, 51(D1):D1373–D1380, 10 2022. ISSN 0305-
  1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac956. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac956.
Sung Moon Ko, Sungjun Cho, Dae-Woong Jeong, Sehui Han, Moontae Lee, and Honglak Lee.
  Grouping matrix based graph pooling with adaptive number of clusters. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 8334–8342, 2023.
Brian Kulis, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. What you saw is not what you get: Domain adaptation
  using asymmetric kernel transforms. CVPR 2011, pp. 1785–1792, 2011. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7419723.
Kyoungyeul Lee and Dongsup Kim. In-silico molecular binding prediction for human drug targets
  using deep neural multi-task learning. Genes, 10(11):906, 2019.
Xinhao Li and Denis Fourches. Inductive transfer learning for molecular activity prediction: Next-
  gen qsar models with molpmofit. Journal of Cheminformatics, 12(1):1–15, 2020.
Shengchao Liu, Meng Qu, Zuobai Zhang, Huiyu Cai, and Jian Tang. Structured multi-task learn-
  ing for molecular property prediction. In International conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 8906–8920. PMLR, 2022.
Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Guiguang Ding, Wei Cheng, Xiang Zhang, and Wei Wang. Dual
 Transfer Learning, pp. 540–551. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611972825.47. URL https://epubs.
 siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611972825.47.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
You-Wei Luo, Chuan-Xian Ren, Pengfei Ge, Ke-Kun Huang, and Yu-Feng Yu. Unsupervised do-
  main adaptation via discriminative manifold embedding and alignment. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 5029–5036, 2020.
Jianhan Pan, Teng Cui, Thuc Duy Le, Xiaomei Li, and Jing Zhang. Multi-group transfer learning on
   multiple latent spaces for text classification. IEEE Access, 8:64120–64130, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
   ACCESS.2020.2984571.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
  and data engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.
Minshi Peng, Yue Li, Brie Wamsley, Yuting Wei, and Kathryn Roeder. Integration and transfer
 learning of single-cell transcriptomes via cfit. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 118(10):e2024383118, 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2024383118. URL https://www.pnas.
 org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2024383118.
Ariadna Quattoni, Michael Collins, and Trevor Darrell. Transfer learning for image classification
  with sparse prototype representations. Proceedings / CVPR, IEEE Computer Society Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2, 03 2008. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587637.
Maithra Raghu, Chiyuan Zhang, Jon M. Kleinberg, and Samy Bengio. Transfusion: Understanding
 transfer learning with applications to medical imaging. CoRR, abs/1902.07208, 2019. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.07208.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The graph
  neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks / a publication of the IEEE Neural
  Networks Council, 20:61–80, 01 2009. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Iurii Sushko, Sergii Novotarskyi, Robert Körner, Anil Kumar Pandey, Matthias Rupp, Wolfram
   Teetz, Stefan Brandmaier, Ahmed Abdelaziz, Volodymyr V Prokopenko, Vsevolod Y Tanchuk,
   et al. Online chemical modeling environment (ochem): web platform for data storage, model de-
   velopment and publishing of chemical information. Journal of computer-aided molecular design,
   25:533–554, 2011.
Jingshu Wang, Divyansh Agarwal, Mo Huang, Gang Hu, Zilu Zhou, Chengzhong Ye, and Nancy
   Zhang. Data denoising with transfer learning in single-cell transcriptomics. Nature Methods, 16:
   875–878, 09 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0537-1.
David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to method-
  ology and encoding rules. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36,
  1988.
Kevin Yang, Kyle Swanson, Wengong Jin, Connor Coley, Philipp Eiden, Hua Gao, Angel Guzman-
  Perez, Tim Hopper, Brian Kelley, Miriam Mathea, Andrew Palmer, Volker Settels, Tommi
  Jaakkola, Klavs Jensen, and Regina Barzilay. Analyzing learned molecular representations
  for property prediction. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 59, 07 2019. doi:
  10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00237.
Qiang Yang, Yu Zhang, Wenyuan Dai, and Sinno Jialin Pan. Transfer learning. Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press, 2020.
Xiang Yu, Jian Wang, Qing-Qi Hong, Raja Teku, Shui-Hua Wang, and Yu-Dong Zhang. Trans-
  fer learning for medical images analyses: A survey. Neurocomputing, 489:230–254, 2022.
  ISSN 0925-2312. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2021.08.159. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231222003174.
Liang Zeng, Lanqing Li, and Jian Li. Molkd: Distilling cross-modal knowledge in chemical reac-
  tions for molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01912, 2023.
Hao Zhang, Nan Zhang, Ruixin Zhang, Lei Shen, Yingyi Zhang, and Meng Liu. Coordinating cross-
  modal distillation for molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16712, 2022.
Wen Zhang, Lingfei Deng, Lei Zhang, and Dongrui Wu. A survey on negative transfer. IEEE/CAA
 Journal of Automatica Sinica, 10(2):305–329, 2023. doi: 10.1109/JAS.2022.106004.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Ping Luo, Hui Xiong, Qing He, Yuhong Xiong, and Zhongzhi Shi. Exploiting
  associations between word clusters and document classes for cross-domain text categorization†.
  Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, 4(1):100–114, 2011. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1002/sam.10099. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
  abs/10.1002/sam.10099.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Ping Luo, Changying Du, Qing He, and Zhongzhi Shi. Triplex transfer learning:
  Exploiting both shared and distinct concepts for text classification. In Proceedings of the Sixth
  ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’13, pp. 425–434, New
  York, NY, USA, 2013. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450318693. doi: 10.
  1145/2433396.2433449. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2433396.2433449.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Ping Luo, Changying Du, Qing He, Zhongzhi Shi, and Hui Xiong. Triplex transfer
  learning: Exploiting both shared and distinct concepts for text classification. IEEE Transactions
  on Cybernetics, 44(7):1191–1203, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2013.2281451.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     N OTATIONS

Our notation is based on index notation and Einstein summation conventions. Notation of functions
and matrices in our algorithm is as follows.
                                             X : Vector
                                         X µ : Vector Field
                                             dxµ : Basis
                                        Xµ : Dual Vector Field
                                          dxµ : Dual Basis
                                             T : Tensor
                                   ν ···νp
                                 T 1      µ1 ···µq : (p, q) Tensor Field
                                          gµν : Metric Tensor
                                        δµν : Kronecker Delta
                                       ∇µ : Covariant Derivative
                                          LX : Lie Derivative
                                        ρ
                                       Γ µν : Christoffel Symbol

All indices are raised and lowered by a metric gµν . For instances,

                                            g µν = g µρ gρν                                     (19)

where

                                          g µν gµν = δ µν = D                                   (20)

Here D is the number of dimensions.

B     P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS

B.1     T HE D EFINITION OF R IEMANNIAN M ANIFOLD

A curved space is complicated to comprehend in general. Since late 19th century, there has been
immense development in differential geometry to interpret curved spaces formally. One of the best-
known intuitive geometrys is the Riemannian. Riemannian geometry enjoys a handful of useful
mathematical characters that can be utilized in the real world. The formal definition of Riemannian
is as follows:
Definition B.1 (Riemannian Manifold). A Riemannian metric on a smooth manifold M is a choice
at each point x ∈ M of a positive definite inner product gp : Tp M × Tp M → R on Tx M . The
smooth manifold endowed with the metric g is a Riemannian manifold, denoted (M, g).

As it is expressed above, a Riemannian manifold is smooth and differentiable everywhere on the
manifold and its derivative as well. Also, a Riemannian enjoys diffeomorphism invariances, induced
by the Lie derivative LX . One can easily notice that the adjoint operation between two different Lie
derivatives forms a group, namely the diffeomorphism group. This isometry ensures coordinate
choices without changing the global geometry of the space.
                                                 ∂X ν
                        X ′ = X ′µ dXµ′ = X ′µ         dXν = X ν dXν = X                        (21)
                                                 ∂X ′µ
As it is depicted in eq. 21, transformed vector remains unchanged. Moreover, one can always fix the
transformed coordinate in a locally flat space.
                                                   ∂ξ µ ν
                                            ξµ =        X                                       (22)
                                                   ∂X ν

                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Where ξ µ is a vector on a locally flat frame. To ensure the vector is on a flat frame, one must impose
the following condition:
                                               ∂2 µ
                                                  ξ (t) ≡ 0                                        (23)
                                              ∂t2
Since a vector is on a flat frame, it should be in a free-falling motion, so its acceleration should be
trivial. On a locally flat frame, the metric also becomes flat Euclidean metric
                                             gµν = 1µν                                            (24)

B.2   C OVARIANCE

The vector should be transformed in the same manner in any coordinate frame. However, if the
space is no longer flat, the ordinary derivative no longer guarantees it. Let us consider a derivative
of a vector in a general curved space.
                                                      ∂xµ
                                         ∂µ → ∂µ′ =        ∂ν                                     (25)
                                                      ∂x′ν
Where ∂µ = ∂x∂ µ , then the vector transformation can be written as follows:
                                              ∂xλ ∂ ∂x′µ ρ
                     ∂ν X µ → ∂ν′ X ′µ   =              (     V )                                 (26)
                                             ∂x′ν ∂xλ ∂xρ
                                             ∂x′ν   ∂x′ρ λ ρ         ∂ 2 x′µ ρ
                                         =       λ      ν
                                                          ∂ V +              V                    (27)
                                              ∂x     ∂x            ∂xλ ∂xρ
As it is shown above, a transformation of a vector on a curved space with an ordinary derivative is
no longer covariant. Thus, one must impose an additional factor to make it covariant, namely an
Affine connection. With this factor, one can define a covariant derivative, replacing an ordinary one.
                                          ∇µ = ∂µ + Γλµν                                          (28)
By requiring a covariance condition on the covariant derivative,
                                                  ∂xρ ∂x′µ
                                  ∇λ → ∇′λ V ′µ =          ∇ρ V ν                                 (29)
                                                 ∂x′ν ∂xν
Then one can induce the explicit form of a connection.
                                     ∇µ V ν = ∂µ V ν + Γν µλ V λ                                  (30)
Under coordinate transformation,
          ∂ ∂x′ν λ                        ∂xρ ∂x′ν             ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν
            ′µ
               ( λ V ) + Γ′νµσ V ′σ =       ′µ
                                                     ∂ρ V λ +              V λ + Γ′νµσ V ′σ       (31)
         ∂x ∂x                            ∂x ∂x    λ          ∂x′µ ∂xρ ∂xλ
Here, to make the derivative of a vector covariant, the following equation must hold:
                        ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν    λ     ′ν     ′σ   ∂xρ ∂x′ν λ
                                     V   + Γ   µσ V    =         Γ Vσ                             (32)
                        ∂x′µ ∂xρ ∂xλ                     ∂x′µ ∂xλ ρσ
Which is
                       ∂x′σ τ       ∂xρ ∂ ′ν λ           ∂xρ ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν
                  Γ′νµσ (   V   ) =          Γ ρσ V σ
                                                      −                    Vλ           (33)
                        ∂xτ         ∂x′µ ∂xλ             ∂x′µ ∂x′µ ∂xρ ∂xλ
                              ∂xρ ∂xρ ∂x′ν λ            ∂xτ ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν
                 Γ′νµκ V τ =     ′κ  ′µ
                                            Γ ρσ V σ −                    Vλ            (34)
                              ∂x ∂x ∂x    λ             ∂x′κ ∂x′µ ∂xρ ∂xλ
This leads us to the explicit form of how the Christoffel symbol transforms under coordinate
changes.
                                 ∂xτ ∂xρ ∂x′ν λ           ∂xτ ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν
                        Γ′νµκ =     ′κ   ′µ
                                                 Γ ρτ −                                          (35)
                                 ∂x ∂x ∂x      λ          ∂x′κ ∂x′µ ∂xρ ∂xτ
Since the Kronecker delta is a constant matrix, it is obvious that the derivative of the delta should
be trivial. Then one can apply the chain rule to the delta and find the following relation, which can
simplify the above transformation rule.
   ∂ ν       ∂ ∂x′ν    ∂ ∂xτ ∂x′ν      ∂xτ ∂xρ ∂ 2 x′ν     ∂x′ν ∂x′ν ∂ 2 xτ
    ′µ
       δκ =   ′µ ′κ
                    =   ′µ
                           ( ′κ   )=0=   ′κ  ′µ
                                                         +
  ∂x        ∂x ∂x     ∂x ∂x ∂x  τ                ρ
                                       ∂x ∂x ∂x ∂x     τ   ∂xτ ∂xτ ∂x′µ ∂x′ρ
                                                                            (36)


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, the transformation rule for a Christoffel symbol is as follows:

                                    ∂xτ ∂xρ ∂x′ν λ     ∂x′ν ∂ 2 xτ
                          Γ′νµκ =     ′κ  ′µ
                                                Γ ρτ +                                            (37)
                                    ∂x ∂x ∂x  λ        ∂xτ ∂x′µ ∂x′ρ
By the same logic, one can easily find out how covariant derivatives act on forms.

                                       ∇µ Vν = ∂µ Vν − Γλµν Vλ                                    (38)

B.3   E XPLICIT F ORM OF C HRISTOFFEL S YMBOL

The metric is a ruler of a given geometry; it should not vary under position on a coordinate. The
Euclidean is trivial to see since the metric on Euclidean space is mere δµν , which is a constant
matrix.
                                              ∂
                                                 δµν = 0                                          (39)
                                            ∂xλ
However, in the curved case, the above statement should also hold to interpret the metric as a ruler,
yet the statement does not hold for an ordinary derivative. There, the covariant derivative kicks in to
replace an ordinary derivative instead. By taking covariant derivative to the curved metric, the term
diminishes.
                                             ∇λ gµν = 0                                           (40)
One can express this in terms of a flat metric with a diffeomorphism transformation factor.

                                                  ∂ξ λ ∂ξ ρ
                                      gµν (x) =             δλρ (ξ)                               (41)
                                                  ∂xµ ∂xν
If we take a derivative of x on both sides, the above equation becomes:

             ∂                   ∂ 2 xλ ξ ρ           ∂ 2 ξ ρ ∂ξ λ
                gµν (x)    =                 δλρ +                 δλρ                            (42)
            ∂xσ                   σ
                                ∂x ∂x ∂xµ  ν       ∂xσ ∂xν ∂xµ
                                 ∂ 2 ξ ρ ∂xτ ∂ξ ρ ∂ξ λ          ∂ 2 ξ λ ∂xτ ∂ξ λ ∂ξ ρ
                           =                           δ λρ  +                        δλρ         (43)
                                ∂xσ ∂xν ∂ξ ρ ∂xτ ∂xµ           ∂xσ ∂xµ ∂ξ λ ∂xτ ∂xν
                                 ∂ 2 ξ ρ ∂xτ          ∂ 2 ξ λ ∂xτ
                           =                 gµτ +                 gτ ν                           (44)
                                ∂xσ ∂xν ∂ξ ρ       ∂xσ ∂xµ ∂ξ λ
From eq 40, one can easily find out the specific form of the Christoffel symbol in terms of derivatives
of curved and flat coordinates.
                                     ∂
                                        gµν = Γτ σµ gτ ν + Γτ νσ gµσ                              (45)
                                    ∂xσ
                                                ∂ 2 ξ λ ∂xτ
                                       Γτ σµ =               (x)                                  (46)
                                               ∂xσ ∂xµ ∂ξ λ
Since the metric should always be symmetric, the lower indices of the Christoffel symbol should also
be symmetric. It is called a torsion-free condition. Furthermore, by utilizing a simple mathematical
trick, one can obtain the Christoffel symbol in terms of the metric gµν .
                                  ∂
                                     gµν    =     Γτ σµ gτ ν + Γτ σν gµτ                          (47)
                                 ∂xσ
                                  ∂
                                     gνσ    =     Γτ µν gτ σ + Γτ µσ gντ                          (48)
                                 ∂xµ
                                  ∂
                                     gσµ    =     Γτ νσ gτ µ + Γτ νµ gστ                          (49)
                                 ∂xν
Adding the first two equations and subtracting the last one leads to
                                     1 λρ ∂         ∂         ∂
                           Γλµν =      g ( µ gνρ +     gρµ −     gµν )                            (50)
                                     2    ∂x       ∂xν       ∂xρ

                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4   G EODESIC E QUATIONS

The shortest path between two points is simple in flat space. However, in curved space, the notion
becomes rather complicated. The shortest path in a curved space is defined as a geodesic. There are
several ways to induce a geodesic equation. One is by requiring a free-falling condition.
                                         ∂ 2 ξ µ (τ )
                                                      =0                                          (51)
                                            ∂τ 2
By diffeomorphism, one can transform a coordinate into an arbitrary coordinate x.
                          ∂ ∂ξ µ ∂xν     ∂ξ µ ∂ 2 xν      ∂ 2 ξ µ ∂xλ ∂xν
                       0=   ( ν      )=               +                                           (52)
                          ∂τ ∂x ∂τ       ∂xν ∂τ 2        ∂xλ ∂xν ∂τ ∂τ
                    2 ρ     2 µ    ρ   λ    ν        2 ρ
                   ∂ x     ∂ ξ ∂x ∂x ∂x            ∂ x            ∂xλ ∂xν
                      2
                        +   λ   ν  µ
                                               =       2
                                                         + Γρλν           =0                      (53)
                   ∂τ     ∂x ∂x ∂ξ ∂τ ∂τ           ∂τ             ∂τ ∂τ
Another way to derive the equation is by finding the minimum value of the distance in curved space.
                                          Z r
                                                    dxµ dxν
                                    S=         gµν          dτ                                 (54)
                                                     dτ dτ
By varying the above equation and requiring it to be 0, one can compute its minimum value, and
after tedious calculation, the geodesic equation can be obtained.

C     BASE G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORK M ODEL
In general, molecule is represented in a graph form. Therefore, in order to handle molecule dataset,
it is inevitable to utilize graph neural networks. We chose directional message passing network
(DMPNN) (Yang et al., 2019) for our backbone, since it outperforms other GNN architectures in
molecular domain. Given a graph, DMPNN initializes the hidden state of each edge (i, j) based
on its edge feature Eij with node feature Xi . At each step t, directional edge summarizes incident
edges as a message mt+1                                     t+1
                        ij and updates its hidden state to hij .
                                                    X
                                         mt+1
                                          ij =             htki                                (55)
                                                 k∈N (i)\j

                                   ht+1        0        t+1
                                    ij = ReLU(hij + We mij )                                      (56)
Where N (i) denotes the set of neighboring nodes and We a learnable weight.he hidden states of
nodes are updated by aggregating the hidden states of incident edges into message mt+1
                                                                                   i   , and passing
its concatenation with the node feature Xi into a linear layer followed by ReLU non-linearity
                                                    X
                                        mt+1
                                          i    =          htij                                  (57)
                                                  j∈N (i)

                               ht+1
                                i   = ReLU(Wn concat(Xi , mt+1
                                                           i   ))                                 (58)
Similarly, Wn denotes a learnable weight. Assuming DMPNN runs for T timesteps, we use
(Xout , Eout ) = GNN(A, X, E) to denote the output representation matrices containing hidden
states of all nodes and edges, respectively (i.e., Xout,i = hTi and Eout,ij = hTij ).
For graph-level prediction, the node representationsPafter the final GNN layer are typically sum-
pooled to obtain a single graph representation hG = i hi , which is then passed to a FFN prediction
layer.

D     A RCHITECTURE AND H YPERPARAMETERS
Detailed steps of training GATE is described in Algorithm 1. The architecture of our model is
composed of five distinct networks and their parameter sizes are depicted in Table 1. As illustrated in
Figure 2, one embedding network is shared across tasks, and encoder, transfer, inverse transfer, and
head network exists for each task. The embedding network embedd(·) has the DMPNN architecture


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 GATE
 1: Initialize encoder network fe , transfer network ft , inverse transfer network fi , head network fh
    with random parameters θ
 2:
 3: for epoch i = 1, 2, . . . n do
 4:     for each t ∈ T asks do
 5:         for each batch b = (xt , y t ) ∈ dataset D do
 6:             at ← embedd(xt )
 7:             {āt } ← perturb(at )
 8:
 9:             z t ← fet (at )
10:             mt ← ftt (z t )
11:             {z̄ t } ← fet ({āt })
12:             {m̄t } ← ftt ({z̄ t })
13:
14:             Lreg ← M SELoss(y t , fht (z t ))
15:             Lauto ← M SELoss(fit (mt ), z t )
16:
17:             for each s ∈ Subtasks do
18:                   z s ← fes (at )
19:                   ms ← fts (z s )
20:                   {z̄ s } ← fes ({ās })
21:                   {m̄s } ← fts ({z̄ s })
22:
23:                   Lmap ← Lmap + M SELoss(y t , fht ◦ fit (ms ))
24:                   Lcons ← Lcons + M SELoss({m̄t } , ms )
25:                   Ldist ← Ldist + M SELoss(mt − {m̄t } , ms − {m̄s })
26:             end for
27:
28:             Compute Ltotal = Lreg + αLauto + βLmap + γLcons + δLdist
29:             Update θ using Ltotal
30:         end for
31:     end for
32: end for


with depth 2 and converts the input molecule representation x into a new representation a in a
common embedding space. We apply perturbation perturb(·) to a for a number of perturbations,
which is set to 10 in this paper. All of the perturbed representation {ā} along with a are then fed
into the encoder network. The encoder network is composed of backbone network and bottleneck
network. Backbone network has the DMPNN architecture with depth 2 and the bottleneck network
has an autoencoder structure with MLP layers. The output from the encoder fe (a) becomes the
input to the transfer network and head network. The output of transfer network ft (z), notated as m,
is used to calculate consistency loss and distance loss. It is also fed into inverse transfer network,
so that the output from inverse transfer network fi (m) can be used to calculate autoencoder loss.
The output from head network fh ◦ fi (m) is used to calculate regression loss and mapping loss.
We trained 600 epochs with batch size 512 while using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) for
optimization with learning rate 5e-5. The hyperparameters for α, β, γ, δ are 1, 1, 1, 1 respectively.


                                    Table 1: Network parameters
              network         layer         input, output size    hidden size     dropout
             backbone        DMPNN            [134,149], 100          200            0
             bottleneck      MLP layer           100, 50               50            0
              transfer       MLP layer            50, 50          100,100,100       0.2
          inverse transfer   MLP layer            50, 50          100,100,100       0.2
                head         MLP layer             50, 1             25,12          0.2



                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Table 2: Hyperparameters
                                       learning rate     0.00005
                                         optimizer       AdamW
                                         batch size         512
                                           epoch            600
                                     # of perturbation      10
                                         α, β, γ, δ      1, 1, 1, 1


E     D ETAILED E XPLANATION OF DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

E.1   DATASETS


                          Table 3: Detailed information about the datasets.
           name                      acronym source           count       mean          std


           Abraham Descriptor S       AS          Ochem          1925       1.05      0.68
           Boiling Point              BP          Pubchem        7139     198.99    108.88
           Collision Cross Section    CCS         Pubchem        4006     205.06     57.84
           Critical Temperature       CT          Ochem           242     626.04    120.96
           Dielectric Constant        DK          Ochem          1007       0.80      0.41
           Density                    DS          Pubchem        3079       1.07      0.29
           Enthalpy of Fusion         EF          Ochem          2188       1.32      0.32
           Ionization Potential       IP          Pubchem         272      10.00      1.63
           Kovats Retention Index     KRI         Pubchem       73507    2071.20    719.34
           Log P                      LP          Pubchem       28268      11.17      9.89
           Polarizability             POL         CCCB            241       0.84      0.26
           Surface Tension            ST          Pubchem         379      29.01     10.36
           Viscosity                  VS          Pubchem         294       0.47      0.87
           Heat of Vaporization       HV          Pubchem         525      43.77     18.08


We used 14 different molecular property datasets from three different open databases, described
in Table 3 and below explanations for evaluation of the GATE. Before the training process, the
data were purified to exclude data with incorrectly specified units, typos, and extreme measurement
environments. All datasets were normalized by mean and standard deviation before the training
process. We selected 23 pairs of source and target tasks among the 14 datasets, considering the
number of data points in each dataset. We also tried to select task pairs with diversity in correlation
as shown in the Figure 7 for a fair and unbiased examination. Hereby, we explicitly describe the
physical meaning of each dataset.

       • AS : The solute dipolarity/polarizability.
       • BP : The temperature at which this compound changes state from liquid to gas at a given
         atmospheric pressure.
       • CCS : The effective area for the interaction between an individual ion and the neutral gas
         through which it is traveling.
       • CT : The temparature when no gas can become liquid no matter how high the pressure is.
       • DK : The ratio of the electric permeability of the material to the electric permeability of
         free space.
       • DS : The mass of a unit volume of a compound.
       • EF : The change in enthalpy resulting from the addition or removal of heat from 1 mole of
         a substance to change its state from a solid to a liquid.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Absolute Corr. Values Between Task Pairs
   1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
   0


Figure 7: Pearson correlation between overlapping data points in target dataset and source dataset.


        • IP : The amount of energy required to remove an electron from an isolated atom or
          molecule.
        • KRI : The rate at which a compound is processed through a gas chromatography column.
        • LP : Logarithmic form of the ratio of concentrations of a compound in a mixture of octanol
          and water at equilibrium.
        • POL : The tendency of matter, when subjected to an electric field, to acquire an electric
          dipole moment in proportion to that applied field.
        • ST : The property of the surface of a liquid that allows it to resist an external force
        • VS : A measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow.
        • HV : The quantity of heat that must be absorbed if a certain quantity of liquid is vaporized
          at a constant temperature.

E.2    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

For evaluation of the GATE, we compared the performance of six baseline methods, including STL,
MTL, KD, global structure preserving loss based KD (GSP-KD), and transfer learning (retrain all or
head network only). All of the baselines share the same base architecture, with a few different details
according to methods. The MTL shares parameters of backbone and bottleneck for given two tasks,
and only head networks are separated. In the case of the KD, latent vectors from the bottleneck
are used as labels for the distillation, and the distillation loss ratio is set to 0.1. Graph Contrastive
Representation Distillation (G-CRD) contains contrastive loss as well as the GSP loss (Joshi et al.,
2022). However, we only adopt GSP loss since the contrastive loss term is not applicable for regres-
sion tasks. For the GSP-KD, node features from the last layer of the backbone network are used to
calculate pairwise distances, which are the labels of the distillation process. The loss ratio of the
distillation process of the GSP is also set to 0.1. The maximum epoch is set to be 600, and the best
models are selected by early stopping.

F      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We express explicit test results in this section. A total of 23 task pairs from 14 distinct datasets were
tested thoroughly with seven different models. Four tables are depicted to show the full experimental
results. The best result is emphasized by bold and underlined on each individual result, and the
second-best result is underlined. The GATE outperforms other conventional methods by a noticeable
margin. In a random split setup, the GATE wins 52.17% out of total tasks, and for up to second, the
GATE wins 78.26% out of total. In scaffold setup, the GATE wins 56.52% and 78.26% respectively.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 4: Random Split Result (part 1)
     Tasks          GATE                STL                MTL                 KD
               RMSE     STD        RMSE     STD       RMSE     STD    RMSE       STD
    hv ← ds    0.9221 0.0612       0.9574 0.0519      0.9782 0.0782   1.3726    0.2930
    as ← bp    0.4583 0.0193       0.5125 0.0085      0.4370 0.0119   0.5426    0.0335
   ds ← kri    0.4145 0.0172       0.4154 0.0045      0.4172 0.0102   0.4403    0.0119
    hv ← vs    0.9116 0.0522       0.9574 0.0519      0.9700 0.1052   1.1995    0.1419
    vs ← hv    0.5471 0.0719       0.5947 0.0357      0.5535 0.0353   0.5878    0.0264
     st ← as   0.6689 0.0413       0.9902 0.0729      1.0272 0.0244   1.1601    0.0396
    ds ← lp    0.4046 0.0142       0.4154 0.0045      0.4133 0.0135   0.4378    0.0086
   pol ← ds    0.3431 0.0475       0.3460 0.0291      0.4367 0.1213   0.3089    0.0270
    vs ← bp    0.4457 0.0151       0.5947 0.0357      0.4516 0.0366   0.6076    0.0241
    dk ← ef    0.4331 0.0140       0.4331 0.0358      0.4498 0.0126   0.3852    0.0238
   as ← ccs    0.4648 0.0139       0.5125 0.0085      0.4677 0.0220   0.5364    0.0211
    ct ← bp    0.1742 0.0034       0.2549 0.1247      0.1707 0.0132   0.1690    0.0079
    st ← ccs   0.9546 0.0452       0.9902 0.0729      1.0361 0.0737   1.1731    0.0730
   ccs ← kri   0.2476 0.0034       0.2936 0.0110      0.2524 0.0042   0.2622    0.0117
   hv ← bp     0.7251 0.0581       0.9574 0.0519      0.7550 0.0432   1.1983    0.1815
   vs ← ccs    0.5233 0.0323       0.5947 0.0357      0.5792 0.0228   0.6027    0.0127
    st ← hv    0.7647 0.0622       0.9902 0.0729      0.7179 0.0259   1.1270    0.0184
    hv ← ct    0.9399 0.0896       0.9574 0.0519      1.1118 0.1633   1.5114    0.1845
    ip ← bp    0.5476 0.0642       0.6695 0.0660      0.6067 0.0345   0.5624    0.0273
    hv ← ef    0.6131 0.0966       0.9574 0.0519      0.8296 0.0999   1.3659    0.2587
   hv ← kri    0.5410 0.0732       0.9574 0.0519      0.8631 0.0354   1.3739    0.2487
    ct ← kri   0.1658 0.0136       0.2549 0.1247      0.1716 0.0090   0.1586    0.0102
    ip ← dk    0.6510 0.0381       0.6695 0.0660      0.7083 0.0226   0.5508    0.0100
      mean     0.5592 0.0271       0.6642 0.0320      0.6263 0.0414   0.7667    0.0908
               Count    Ratio      Count    Ratio     Count   Ratio   Count      Ratio
      1st        12    52.17%         0    0.00%         1    4.35%      2      8.70%
      2nd        18    78.26%         1    4.35%         7   30.43%      5      21.74%


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 5: Random Split Result (part 2)
           Tasks          GSP-KD         Transfer Retrain All   Transfer Retrain Head
                     RMSE      STD       RMSE        STD        RMSE         STD
          hv ← ds    0.9321 0.0487       1.0428     0.1165      1.1166      0.0024
          as ← bp    0.5315 0.0151       0.4325     0.0104      0.7712      0.0105
         ds ← kri    0.4147 0.0063       0.4414     0.0154      0.8842      0.0049
          hv ← vs    0.9154 0.0130       0.9937     0.0821      1.0091      0.0181
          vs ← hv    0.5619 0.0223       0.5712     0.0232      0.7215      0.0392
           st ← as   0.9938 0.0141       1.1296     0.1302      1.0045      0.0220
          ds ← lp    0.4106 0.0077       0.4280     0.0136      0.9111      0.0022
         pol ← ds    0.2603 0.0270       0.3741     0.0303      0.9060      0.0141
          vs ← bp    0.5932 0.0097       0.5445     0.0239      0.7220      0.0645
          dk ← ef    0.4230 0.0133       0.3936     0.0164      0.9380      0.0026
         as ← ccs    0.5457 0.0150       0.4741     0.0148      0.9935      0.0033
          ct ← bp    0.2018 0.0093       0.1563     0.0044      0.6847      0.0186
          st ← ccs   0.9595 0.0405       1.1334     0.0687      1.1039      0.0046
         ccs ← kri   0.2698 0.0095       0.2273     0.0016      0.6166      0.0567
         hv ← bp     0.9051 0.0571       0.8267     0.0417      0.8829      0.0499
         vs ← ccs    0.5269 0.0167       0.4868     0.0119      0.8684      0.0116
          st ← hv    0.9618 0.0086       1.0290     0.0945      1.0102      0.0138
          hv ← ct    0.9207 0.0112       1.2072     0.0460      1.0302      0.0186
          ip ← bp    0.4631 0.0037       0.9816     0.2334      0.8732      0.0293
          hv ← ef    0.8112 0.0463       1.0818     0.1021      0.9616      0.0478
         hv ← kri    0.9191 0.0676       0.9080     0.0510      1.0715      0.0145
          ct ← kri   0.2080 0.0057       0.1661     0.0075      0.8349      0.0279
          ip ← dk    0.5257 0.0192       0.6099     0.0273      1.0336      0.0085
            mean     0.6198 0.0212       0.6800     0.0540      0.9108      0.0181
                     Count     Ratio     Count       Ratio      Count        Ratio
            1st         4     17.39%        4      17.39%          0        0.00%
            2nd        10     43.48%        5      21.74%          0        0.00%


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 6: Scaffold Split Result (part 1)
     Tasks          GATE                 STL                  MTL              KD
               RMSE     STD        RMSE      STD         RMSE    STD     RMSE     STD
    hv ← ds    0.6939 0.0996       0.6744 0.1079         0.6465 0.0776   0.5920 0.0466
    as ← bp    1.0495 0.0256       1.2828 0.0724         1.1677 0.1068   1.3580 0.0136
   ds ← kri    0.4395 0.0108       0.4477 0.0052         0.4849 0.0061   0.5409 0.0480
    hv ← vs    0.7174 0.0796       0.6744 0.1079         0.9954 0.2059   0.8948 0.2294
    vs ← hv    0.6120 0.0639       0.9816 0.1267         0.8535 0.0558   1.2597 0.3638
     st ← as   0.7540 0.0660       0.8041 0.1062         1.0254 0.0251   1.7083 0.1608
    ds ← lp    0.4049 0.0102       0.4477 0.0052         0.4517 0.0184   0.5221 0.0328
   pol ← ds    0.9040 0.0852       0.9604 0.1056         1.4198 0.0796   1.3309 0.1998
    vs ← bp    0.6121 0.0297       0.9816 0.1267         0.5686 0.0276   0.9371 0.2386
    dk ← ef    0.7122 0.0545       0.7028 0.0391         0.6549 0.0210   0.8189 0.0462
   as ← ccs    1.1313 0.0496       1.2828 0.0724         1.1197 0.0558   1.3773 0.0781
    ct ← bp    0.3883 0.0203       1.4436 0.1150         0.4359 0.0126   1.2459 0.1199
   st ← ccs    0.7281 0.0586       0.8041 0.1062         0.9905 0.0737   1.5402 0.1418
   ccs ← kri   0.5292 0.0094       0.5489 0.0107         0.5297 0.0083   0.5534 0.0190
   hv ← bp     0.4821 0.0132       0.6744 0.1079         0.4668 0.0169   0.6271 0.0868
   vs ← ccs    0.6126 0.0671       0.9816 0.1267         0.8186 0.0790   1.3034 0.5354
    st ← hv    0.7209 0.0412       0.8041 0.1062         0.7237 0.0276   1.5256 0.1906
    hv ← ct    0.6579 0.0678       0.6744 0.1079         0.6633 0.0660   0.7925 0.2694
    ip ← bp    0.4668 0.0179       0.5780 0.1475         0.5540 0.0587   0.4205 0.0240
    hv ← ef    0.6406 0.0335       0.6744 0.1079         0.7879 0.0643   0.6773 0.1553
   hv ← kri    0.5084 0.0264       0.6744 0.1079         0.6204 0.0269   0.6710 0.1524
    ct ← kri   0.3902 0.0140       1.4436 0.1150         0.5173 0.0927   1.3392 0.1076
    ip ← dk    0.4335 0.0119       0.5780 0.1475         0.5335 0.1016   0.4975 0.0769
      mean     0.6343 0.0270       0.8313 0.0408         0.7404 0.0441   0.9797 0.1218
               Count    Ratio      Count     Ratio       Count   Ratio   Count    Ratio
      1st        13    56.52%         0     0.00%           3   13.04%      2    8.70%
      2nd        18    78.26%         3    13.04%           9   39.13%      2    8.70%


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 7: Scaffold Split Result (part 2)
           Tasks          GSP-KD          Transfer Retrain All    Transfer Retrain Head
                     RMSE      STD        RMSE        STD         RMSE         STD
          hv ← ds    0.7606 0.0810        0.8659     0.0788       0.9584      0.0339
          as ← bp    1.2340 0.0294        1.1478     0.0264       1.0935      0.0079
         ds ← kri    0.4467 0.0104        0.8753     0.1134       1.0928      0.0482
          hv ← vs    0.6536 0.0345        0.7520     0.1666       0.7924      0.0595
          vs ← hv    0.6377 0.0253        0.9217     0.1575       0.9179      0.0539
           st ← as   0.9335 0.0954        1.2604     0.0946       1.0780      0.0613
          ds ← lp    0.4685 0.0111        0.4664     0.0121       1.0410      0.0026
         pol ← ds    0.8475 0.0627        1.0385     0.2146       1.3204      0.0491
          vs ← bp    0.6599 0.0204        1.1532     0.1766       1.0135      0.0820
          dk ← ef    0.6353 0.0171        0.7417     0.0384       0.7963      0.0071
         as ← ccs    1.1272 0.0778        1.2925     0.0606       1.4530      0.0143
          ct ← bp    1.1837 0.0586        0.5644      0.053       0.9347      0.0316
         st ← ccs    0.7344 0.0187        0.9075     0.0431       1.2596      0.0287
         ccs ← kri   0.5356 0.0115        0.5640     0.0137       0.7904      0.0159
         hv ← bp     0.7403 0.0889        0.6093     0.0422       0.8111      0.0251
         vs ← ccs    0.8027 0.0159        0.7271     0.0828       1.2282      0.0243
          st ← hv    0.7417 0.0206        1.4243     0.0627       1.0047      0.0813
          hv ← ct    0.6428    0.008      0.9499     0.2579       0.8089      0.0532
          ip ← bp    0.4579 0.0207        0.4419     0.0371       0.9704      0.0399
          hv ← ef    0.5862 0.0375        1.0003     0.1719       0.9503      0.0307
         hv ← kri    0.5509 0.0252        0.6560     0.0408       0.9998      0.0311
          ct ← kri   1.2358 0.0373        1.1124     0.1265       1.2769      0.0193
          ip ← dk    0.4376 0.0255        0.5248     0.0471       1.0165      0.0521
            mean     0.7415 0.0363        0.8694     0.0671       1.0265      0.0217
                     Count     Ratio      Count       Ratio       Count        Ratio
            1st         5     21.74%         0       0.00%           0        0.00%
            2nd        11     47.83%         2       8.70%           1        4.35%


                                               23
