Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S CALABLE AI S AFETY VIA D OUBLY-E FFICIENT D E -
BATE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The emergence of pre-trained AI systems with powerful capabilities across a di-
         verse and ever-increasing set of complex domains has raised a critical challenge
         for AI safety as tasks can become too complicated for humans to judge directly.
         Irving et al. (2018) proposed a debate method in this direction with the goal of pit-
         ting the power of such AI models against each other until the (mis)-alignment
         identification problem is broken down into a manageable subtask. While the
         promise of this approach is clear, the original framework was based on the as-
         sumption that the honest strategy is able to simulate deterministic AI systems for
         an exponential number of steps, limiting its applicability. In this paper, we show
         how to address these challenges by designing a new set of debate protocols where
         the honest strategy can always succeed using a simulation of a polynomial num-
         ber of steps, whilst being able to verify the alignment of stochastic AI systems,
         even when the dishonest strategy is allowed to use exponentially many simulation
         steps.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated emergent capabilities, including the ability to
follow natural-language instructions, use various tools, and perform some types of general-purpose
abstract reasoning and planning (Saunders et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Menick et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023). Thus far, human feedback on LLM outputs has been used to improve the alignment
between the behavior of these models and their designer’s intent (Ouyang et al., 2022). However,
these models are increasingly being used to perform complex tasks that can be viewed as the writing
and execution of general-purpose computations described in natural language, where at each step
the model is invoked with context given by some set of previous model outputs (Lu et al., 2023).
As the complexity of such tasks scales, the ability to provide direct human feedback for training on
long complex traces involving reasoning, planning, and taking actions is limited. This limitation
leads to the need for new approaches for scalable oversight (Leike et al., 2018; Christiano et al.,
2018)–where carefully designed protocols involving the interaction of both humans and AI models
are used to provide high-quality feedback for training and oversight of complex AI systems.
As a motivating example, consider the case of using a language model to draft a law or a legal
contract. Laws and contracts are written in natural language, refer to concepts in the real world, and
require human judgement (in the worst case a judge in an actual court) to interpret their meaning.
Furthermore, individual passages or even single characters in laws or contracts can have significant
real-world consequences, as demonstrated by multimillion-dollar losses suffered by companies and
governments due to misplaced commas (Kurtzleben, 2014; BBC, 2017). In order to train a language
model to write such high-stakes natural language, it is necessary to be certain that every passage of
an extremely long document is correct, where correctness is defined by human judgement. However,
requiring human experts to carefully read an entire law or contract produced by a language model
to provide the training label for one example is clearly prohibitively expensive. Thus, in this setting
it is necessary to design methods for training and oversight that are extremely efficient in their use
of human judgements.
A prominent approach to the oversight and safe training of AI systems builds upon the fact that
there is a natural high-level correspondence between training techniques in machine learning and
interactive proofs in complexity theory, as exemplified by the proposal for AI safety via debate


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Irving et al., 2018). The overall goal of this approach is to enable the design of methods that
allow the training of extremely computationally powerful learned models that nonetheless behave
as desired, despite only being supervised by much more limited verifiers. For example, while no
human Go player can instruct the AlphaZero model (Silver et al., 2017) on what move to make next,
the model nonetheless was trained to a super-human level via self-play. This was possible precisely
because it is computationally easy to verify which player has won at the end of a game of Go.
Using such an approach for training LLMs to produce (and then successfully execute) computations
described in natural-language requires some method of scalably verifying that the computations
produced actually solve the intended task, and are executed correctly.
The surprising ability of computationally limited verifiers to correctly judge the outputs of much
more computationally powerful provers underlies some of the most celebrated results in computa-
tional complexity theory. Notably, any polynomial space (and potentially exponential time) compu-
tation can be verified by a polynomial time verifier interacting with a computationally unbounded
prover i.e. IP=PSPACE (Shamir, 1992). Further, for any problem with solutions which can be ver-
ified in polynomial time, one can efficiently encode the solutions in such a way that they can be
non-trivially verified by reading only three bits chosen uniformly at random from the encoded solu-
tion i.e. the PCP theorem (Arora & Safra, 1998; Arora et al., 1998). Recent work has introduced the
notion of doubly-efficient interactive proofs (Goldwasser et al., 2015; Reingold et al., 2021) in the
context of delegating computation. Here an untrusted prover is asked to run some polynomial-time
computation, and the goal is for a linear-time verifier to interact with the prover in order to accu-
rately judge that the computation was performed correctly. Thus, the time spent by the verifier is
much less than the time to run the whole computation.
Unfortunately, all of the methods from the theory of interactive proofs for the highly-efficient ver-
ification of computationally powerful provers apply only to tasks with mathematically precise def-
initions (e.g. find a solution to a problem, given the actual code of an algorithm for verifying that
the solution is correct). However, in the case of training a model to follow human intent, the main
source of feedback available is black-box access to human judgements of model outputs. Strikingly,
when access to a black-box is allowed in computations, the main theorems regarding the power of
interactive proofs (e.g. IP=PSPACE and the PCP theorem) are actually false (Chang et al., 1994;
Fortnow, 1994). However, the goal of efficient verification of powerful provers with access to black-
box judgements can still be achieved by requiring that the provers compete.
We introduce the theoretical model of doubly-efficient debate, where two polynomial-time provers
compete with each other in order to convince a much more efficient verifier of the correctness of a
computation that depends on access to black-box judgements. In this model we prove that, under
appropriate assumptions, any polynomial-time computation can be verified using only a constant
number of queries to the black-box representing human judgement (and in time linear in the size of
a single query). Intuitively, our results show that, for any problem whose solutions can be verified
by extremely extensive human reflection, the solutions can also be verified with a constant amount
of human judgement and interaction with competing provers. A key requirement, and limitation,
for applying our results in real-world settings, is that the debating models must have the ability to
produce (potentially extensive) natural-language reasoning traces to solve the problem at hand, in
such a way that (potentially extensive) careful human analysis could have been used to judge that the
reasoning was correct. These theorems open up the door for training models with human feedback
via self-play, as even very complex and extensive computations described in natural language can
be verified by querying human judgements for only a single step of such a computation.

1.1   O UR R ESULTS

Our definition of doubly-efficient debate is a complexity-theoretic formalization of a training setup
in which two competing AI models attempt to convince a verifier, who has access to human judge-
ments, of the correctness of a solution to a computational problem. At a high-level, the goal is to
design protocols where (1) the model arguing for the correct solution convinces the verifier without
expending computational effort much greater than would be necessary to correctly solve the prob-
lem by itself, and (2) the verifier makes a number of queries to human judgements that does not
grow (i.e. is a fixed constant) with respect to the computational effort required to solve the problem.
The details of the definition appear in Section 4. Recalling the example of models writing laws or
contracts, the above goal would allow for training feedback on an entire legal contract, by showing


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


only a small, fixed (independently of the contract length) number of sentences to a human rater,
allowing for scalable training of such models.
In the subsequent sections we prove theorems achieving this high-level goal in several settings. As a
warm-up, in Section 5 we give protocols achieving the goal when human judgements are modeled as
deterministic, and the competing models are given explicit natural language instructions to follow.
In order to better capture the fuzzy nature of human judgement, we then extend these results to
the setting where human judgements are stochastic in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7 we prove
theorems achieving our goal in the case where the models are asked to come up with a proposed
solution themselves, and then are required to justify the correctness of the solution with a natural-
language argument. We also include in the supplementary material a machine-verifiable (in lean)
formalization of the proof of the main theorem of Section 6.


2   R ELATED WORK

The work most closely related to ours is the debate proposal by Irving et al. (2018), which proposed
the setup of natural-language debates between AI models judged by humans. The original proposal
showed that debates between two provers could naturally capture the complexity class PSPACE.
Follow-up work of Barnes & Christiano (2020b) introduced cross-examination, which extends the
power of debate to all of NEXP. This prior theoretical work models both provers in the debaters
as computationally unbounded, which leaves open the question of the ability of actual models to
efficiently implement the protocols, and whether there may be an advantage for the dishonest prover
in a computationally bounded setting. Our model of doubly-efficient debate makes progress both of
these questions, by giving debate protocols where the honest prover always has a winning strategy
implementable in polynomial time, even when the dishonest prover is allowed unbounded computa-
tion.
The model of doubly-efficient debate is inspired by doubly-efficient interactive proofs in computa-
tional complexity first introduced in Goldwasser et al. (2015). The original purpose of this model
was to capture the situation where a verifier wants to delegate a polynomial time computation to
an untrusted prover, while spending much less time to verify that the computation was performed
correctly. Later Reingold et al. (2021) gave the best results currently know for delegating space-
bounded computation. See also Goldreich et al. (2018) for a survey of these results. Other related
work connecting interactive proofs and machine learning includes Wäldchen et al. (2022), which
uses the model of Merlin-Arthur (MA) proof systems in order to achieve formal interpretability of
classifier outputs.
The doubly-efficient debate protocols we design are strongly connected to the idea of process-based
feedback (Stuhlmüller & jungofthewon, 2022; Uesato et al., 2022), where the goal is to directly
supervise the reasoning process of an AI system, rather than just the final outcome. Our protocols
can be interpreted as a type of process-based feedback where two AI systems compete to convince a
limited verifier that a given outcome has been arrived at by a (possibly complex) reasoning process
that the verifier would endorse. On the safety side, there have been various proposals that directly
supervise language models with human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), as well as with additional
data from external sources (Menick et al., 2022). There has also been work that utilizes language
models to improve supervision of language models including Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022)
and self-critique (Saunders et al., 2022). There are also alternatives to debate as approaches to scal-
able oversight including recursive reward modelling (Leike et al., 2018) and iterated amplification
(Christiano et al., 2018). Another line of related work on LLMs that motivates the need for scalable
oversight is the design of schemes for prompting language models to perform increasingly complex
tasks. Notable examples include Chameleon (Lu et al., 2023), ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), and the
direct use of language models as prompt engineers (Zhou et al., 2023).


3   P RELIMINARIES

We will use the notation [n] = {0, 1, . . . , n}. For a vector x ∈ {0, 1}n and a subset I ⊆ [n] we
write xS to denote the restriction of x to the set of coordinates i ∈ I. For a real number p > 0 and
positive integer d.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We will model computations as Turing machines M with input x ∈ {0, 1}n , that additionally have
access to an oracle O, which we refer to as oracle Turing machines. Formally, for l = l(n) an oracle
is a function O : {0, 1}l → {0, 1}. An oracle Turing machine M is a Turing machine with the
additional ability to write a query z ∈ {0, 1}l onto its tape, after which it will receive a response
O(z) in one step. We use the notation M O to indicate the oracle machine M where the queries z
are answered by the oracle O. We will also consider the setting where the oracle O is stochastic, in
which case the response to each oracle query O(z) is an independent {0, 1}-valued random variable.
In the LLM setting, the machine M corresponds to a set of natural language rules and instructions,
and the oracle O represents human judgement along with any other external black-box feedback the
model may receive (e.g. results from search-query, observations from a camera or sensor, outputs of
API calls).
A language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ is a subset of finite-length strings. A deterministic oracle Turing ma-
chine M decides a language L with oracle O if it holds that M O (x) = 1 ⇐⇒ x ∈ L.
A probabilistic oracle Turing machine M decides a language L with oracle O if it holds that
x ∈ L =⇒ P[M O (x) = 1] > 32 and x ∈          / L =⇒ P[M O (x) = 1] < 13 . For LLMs, the
language L corresponds to some class of problems describable in natural language, each with a yes
or no answer that may depend on human judgement or other black-box feedback encoded by the
oracle O. The strings x ∈ L are the problems where the answer is yes, and x ∈  / L the problems
where the answer is no. As is usual this can be extended to search problems (where the answer is
polynomial length) by classical search-to-decision reductions.
Definition 3.1. A language L is in NPO if there is a polynomial-time oracle machine M such
that: x ∈ L if and only if there exists a witness w of length polynomial in |x| = n such that
M O (x, w) = 1.
Definition 3.2. A language L is in MAO if there is a probabilistic oracle machine M and a polyno-
mial p(n) such that:

       • x ∈ L =⇒ ∃w of length p(n) s.t. P[M O (x, w) = 1] > 23 .

          / L =⇒ ∀w of length p(n), P[M O (x, w) = 1] < 13 .
       • x∈

For the LLM setting, languages in NPO and MAO correspond to problems x describable in natural
language, where a correct solution (the witness w) can be verified by polynomially many human
judgements of a potentially polynomial length transcript arguing that w is a solution to x. These sorts
of problems are arguably the most important for safety and scalable oversight, as they correspond to
the case where the LLM proposes a plan w in natural language, and goes through a potentially quite
long sequence of steps to argue that execution of the plan will have the desired outcome.
The protocols establishing the power of debate in terms of standard complexity classes rely on pro-
ducing verifiable transcripts of some prescribed computation. A transcript of a time T computation
of machine M on input x is a string y ∈ {0, 1}T , where yt is the bit written at the current head
position of M in time step t. We will assume that the T -th coordinate of the transcript is equal
to the output of M on x i.e. yT = M (x). In the context of LLMs executing polynomial-length
computations from natural-language instructions, the transcript is just the string of tokens output by
the model. Given a transcript y, the subset of coordinates IM,x (t) ⊆ [T ] of y relevant to coordinate
t ∈ [T ] are the coordinates of the transcript that are read by M when computing yt . When the ma-
chine M and input x are obvious from context we will write I(t) for the set of relevant coordinates.
For standard Turing machines (without access to an oracle), the set of relevant coordinates has size
O(1), but for oracle Turing machines may be as large as l.

4    D EBATE
A debate (Irving et al., 2018) is given by a triple (A, B, V ) of oracle Turing machines, an oracle
O, and a common input x of length n. The machines A and B are called provers and V is called
the verifier. A debate consists of k = k(n) rounds, during which the provers exchange messages.
In round i ∈ [k] prover A sends a message a(i) = AO (x, a(1) , b(1) , . . . a(i−1) , b(i−1) ) and prover B
sends a message b(i) = B O (x, a(1) , b(1) , . . . a(i−1) , b(i−1) ) which can be read by all parties involved.
We let a = (a(1) , . . . a(k) ) and b = (b(1) , . . . b(k) ) denote the full transcript of the messages sent by


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


each prover. At the end of the k-th round, the verifier runs V O (x, a, b) and outputs either zero or
one. As defined, the two provers each send a message in one round, but this also captures the case
of taking turns by having them alternate sending empty messages.

4.1   D OUBLY- EFFICIENT DEBATE

Different variants of debate arise depending on the computational power and/or limitations of the
provers and the verifier.
Definition 4.1. A (Ptime , Vtime , q)-debate protocol is given by a triple of oracle Turing machines
(A, B, V ) where A and B run in time Ptime , and V runs in time Vtime and makes q oracle queries.
Let 1 ≥ c > 21 > s ≥ 0. A debate protocol decides a language L with completeness c and soundness
s if:

       • Completeness: If x ∈ L then for all (unbounded time) oracle Turing machines B ′ the
         debate (A, B ′ , V ), with oracle O, and input x satisfies P[V O (x, a, b) = 1] ≥ c.
       • Soundness: If x ∈   / L then for all (unbounded time) oracle Turing machines A′ the debate
         (A′ , B, V ), with oracle O, and input x satisfies P[V O (x, a, b) = 1] ≤ s.

When c = 1 and s = 0 we say that the debate protocol deterministically decides L.

For deterministic oracle machines, as there is no randomness, it will always be the case that c = 1
and s = 0 i.e. that the honest prover always wins. For stochastic oracle machines the definition
requires a constant gap between c and s, which as usual can be amplified by repeating the protocol
multiple times and taking the majority outcome. A debate protocol specifies the behavior of honest
provers for both of the cases x ∈ L and x ∈   / L. Additionally, it is required that the honest prover
wins the debate with higher probability while running in time Ptime , against any (computationally
unbounded) strategy by the dishonest prover. Note that this requirement gives a complexity theoretic
formalization of the intuitively desirable property that debates should be structured so that it is easier
to tell the truth than to lie.
The original definition of debate requires Vtime to be polynomial in n, but allows Ptime to be un-
bounded. Doubly-efficient debate refers to the setting where Ptime is polynomial in n and Vtime is
linear in l, the length of each oracle query, and linear (or ideally sub-linear) in n, and V makes a
sub-linear (or ideally constant) number q of oracle queries.

4.2   T RAINING AND INFERENCE WITH DEBATE

We first clarify the relationship between our formal theoretical model of debate, and practical train-
ing setups.
The oracle O: Our theoretical model gives both the provers and the verifier access to an oracle
O representing human judgement. The prover access to the oracle corresponds to the fact that
the powerful pre-trained models already have extensive knowledge of human judgement on many
questions, and will gain more knowledge throughout the training process. The verifier access to the
oracle O corresponds to actual judgements by human raters.
At training time: The pretrained models A and B are trained via self-play to win the zero-sum
game given by the debate protocol. When a model queries O this corresponds to using either pre-
trained knowledge, or knowledge gained during self-play, to predict the answer that a human would
give to the oracle query. When the verifer V queries O this corresponds to asking an actual human
rater to judge an oracle query. The distinction between pre-trained knowledge for provers, versus
queries to human judgements for the verifier is critical, because it means that the training cost in
terms of number of queries to human judgement is equal to the number of verifier queries to O.
Thus, as long as the number of verifier oracle queries is bounded, the training procedure can scale
to arbitrarily complex computations by the models A and B, while still only requiring a bounded
number of human judgements.
At inference time: When a model is asked to solve a problem or follow complex natural language
instructions at inference time, the debate protocol is still run. However, no human feedback is used.
Instead the output of the model A is trusted, as long as B does not abort/point out a flaw.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     D ETERMINISTIC DEBATE
Doubly-efficient debate can decide any problem solvable in bounded space with verifier time that is
nearly-linear in the space used, and only a constant number of verifier queries to O.
Theorem 5.1. Let L be any language decidable by an oracle Turing machine M in time T =
T (n) using space S = S(n). Then there is a (O(T log T ), O(S log T ), O(1))-debate protocol
deterministically deciding L.
The proof appears in Section B. One can compare Theorem 5.1 to the setting of doubly-efficient
interactive proofs where there is a single prover (and without any black-box oracles). Reingold et al.
(2021) show that any time T space S computation can be decided by a doubly-efficient interactive
proof in time O(S 2 polylog T ). It is currently an open question whether this can be improved to
O(S polylog T ) (Goldreich et al., 2018). Additionally, the protocol of Reingold et al. (2021) is
quite complex, and relies on prior work in interactive proofs including the PCP theorem, so does not
apply in the presence of a black-box oracle.
The protocol achieving Theorem 5.1 is given in Figure 3 in Section A. The basic idea (which has
been used in many classical PSPACE-completeness results), is to have A output a supposed middle
configuration of the computation of M (x). Then B decides to recursively call the protocol on either
the first or the second half of the computation. This recursion bottoms-out at a single transition of
the machine M which can be checked by V .

5.1   C ROSS - EXAMINATION

The power of debate can be increased by allowing for cross-examination, where multiple copies of
each debater are questioned independently. Intuitively this should give more power, as the inde-
pendent copies must give consistent answers to the queries asked, and so may have more difficulty
lying.
Definition 5.2. A debate with cross-examination is a debate where A, B, and V can query indepen-
dent, non-communicating copies of both A and B. Furthermore, the verifier is not required to read
the entire transcript of the debate, but can selectively query a subset of the transcript. A debate pro-
tocol with cross-examination is a debate protocol where the debates appearing in the completeness
and soundness case allow cross-examination.
The definition of cross-examination is quite natural when considering language-model debaters. In
this case, the ability to query independent copies can be achieved by either running multiple copies
of the same LLM, or more efficiently by simply querying the same LLM with any previous messages
in the debate removed from the context. Our next theorem shows that doubly-efficient debate with
cross-examination can decide any problem solvable in polynomial time, using only O(l) verifier
time (and hence only O(1) oracle queries).
Theorem 5.3. Let L be any language decidable by an oracle Turing machine M in time T = T (n)
with oracle queries of length l. Then there is a (O(T log T ), O(l log T ), O(1))-debate protocol with
cross-examination deterministically deciding L.
The proof appears in Section B. The protocol achieving Theorem 5.3 is given in Figure 4 in Sec-
tion A. Cross-examination allows for a simple and powerful protocol where A outputs the whole
transcript of the computation M (x), B outputs the location of a supposed mistake by A, and V
checks only this location.

6     S TOCHASTIC DEBATE
In this section we give a debate protocol for any language L decidable by a probabilistic oracle
machine M with access to a stochastic oracle O. In the LLM setting, the oracle O is intended to
model human judgement, as well as other types of responses from nature (e.g. real world data or
observations). Thus, the oracle O must be stochastic in order for the model to be relevant in most
real-world scenarios. However, access to a stochastic oracle introduces an additional subtlety, where
changes on the order of O( T1 ) in the oracle’s distribution may add up to an O(1) difference in the
final output probability over the course of a time T computation. To account for this issue, we
require an additional Lipschitzness assumption for the machine M .


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Debate protocol for a stochastic oracle
All parties have access to an O, input x ∈ {0, 1}n , and K-Lipschitz probabilistic oracle machine M .
A claims that P[M (x) = 1] ≥ 32 , and B disputes this claim.
       1. Let y be the random variable representing the transcript of M on input x, and let d = ⌈150K⌉.
       2. The debate proceeds in a series of T rounds, in lexicographic order for t ∈ [T ]. In round t:
           (a) A outputs a probability p̂t ∈ [0, 1], which is supposed to equal pt = P[yt = 1 | yI(t) = aI(t) ].
           (b) A queries an independent copy of B for a real number ztA ∈ [0, 1], and B queries an independent
               copy of A for a real number ztB ∈ [0, 1]. Both ztA and ztB are supposed to be sampled uniformly
               at random from [0, 1].
           (c) Let zt = ztA + ztB mod 1.
           (d) A sets at = 1 if zt ≤ p̂t , and at = 0 otherwise.
           (e) At this point B can abort the protocol in round t, and is supposed to do so if A has not followed
               the protocol.
       3. If the protocol was aborted at round t:
           (a) The verifier V draws r = 192d2 log 100 samples of yt conditioned on yI(t) = aI(t) to obtain
               an estimate p̂O
                             t of the probability P[yt = 1 | yI(t) = aI(t) ] via the sample mean. Note that if
               yt is supposed to be the output of an oracle query this can be done with r queries to O(aI(t) ),
               otherwise yt is a deterministic function of aI(t) given by one step of M .
           (b) V checks if p̂O          3
                             t − p̂t ≥ 8d and outputs 0 if so and 1 otherwise.

       4. If the protocol was not aborted, then V outputs aT .


                  Figure 1: Doubly-efficient debate protocol for a stochastic oracle.


Definition 6.1. For K > 0, a probabilistic oracle machine M is K-Lipschitz at oracle O if, for any
other oracle O′ ,
                                           ′
         sup P[M O (x) = 1] − P[M O (x) = 1] < K sup |P[O(z) = 1] − P[O′ (z) = 1]|
          x                                                      z


In other words, if M is run with any oracle which assigns similar probabilities to O, the probability
that M outputs 1 should change by at most a K factor more than the maximum differences in
the oracle probabilities. Observe that every time-T stochastic oracle machine is K-Lipschitz for
K = O(T ).
Theorem 6.2. For K > 0, let L be any language decidable by a K-Lipschitz probabilistic or-
acle Turing machine M in time T = T (n) with oracle queries of length l. Then there is a
(O(K 2 T log T ), O(K 2 + l log T ), O(K 2 ))-debate protocol with cross-examination deciding L with
completeness 53 and soundness 25 .

The proof appears in Section D. The debate protocol promised in Theorem 6.2 is given in Figure 1.
As usual the protocol describes the prescribed behavior of the honest provers, but emphasizes that
dishonest behavior may occur. The protocol proceeds in T rounds, where in each round A proposes
a probability distribution over the next bit given the computation so far. Then A and B use cross-
examination to engage in a coin-flipping protocol (Steps 2.b. and 2.c.) in order to sample the next
bit of the computation from the distribution proposed by A. Finally, B can abort the protocol at any
round t, whereupon V samples from O in order to check if A’s proposed distribution at round t is
correct.
Theorem
  √      6.2 delivers non-trivial savings in verifier time and query complexity whenever K =
o( T ). In particular, the most interesting case occurs for K = O(1) i.e. when K is a constant
independent of T .

An Example for Theorem 6.2. Suppose a researcher wants to perform a meta-analysis of the
existing literature on whether caffeine improves learning in college students. The researcher could
give a high-level plan in natural language for how to accomplish this task:


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        1. Search the literature for studies on caffeine consumption and learning in college students.
        2. Among the studies found, select those studies which meet the following quality criteria:
            (a) Do not include any studies that contain clear methodological flaws.
            (b) Only include randomized control trials which measure final exam performance after
                at least six weeks of intervention.
        3. Perform the actual statistical analysis using a random effects model.
        4. Measure sources of heterogeneity between the included studies using meta-regression.
The above natural language plan is the machine M in Theorem 6.2. Instructions such as 2.(a)
correspond to queries to the human judgement oracle O, as whether a study contains a clear flaw is
a question of judgement. To run the debate protocol the model A is prompted to carry out the plan.
A will then carry out the instructions above while carefully listing everything relevant to show that
the instructions are being followed correctly e.g. text from each study to explain why it is included.
At the same time B will examine each step made by A and possibly abort if B believes the step has
been made incorrectly.
To see how the protocol in Figure 4 works in this case suppose that B aborts when A decides not to
include a particular study at Step 2.(a). The protocol requires A to output a probability estimate for
how likely a human is to say that the study contains a clear methodological flaw. Assume that A has
output probability 43 that the study contains a flaw. Then when B aborts, the question of whether
the study has the flaw claimed by A will be sent to human raters. If the fraction of raters who agree
with A about the flaw is sufficiently close to 43 then A wins. Otherwise B wins.

7      D OUBLY- EFFICIENT DEBATE WITH A WITNESS
One should also consider the situation where the debaters additionally are able to non-
deterministically produce a polynomial-sized witness w for the membership of x in an NPO or
MAO language L. In this case the honest debaters are required to run in polynomial time as in
Definition 4.1 when additionally given the witness w as input. This case corresponds to the setting
where an LLM proposes some solution to a very complex problem, and then argues for the correct-
ness of the solution via a polynomially long natural-language argument. Our results in this section
prove that, as long as this argument can be verified via extensive human reflection, then there is a
debate protocol that allows a human judge to only check a constant number of steps of the argument
when interacting with two competing models. The protocols of Figure 4 and Figure 1 then carry
over immediately where the machine M is the polynomial-time verifier for L and both x and the
witness w are given as input.

    Debate protocol with a witness for time T
    All parties have access to an oracle O, input x ∈ {0, 1}n and the code of a time T oracle machine M for
    verifying witnesses for a language L.
    A claims that x is in L, and B disputes this claim.
          1. A outputs a claimed witness w for the membership of x in L.
          2. If the oracle O is deterministic, run the protocol of Figure 4 with input (x, w) and machine M .
          3. If the oracle O is stochastic, run the protocol of Figure 1 with input (x, w) and machine M .


                        Figure 2: Doubly-efficient debate protocol with a witness.

The protocol given in Figure 2 leads immediately to the following theorems.
Theorem 7.1. Let L ∈ NPO and let M be the time T = T (n) verifier for L with oracle queries
of length l. Then there is a (O(T ), O(l log T ), O(1))-debate protocol with cross-examination deter-
ministically deciding L given a witness w.
Theorem 7.2. For K > 0, let L ∈ MAO be a language with a verifier M that is a K-Lipschitz,
time T = T (n) probabilistic oracle machine, with oracle queries of length l. Then there is a
(O(K 2 T log T ), O(K 2 + l log T ), O(K 2 ))-debate protocol with cross-examination deciding L with
completeness 53 and soundness 25 , given a witness w.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The proofs of Theorem 7.1 and Theorem 7.2 appear in Section E.

An Example for Theorem 7.2. The simplest example for Debate with a witness is to take the
setting of the example given for Theorem 6.2 above, but drop the assumption that the high-level
natural language plan is given in advance. Instead one could assume that the researcher just asks the
question ”Does caffeine improve learning in college students? Produce a high-level plan to answer
this question, give a step-by-step justification of the correctness of the plan, and then execute the
plan.” Here the high-level plan plus the justification for it’s correctness is the witness w produced
by A in Theorem 7.2. The machine M is given by the natural-language instructions (implicit in the
prompt above):
      1. Go through every step of the plan and the corresponding justification and check that it is
         clearly correct.
      2. Execute the plan.
Clearly many calls to the human-judgement oracle O are necessary to execute M with witness w.
The protocol at this point will proceed as in the example above, with A going step-by-step through
M , and B aborting for a claimed incorrect step.

8   C ONCLUSION AND O PEN P ROBLEMS
We introduced the theoretical model of doubly-efficient debate, where two polynomial-time provers
compete to convince a significantly more efficient verifier that they have correctly solved a compu-
tational problem that depends on black-box access to human judgements. At a high level, our main
theorems show that doubly-efficient debate can be used to allow for the verification of arbitrary poly-
nomial time computations using only a constant amount of human judgement. The overall aim of
this model is to provide theoretical grounding for scalable oversight of powerful AI systems, using
limited human feedback, and our theorems represents an initial step towards this goal. However,
many open questions remain.

The Power of the Provers: The theorems in this paper apply to the setting of verifying computa-
tions that could have been verified by a human reading the entire (polynomial-length) transcript of
the computation. How can the theoretical model be extended to settings where this is not possible?
On the one hand, our model assumes the AI systems implementing the provers are powerful enough
to very accurately simulate human judgements on any query. This may attribute too much power to
these systems. Is it possible to relax the accuracy requirements for the provers e.g. by giving the
provers access to an approximately correct oracle O′ ?
On the other hand, extremely powerful AI systems may be able to perform computations that, while
polynomial time, do not have any polynomial length human-verifiable transcript. The original debate
proposal with unbounded provers captures all of PSPACE, and thus is able to efficiently interrogate
implicitly-represented exponential length transcripts. However, allowing both provers in the theo-
retical model to be unbounded runs into what is referred to by Barnes & Christiano (2020a) as the
obfuscated argument problem, where a dishonest prover can in polynomial time produce an argu-
ment that would require the honest prover exponential time to refute. Is there some intermediate
model where the honest prover always has an efficient strategy, but the computation to be verified
does not require a polynomial-length human-verifiable transcript?

The Power of the Verifier: Human judgement is fallible in many ways. Furthermore, current
approaches to scalable oversight, such as reinforcement learning from human feedback, generally
train AI models (known as reward models) to approximate human judgements from a limited number
of samples. Thus, in the practical settings of interest the oracle O used by the verifier is likely to
be flawed. Theorem 6.2 partially addresses this problem by making each response of O stochastic,
and allowing for the verification of any computation that outputs the correct answer with a constant
advantage over random guessing. Is it possible to extend these results to settings where O gives
incorrect answers on some subset of queries? There are many possible models in this direction e.g.
is there a class of computations that can be verified by debate, where the oracle may make errors
on an arbitrary subset of limited size? Alternately, can debate verify computations where the oracle
makes arbitrary errors on a randomly selected subset of queries?


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Comma comeuppance: When rogue punctuation proves costly. BBC News, 2017. URL https:
  //www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-39300432.
Sanjeev Arora and Shmuel Safra. Probabilistic checking of proofs: A new characterization of np.
  Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45(1):70–122, 1998.
Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy. Proof verifica-
  tion and the hardness of approximation problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45(3):501–555,
  1998.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Beth Barnes and Paul Christiano. Debate update: Obfuscated arguments problem,
  2020a. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/PJLABqQ962hZEqhdB/
  debate-update-obfuscated-arguments-problem.
Beth Barnes and Paul Christiano. Write-up: Progress on ai safety via debate,
  2020b. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/Br4xDbYu4Frwrb64a/
  writeup-progress-on-ai-safety-via-debate-1.
Richard Chang, Benny Chor, Oded Goldreich, Juris Hartmanis, Johan Håstad, Desh Ranjan, and
  Pankaj Rohatgi. The random oracle hypothesis is false. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 49:24–39, 1994.
Paul Christiano, Buck Shlegeris, and Dario Amodei. Supervising strong learners by amplifying
  weak experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08575, 2018.
Lance Fortnow. The role of relativization in complexity theory. Bulletin of the EATCS, 52:229–243,
  1994.
Oded Goldreich et al. On doubly-efficient interactive proof systems. Foundations and Trends® in
  Theoretical Computer Science, 13(3):158–246, 2018.
Shafi Goldwasser, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Guy N. Rothblum. Delegating computation: Interactive
  proofs for muggles. J. ACM, 62(4):27:1–27:64, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2699436. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/2699436.
Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate, 2018.
Danielle Kurtzleben. How a misplaced comma cost the us government $38.4 mil-
  lion. Vox, 2014. URL https://www.vox.com/xpress/2014/10/14/6971613/
  how-a-misplaced-comma-cost-the-us-government-38-4-million.
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable
  agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871,
  2018.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, et al. Teaching lan-
  guage models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11147, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  TG8KACxEON.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Omer Reingold, Guy N. Rothblum, and Ron D. Rothblum. Constant-round interactive proofs for
 delegating computation. SIAM J. Comput., 50(3), 2021. doi: 10.1137/16M1096773. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1096773.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802,
 2022.
Adi Shamir. Ip = pspace. J. ACM, 39(4):869–877, oct 1992. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/146585.
  146609. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/146585.146609.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go
  without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Andreas Stuhlmüller and jungofthewon. Supervise process, not outcomes, 2022.
  URL        https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/pYcFPMBtQveAjcSfH/
  supervise-process-not-outcomes.
Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia
  Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process-and
  outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.
Stephan Wäldchen, Kartikey Sharma, Max Zimmer, and Sebastian Pokutta. Merlin-arthur clas-
  sifiers: Formal interpretability with interactive black boxes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00759,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=92gvk82DE-.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       D ETERMINISTIC D EBATE P ROTOCOLS
In this section we include the full specifications of the protocols for deterministic debate.

Debate protocol for time T and space S
All parties have access to an oracle O, input x ∈ {0, 1}n , and the code of the time T space S oracle machine
M.
A claims that M (x) = 1, and B disputes this claim.
         1. The debate proceeds recursively in a series of O(log T ) rounds. Let z0 = x and t0 = T . The k-th
            round begins with A arguing that the execution of M starting in configuration zk ends in configuration
            zk′ in tk steps.
             (a) A outputs the configuration ak , which is supposed to be equal to the middle configuration of M
                 after t2k steps starting from zk .
             (b) B outputs a bit bk , which is supposed to be 1 if A is lying about the execution of M from zk to
                 ak , and zero if A is lying about the execution from ak to zk′ .
                                                                                  ′
             (c) If bk = 1 then A enters the next round with zk+1 = ak and zk+1      = zk′ . If bk = 0 then A enters
                 the next round with zk+1 = zk and zk+1 = ak . In either case tk+1 = t2k .
                                                        ′

         2. The verifier V checks that each configuration ak output by A is a valid configuration of M , and that
            the final two configurations output by A are a valid execution of one step of M .


                    Figure 3: Doubly-efficient debate protocol for time T and space S.


Debate protocol with cross-examination for time T
All parties have access to an oracle O, input x ∈ {0, 1}n and the code of the time T oracle machine M .
A claims that M (x) = 1, and B disputes this claim.
         1. A outputs a string a, which is supposed to be the transcript y of M on input x
         2. B outputs a location t ∈ [T ] as well as the relevant coordinates I(t), where A has supposedly com-
            puted at incorrectly.
         3. The verifier V reads the relevant bits aI(t) and checks that at is correct for the execution of M given
            these bits. If so V outputs 1, if not 0.


             Figure 4: Doubly-efficient debate protocol with cross-examination for time T .


                                                                      A


    x           M                  a1          a2                                 at                     aT


                                                                       B                                  V


Figure 5: A schematic of the debate protocol with cross examination. The prover A simulates the
execution of the machine M on input x. The prover B points to a location of an incorrect step at ,
and V checks that step.


                                                       12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR D ETERMINISTIC D EBATE

In this section we give the missing proofs for the theorems on the power of deterministic debate
protocols, both with and without cross-examination.

Proof of Theorem 5.1.

Completeness If x ∈ L then an honest prover A can run M (x) once to get the transcript y and
always output the appropriate middle configuration in Step 1a, no matter which bits bk are chosen.
The messages ak will then pass all checks in Step 2.

Soundness Suppose x ∈    / L. Then inductively in the k-th round a dishonest prover A′ must output
a middle configuration ak for which either the first half (zk to ak ) or the second half (ak to zk′ ) is not
a correct execution of M . Then an honest prover B can run M for t2k steps from zk and from ak ,
and output the appropriate bit bk indicating which half was incorrect. Thus, in Step 3 either the last
two configurations are not a correct step of M or one of the configurations output by M is invalid,
so V will reject.

Efficiency The honest prover A only needs to run M (x) once. The honest prover B also only
needs to run M for O(T ) total steps. The current head position of M can be encoded in O(log T )
bits, so simulating one step of M requires at most O(log(T )) time. The verifier V checks O(log T )
configurations each of size S, and simulates one step of M (possibly issuing one query to O), for a
total time of O(S log T ).

Proof. Proof of Theorem 5.3

Completeness If x ∈ L the honest prover A can just output the true transcript of M on input x,
and will pass the test in Step 3 no matter which location t is checked by V .

Soundness If x ∈   / L then a dishonest prover A′ must output a transcript A that does not correspond
to a correct execution of M (x). In particular, there must be at least one location t where at is not
correct given the relevant bits aI(t) . An honest prover B can then execute M (x) and find such a
location, which will in turn cause V to reject in Step 3.

Efficiency The current head position of M can be encoded in O(log T ) bits, so simulating one step
of M requires at most O(log(T )) time. Both provers need only simulate M (x) once which takes
O(T log T ) time. The verifier only needs to read the at most O(l) relevant bits aI(t) , the locations
of which can each be encoded in O(log T ) bits, and execute one step of M (possibly making one
query to O), which takes a total of O(l log T ) time.

C    T HE DEBATE GAME

The verifier V in a debate protocol deciding a language L naturally defines a family of (potentially
stochastic) two-player zero-sum games G(V, x), one for each input x. The game G(V, x) is defined
as follows:

       • The strategies available to the first player are all oracle Turing machines A, and to the
         second player all oracle Turing machines B.
       • The expected payoff to the first player is P[V (x, a, b) = 1].
       • The expected payoff for the second player is 1 − P[V (x, a, b) = 1].

The existence of a (Ptime , Vtime )-debate-protocol deciding a language L then has an equivalent state-
ment in game-theoretic language. In particular if x ∈ L then there is a strategy A for the first
player in G(x, V ) achieving value at least c, regardless of the second player’s strategy. Furthermore,
the strategy A is a Time Ptime oracle Turing machine. Similarly, if x ∈    / L then there is a strategy


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B for the second player in G(x, V ) achieving value at least 1 − s, where B is a time-Ptime ora-
cle Turing machine. This equivalent game-theoretic statement gives a justification for the safety of
training a model to decide a language L via self-play in the games Gx . In particular, the existence
of a (Ptime , Vtime )-debate protocol means that the prover tasked with arguing for the correct answer
always receives a larger expected pay-off, even when restricted to strategies computable in time
Ptime .

D    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR S TOCHASTIC D EBATE
In this section we give the missing proof for Theorem 6.2 on the power of stochastic debate pro-
tocols. For a pair of oracles O,O′ we will use the notation ∥O − O′ ∥∞ = maxz P[O(z) =
1] − P[O′ (z) = 1]

Proof. Proof of Theorem 6.2 We will require the following version of the Chernoff bound through-
out the proof: Let X1 , . . . , XN be independent Bernoulli random variables, each taking the value 1
                                                                 PN
with probability p and 0 with probability (1 − p). Let µ̂ = N1 i=1 Xi be the empirical mean of the
random variables. Then,
                                                              s2 N
                                        P [|µ̂ − p| ≥ s] < 2e− 3 .

Since M is K-Lipschitz at O, for any oracle O′ satisfying ∥O − O′ ∥ < d1
                        h     ′
                                       i                       K      1
                      P M O (x) = 1 − P M O (x) = 1 <

                                                                   ≤     .                           (1)
                                                               d     150

Completeness If x ∈ L, we first describe how the prover A can efficiently follow the prescribed
protocol. In each round t the prover A draws R = 192d2 log 100T samples from yt conditioned on
yI(t) = aI(t) (this may involve querying O(aI(t) ) up to R times). Next A outputs the sample mean
p̂t of these R samples as the probability in step 2.a. Finally, when A is queried for a random integer
in step 2.b, A outputs a number ztA ∈ {0, . . . , d} sampled uniformly at random.
Next we analyze the probability that the verifier V accepts when A follows the protocol as described
above, and B ′ is an arbitrary strategy. Let pt = P[yt = 1 | yI(t) = aI(t) ] be the true probability that
                                                                                        1
yt = 1 conditioned on the execution so far. Let Et be the event that |p̂t − pt | < 8d     . Let Ht be the
history of all messages sent in the protocol up until the end of round t. Let a(Ht ) denote the bits
a1 . . . at output in the history Ht . We will call a history Ht ”good” if Et′ occurs and B ′ does not
abort in round t′ for all t′ ≤ t in the history. Let Kt be the event that B ′ aborts in round t.
For the analysis it will be useful to define an alternative oracle machine M ′ . The machine M ′ is
                                                                                              1
exactly the same as M except that in the final step T , if M outputs 1, then with probability 50 M′
                          ′
outputs 0, otherwise M outputs the same value that M outputs. This implies that, given any initial
setting of the transcript y≤t = a≤t and any oracle O′ ,
                    h       ′
                                           i 49 h          ′
                                                                            i 49
                  P M ′O → 1|y≤t = a≤t =            P M O → 1|y≤t = a≤t ≤           .            (2)
                                                50                               50

The proof proceeds by induction for decreasing values of t ≤ T . The inductive hypothesis is: For
any good history Ht , there exists an oracle Ot with ∥Ot − O∥∞ < d1 satisfying
                                                                            T −t
                                        ′Ot                            1
                P[V → 1|Ht ] ≥ P M           → 1|y≤t = a(Ht )     1−             .            (3)
                                                                     50T

The base case t = T follows from the fact that, given a good history HT , V simply outputs aT .
Thus, if aT = 1 then V outputs 1 with probability one, and M ′ outputs 1 with probability 49
                                                                                          50 . If
aT = 0 both V and M ′ output 0.
For the inductive case, since A draws R = 192d2 log 100T independent samples conditioned on the
value of aI(t) to estimate p̂t , the Chernoff bound implies that for any history Ht−1

              h         i                          1                        R          1
           P Et Ht−1 ≥ 1 − P |p̂t − pt | ≥            Ht−1 > 1 − 2e− 192d2 = 1 −          . (4)
                                                  8d                                  50T

                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next if Et occurs and B ′ aborts, V ’s decision depends only on the value of p̂t . Thus for any bit αt ,
the probability that V outputs 1 after taking r = 192d2 log 100 samples is, by the Chernoff bound,



                                                                      1
       P[V → 1|Ht−1 , Et , at = αt , Kt ] ≥ 1 − P       p̂O
                                                          t − pt ≥      Ht−1 , Et , at = αt , Kt
                                                                     4d
                                                         r    49
                                          ≥ 1 − 2e− 48d2 >       .                                     (5)
                                                              50

Next let Ht1 be the extension of Ht−1 where Et occurs, at = 1 and B ′ does not abort. Similarly let
Ht0 be the extension of Ht−1 where Et occurs, at = 0 and B ′ does not abort. If Et occurs, since A
samples ztA independently of everything else in the protocol, the value of zt = ztA + ztB (mod 1) in
step 2.c will be uniformly random in [0, 1]. Thus, at will be set to 1 with probability exactly p̂t in
step t i.e. P[at = 1|Ht−1 , Et ] = p̂t . Therefore, using (5) we have

           P [V → 1|Ht−1 , Et ] ≥ P V → 1|Ht1 p̂t P[K t |Ht−1 , Et , at = 1]


                                     49
                                   + p̂t P[Kt |Ht−1 , Et , at = 1]
                                     50
                                   + P V → 1|Ht0 (1 − p̂t )P[K t |Ht−1 , Et , at = 0]


                                     49
                                   + (1 − p̂t )P[Kt |Ht−1 , Et , at = 0]
                                     50

                                                    1
                                                        49
                                ≥ min P V → 1|Ht ,            p̂t
                                                        50

                                                         0
                                                             49
                                   + min P V → 1|Ht ,               (1 − p̂t )
                                                              50

For a good history Ht , let Ot be the oracle guaranteed to exist by the inductive hypothesis, and
define Ot−1 to be identical to Ot , except that P[Ot−1 (aI(t) ) = 1] = p̂t . Observe that, for any
good history Ht , the occurence of Et implies that the oracle Ot−1 will satisfy ∥Ot−1 − O∥∞ < d1 .
Applying the inductive hypothesis (3) followed by (2) yields
                                (                                        T −t       )
                                  ′Ot                   1
                                                                    1           49
  P [V → 1|Ht−1 , Et ] ≥ min P M       → 1|y≤t = a(Ht )        1−             ,       p̂t
                                                                  50T           50
                             (                                           T −t       )
                                   ′Ot                  0
                                                                    1            49
                       + min P M       → 1|y≤t = a(Ht )        1−             ,       (1 − p̂t )
                                                                  50T            50
                                                                  T −t
                             ′Ot               1
                                                              t
                       ≥ P M      → 1|y≤t = a(Ht )     1−              p̂t
                                                             50T
                                                                  T −t
                                                              1
                       + P M ′Ot → 1|y≤t = a(Ht0 )

                                                        1−             (1 − p̂t )
                                                             50T
                                                                         T −t
                             ′Ot−1                                  1
                       = P M       → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 )        1−             .
                                                                  50T

Therefore, combining the above calculation with (4) yields

     P [V → 1|Ht−1 ] = P [V → 1|Ht−1 , Et ] P[Et |Ht−1 ]
                                                                       T −t
                                                                   1              1
                       ≥ P M ′Ot−1 → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 )

                                                              1−              1−
                                                                  50T            50T
                                                                     T −(t−1)
                                                                 1
                       = P M ′Ot−1 → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 ) 1 −

                                                               50T

                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus by induction, (2), and (1) we conclude that
                                               T
                        ′O1                1       49       O       1        1
      P[V → 1] ≥ P M          →1 1−              ≥      P[M → 1] −       1−
                                          50T      50              150      50
                                                                  2
                                                     2    1     49
                                                 ≥     −      ·
                                                     3 150      50
                                                   3
                                                 >
                                                   5
Soundness If x ∈      / L, we first describe how the prover B can efficiently follow the prescribed
protocol. In each round t the prover B draws R = 48d2 log 100T samples from yt conditioned on
yI(t) = aI(t) (this may involve querying O(aI(t) ) up to R times). Next B computes the sample
mean q̂t of these R samples. B aborts if the value p̂t output by A′ in Step 2.a does not satisfy
                1
|q̂t − p̂t | < 2d . Finally, when B is queried for a random integer in step 2.b, B outputs a number
  B
zt ∈ {0, . . . , d} sampled uniformly at random.
Next we analyze the probability that the verifier V accepts when B follows the protocol as described
above, and A′ is an arbitrary strategy. Let pt = P[yt = 1 | yI(t) = aI(t) ] be the true probability that
yt = 1 conditioned on the execution so far. Let Ht be the history of all messages sent in the protocol
up until the end of round t. Let a(Ht ) denote the bits a1 . . . at output in the history Ht . Throughout
the proof we will consider three possible events based on the behavior of A′ in each step. Let Et0 be
                              1                              1                  3
the event that |p̂t − pt | < 4d , let Et1 be the event that 4d ≤ |p̂t − pt | < 4d , and let Et2 be the event
                    3                                            0       1
that |p̂t − pt | ≥ 4d . We will call a history Ht ”good” if Et′ ∪ Et′ holds and B does not abort in
round t′ for all t′ ≤ t in the history. Let Kt be the event that B aborts in round t.
For the analysis it will be useful to define an alternative oracle machine M ′ . The machine M ′ is
                                                                                               1
exactly the same as M except that in the final step T , if M outputs 0, then with probability 25 , M′
outputs 1, otherwise M ′ outputs the same value that M outputs. This implies that, given any initial
setting of the transcript y≤t = a≤t and any oracle O′ ,
   h     ′
                            i    h     ′
                                                          i    1    h     ′
                                                                            i                      1
 P M ′O → 1|y≤t = a≤t = P M O → 1|y≤t = a≤t +                    · P M O → 0|y≤t = a≤t ] ≥           .
                                                              25                                  25
                                                                                                    (6)
The proof proceeds by induction for decreasing values of t ≤ T . The inductive hypothesis is: For
any good history Ht there exists an oracle Ot with ∥Ot − O∥∞ < d1 satisfying
                                                                   T −t
                     P[V → 1|Ht ] ≤ P M ′Ot → 1|y≤t = a(Ht ) +

                                                                          .                   (7)
                                                                      50T
The base case t = T follows from the fact that, given a full good history HT , V simply outputs
aT . Thus, if aT = 1 both M ′ and V output 1, and if aT = 0, V outputs 0 while M ′ outputs 1 with
             1
probability 25 .
For the inductive step we consider three cases, resulting from conditioning on each of the Eti for
i = {0, 1, 2}.

Conditioning on Et2 . Observe that given any good history Ht−1 , if Et2 holds then the probability
that B fails to abort is, again by the Chernoff bound,

                                            1                               1               1
    P[K t |Ht−1 , Et2 ] = P |q̂t − p̂t | >    Ht−1 , Et2 ≤ P |q̂t − pt | >    Ht−1 , Et2 <
                                           2d                              4d              50T
Next if Et2 holds and B does abort, the probability that V outputs 1 after taking r = 192d2 log 100
samples is, by the Chernoff bound,

                                2              O            3           2           1
               P[V → 1|Ht−1 , Et , Kt ] ≤ P p̂t − pt ≥         Ht−1 , Et , Kt <       .
                                                           8d                      50
Therefore, combining the two above inequalities yields,

                                       2             1    1   1    1
                    P[V → 1|Ht−1 , Et ] ≤ 1 −               +   <    .                                  (8)
                                                   50T 50 50T     25

                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Conditioning on Et0 . Next we consider the case where Et0 occurs. B’s decision to abort at round
t depends only on the value of p̂t and q̂t . Thus for any bit αt , the Chernoff bound implies that the
probability that B aborts is at most

                                                                 1                1
                 P[Kt |Ht−1 , Et0 , at = αt ] ≤ P |q̂t − pt | >     Ht−1 , Et0 <     .             (9)
                                                                4d               50T

Next let Ht1 be the extension of Ht−1 where Et0 occurs, at = 1 and B does not abort. Similarly let
Ht0 be the extension of Ht−1 where Et0 occurs, at = 0 and B does not abort. Observe that since B
samples ztB independently of everything else in the protocol, the value of zt = ztA + ztB (mod 1) in
step 2.c will be uniformly random in [0, 1]. Thus, at will be set to 1 with probability exactly p̂t in step
t i.e. P[at = 1|Ht−1 , Et0 ] = p̂t . For a good history Ht , let Ot be the oracle guaranteed to exist by the
inductive hypothesis, and define Ot−1 to be identical to Ot , except that P[Ot−1 (aI(t) ) = 1] = p̂t .
Observe that, for any good history Ht , the occurrence of Et0 implies that the oracle Ot−1 will satisfy
∥Ot−1 − O∥∞ < d1 . Therefore, applying (9) followed by the inductive hypothesis (7) yields


                                                                                         1             1
  P[V → 1|Ht−1 , Et0 ] ≤ P[V → 1|Ht1 ]p̂t + P[V → 1|Ht0 ](1 − p̂t )

                                                                                   1−             +
                                                                                        50T           50T

                                               T −t
                    P M ′Ot → 1|y≤t = a(Ht1 ) +

              ≤                                           · p̂t
                                                  50T
                                                                           !
                          ′Ot                0
                                                   T −  t                         1       1
                  + P M       → 1|y≤t = a(Ht ) +              · (1 − p̂t )    1−       +
                                                    50T                          50T     50T

                                                   T −t                    1      1
              = P M ′Ot−1 → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 ) +

                                                                   1−          +
                                                      50T               50T      50T
                                                 T − (t − 1)
              ≤ P M ′Ot−1 → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 ) +

                                                                   .                        (10)
                                                       50T
Conditioning on Et1 . First observe that if Et1 occurs and B aborts, since V takes r =
192d2 log 100 samples, the Chernoff bound implies that,

                                                                1      1
                    P[V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et1 , Kt ] = P p̂O
                                                      t − pt >      <               (11)
                                                               8d     50
Therefore, by (11) we have,
                                                                          1
 P[V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et1 ] < P V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et1 , K t P K t | Ht−1 , Et1 +    P Kt | Ht−1 , Et1

                                                                          50
                                                     1      1
                        ≤ max P[V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et , Kt ],                                   (12)
                                                           50

Next let G1t be the extension of Ht−1 where Et1 occurs, at = 1 and B does not abort. Similarly let
G0t be the extension of Ht−1 where Et0 occurs, at = 0 and B does not abort. As before we know
that the steps 2.b -2.d guarantee that P[at = 1|Ht−1 , Et1 ] = p̂t . Again for a good history Ht , let Ot
                                                                               ′
be the oracle guaranteed to exist by the inductive hypothesis, and define Ot−1     to be identical to Ot ,
                 ′
except that P[Ot−1 (aI(t) ) = 1] = p̂t . Observe that, for any good history Ht , the occurrence of Et1
                          ′                  ′
implies that the oracle Ot−1  will satisfy ∥Ot−1 − O∥∞ < d1 .
Continuing, the inductive hypothesis (7) implies that
     P V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et1 , Kt = P V → 1 | G1t p̂t + P V → 1 | G0t (1 − p̂t )


                                                                T −t
                                 ≤ P M ′Ot → 1 | y≤t = a(G1t ) +

                                                                          p̂t
                                                                   50T

                                                                     T −t
                                      + P M ′Ot → 1 | y≤t = a(G0t ) +

                                                                                (1 − p̂t )
                                                                       50T
                                      h     ′
                                                                 i T −t
                                 = P M ′Ot−1 → 1 | y≤t = a(Ht−1 ) +                        (13)
                                                                      50T


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore combining (12) and (13) we conclude that
                                        h                               i T −t 1
                                                 ′
                           1                  ′Ot−1

       P V → 1 | Ht−1 , Et ≤ max P M                → 1 | y≤t = a(Ht−1 ) +      ,
                                                                            50T 50
                                    h     ′
                                                                  i T −t
                               = P M ′Ot−1 → 1 | y≤t = a(Ht−1 ) +
                                                                     50T
                                    h     ′
                                                                  i T − (t − 1)
                               < P M ′Ot−1 → 1 | y≤t = a(Ht−1 ) +                                (14)
                                                                         50T
where the penultimate equality follows from (6).

Putting it all together. By (6) combined with (8), (10), and (14) we have
                                    2
                                    X
                                      P V → 1 | Ht−1 , Eti P Eti | Ht−1

             P [V → 1 | Ht−1 ] =
                                    i=0
                                     max P V → 1 | Ht−1 , Eti

                                ≤
                                    i∈{0,1,2}
                                                                  T − (t − 1)
                                ≤ P M ′Ot−1 → 1|y≤t−1 = a(Ht−1 ) +

                                                                              .
                                                                     50T
Here the oracle Ot−1 may either come from the case where Et1 achieves the maximum or where Et0
does. Either way, Ot−1 satisfies ∥Ot−1 − O∥∞ < d1 as required. Thus by induction, (6), and (1),
                                                    1
                        P[V → 1] = P M ′O1 → 1 +

                                                   50
                                       O1          1   O1       1
                                 =P M →1 +            P M →0 +
                                                  25           50
                                   1    1    1      1   2
                                 ≤ +       +     +     = .
                                   3 150 25 50          5

Efficiency Both honest provers A and B need to sample from O at most R = O(d2 log T ) =
O(K 2 log T ) times for each of the T steps of the machine M . The current head position of M can be
encoded in O(log T ) bits, so simulating one step of M requires at most O(log(T )) time. V needs to
read the O(l) relevant coordinates of aI(t) , the locations of which can each be encoded in O(log T )
bits, yielding a total of O(l log T ) bits read. V must further sample at most O(d2 ) = O(K 2 ) times
from O.



E    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR D EBATE WITH A W ITNESS
This section gives the missing proofs for the power of debate with a witness.

Proof of Theorem 7.1.

Completeness If x ∈ L then an honest prover A can output a valid witness w (i.e. satisfying
M (x, w) = 1) and run the protocol of Figure 4 with input (x, w) and machine M . By the complete-
ness case of Theorem 5.3, the verifier will output 1 no matter the behavior of a potentially dishonest
prover B ′ .

Soundness Suppose x ∈    / L. Let w be any witness produced by a dishonest prover A′ . Clearly
M (x, w) = 0, so by the soundness case of Theorem 5.3 the verifier will always output 0.

Efficiency The only cost is running the protocol of Figure 4 and so the prover and verifier time are
the same as Theorem 5.3.

Proof of Theorem 7.2.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Completeness If x ∈ L then an honest prover A can output a valid witness w (i.e. satisfying
M (x, w) = 1 with probability at least 32 ) and run the protocol of Figure 1 with input (x, w) and
machine M . By the completeness case of Theorem 6.2, the verifier will output 1 with probability at
least 35 , no matter the behavior of a potentially dishonest prover B ′ .

Soundness Suppose x ∈     / L. Let w be any witness produced by a dishonest prover A′ . Clearly
M (x, w) = 0 with probability at least 32 . Thus, by the soundness case of Theorem 6.2 the verifier
will output 1 with probability at most 25 .

Efficiency The only cost is running the protocol of Figure 1 and so the prover and verifier time are
the same as Theorem 6.2.


                                                19
