Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


JEN-1: T EXT-G UIDED U NIVERSAL M USIC G ENERA -
TION WITH O MNIDIRECTIONAL D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Music generation has attracted growing interest with the advancement of deep
         generative models. However, generating music conditioned on textual descrip-
         tions, known as text-to-music, remains challenging due to the complexity of mu-
         sical structures and high sampling rate requirements. Despite the task’s signif-
         icance, prevailing generative models exhibit limitations in music quality, com-
         putational efficiency, and generalization ability. This paper introduces JEN-1,
         a universal high-fidelity model for text-to-music generation. JEN-1 is a diffu-
         sion model incorporating both autoregressive and non-autoregressive training in
         an end-to-end manner, enabling up to 48kHz high-fidelity stereo music gener-
         ation. Through multi-task in-context learning, JEN-1 performs various gener-
         ation tasks including text-guided music generation, music inpainting, and con-
         tinuation. Evaluations demonstrate JEN-1’s superior performance over state-of-
         the-art methods in text-music alignment and music quality while maintaining
         computational efficiency. Our anonymous demo pages are available at https:
         //anonymous.4open.science/w/Jen1-Demo-Page-21D4/


     “Music is the universal language of mankind.”
                                                                – Henry Wadsworth Longfellow


1   I NTRODUCTION

Music, as an artistic expression comprising harmony, melody and rhythm, holds great cultural signif-
icance and appeal to humans. Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in music generation
with the rise of deep generative models (Liu et al., 2023; Kreuk et al., 2022; Agostinelli et al.,
2023). However, generating high-fidelity and realistic music still poses unique challenges compared
to other modalities. Firstly, music utilizes the full frequency spectrum, requiring high sampling rates
like 44.1kHz stereo to capture the intricacies. This is in contrast to speech generation which focuses
on linguistic content and uses lower sampling rates (e.g., 16kHz). Secondly, the blend of multiple
instruments and the arrangement of melodies and harmonies result in highly complex structures.
With humans being sensitive to musical dissonance, music generation allows little room for imper-
fections. Most critically, controllability over attributes like key, genre and melody is indispensable
for creators to realize their artistic vision.
The multi-modal intersection of text and music, known as text-to-music generation, offers valuable
capabilities to bridge free-form textual descriptions and musical compositions. A variety of works
have been done towards text-to-music generation. Regarding how they encode the high complexity
of input music signals, typical methods are generally categorized into, (1) directly adopting wave-
form signals with the help of discrete encodings to handle the complexity burden (Agostinelli et al.,
2023; Copet et al., 2023), or (2) converting signals to spectrum formats that allow continuous encod-
ings, which, inevitably incur fidelity losses during the spectrum conversion process (Liu et al., 2023;
Ghosal et al., 2023). Apart from these works, Noise2Music (Huang et al., 2023a) tries to leverage
waveform signals with continuous encodings yet the fidelity of music representation is bottle-necked
to only 3.2kHz, which is still limited even after adding a cascade model and a super-resolution stage
hierarchically.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table 1: Comparison between state-of-the-art music generative models.

              Feature                MusicLM   MusicGen   AudioLDM      Noise2Music    JEN-1 (Ours)
              high sample rate         ✗          ✗            ✗             ✗               ✓

    Data
              2-channel stereo         ✗          ✗            ✗             ✗               ✓
              waveform                 ✓          ✓            ✗             ✓               ✓
              autoregressive           ✓          ✓            ✗             ✗               ✓
    Model

              non-autoregressive       ✗          ✗            ✓             ✓               ✓
              non-cascade model        ✗          ✓            ✓             ✗               ✓
              single-task training     ✓          ✓            ✓             ✓               ✓
    Task


              multi-task training      ✗          ✗            ✗             ✗               ✓

A systematic comparison of existing methods is provided in Table 1, where some of the approaches
operate on spectrogram representations, incurring fidelity loss from audio conversion (Liu et al.,
2023; Ghosal et al., 2023). Others employ inefficient autoregressive designs to sequentially predict
each music token (Agostinelli et al., 2023), or adopt multiple models to cascade-generate the music,
resulting in low computational efficiency (Copet et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a). More restric-
tively, the training objectives of existing methods are confined to a single task, lacking the versatility
to conduct multiple and general music generation and editing tasks.
In this paper, we propose JEN-1, a universal text-to-music generation model combining quality,
controllability, and efficiency. JEN-1 leverages a hybrid autoregressive (AR) and non-autoregressive
(NAR) structure, with a novel omnidirectional design that potentially enjoys the benefits of both
generation efficiency and quality. By the combination of AR and NAR structural designs, for the first
time, JEN-1 unifies the learning process of multiple tasks including text-to-music, music inpainting,
and music continuation into one single model. Another hallmark of JEN-1 is the ability to encode
raw waveform data formats, e.g., enabling the generation of high-fidelity 48kHz stereo audios, which
is realized by our proposed masked noise-robust autoencoder with specific designs for continuous
embedding representation and latent embedding normalization.
We extensively evaluate JEN-1 against state-of-the-art baselines across objective metrics and human
evaluations. Results indicate that JEN-1 produces music of perceptually higher quality compared to
the current best methods (85.7 vs. 83.8). Ablations validate the efficacy of each technical component
and also demonstrate that JEN-1 benefits greatly from multitask joint training. More importantly,
human judges confirm JEN-1 generates music highly aligned with text prompts in a melodically and
harmonically pleasing fashion.
In summary, the key contributions of this work are:
            1. We propose JEN-1 as a universal framework to the challenging text-to-music generation
               task. JEN-1 utilizes an extremely efficient approach by directly modeling waveforms and
               avoids the conversion loss associated with spectrograms. It incorporates a masked autoen-
               coder and diffusion model, yielding high-quality music at a 48kHz sampling rate.
            2. JEN-1 integrates both autoregressive and non-autoregressive diffusion modes in an end-
               to-end manner to improve sequential dependency and enhance sequence generation con-
               currently, enabling music generation, music continuation, and music inpainting within one
               single non-cascade model.
            3. We conduct comprehensive evaluations, both objective and involving human judgment, to
               thoroughly assess the crucial design choices underlying our method. Results demonstrate
               that JEN-1 generates melodically aligned music that adheres to textual descriptions while
               maintaining high fidelity.

2     R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we present a review of the extant literature within the domain of music generation. We
undertake a comparative analysis of three primary paradigmatic distinctions: single-task vs. multi-
task training, waveform vs. spectrum-based methods, and autoregressive vs. non-autoregressive
generative modes.
Single-task vs. Multi-task. Several prior symbolic music generation methods Yang et al. (2017);
Sulun et al. (2022) have primarily produced basic MIDI-style compositions, characterized by their


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


simplicity and lack of realism. In contrast, recent methodologies Agostinelli et al. (2023); Liu et al.
(2023); Huang et al. (2023a) have employed text descriptions as conditioning inputs to facilitate
the direct generation of high-fidelity raw musical compositions. Nevertheless, existing approaches
are often constrained by narrow generation objectives, limiting their applicability to a singular task
and impeding their adaptability for diverse music generation and editing tasks. In contrast, JEN-1
introduces a universal framework designed to tackle the intricate text-to-music generation challenge.
This framework streamlines the learning process by encompassing multiple tasks within a singular
mode, thus encompassing text-to-music conversion, music inpainting, and music continuation.
Waveform vs. Spectrum. The fundamental processes of audio feature extraction and representa-
tion learning play a pivotal role in music generation and can be classified into two main directions.
One of these methods entails the transformation of the audio waveform into a mel-spectrogram Liu
et al. (2023); Ghosal et al. (2023), which is then processed as images. However, this transfor-
mation from waveform to spectrogram necessitates a shift from continuous encodings to spectral
formats, a step that inevitably introduces fidelity losses in the audio data. Conversely, the other
approaches Agostinelli et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023a) involve the direct utilization of raw
waveform-based audio data. Some variations of this approach go a step further by converting the
audio into discrete tokens Agostinelli et al. (2023); Copet et al. (2023) for modeling purposes, also
resulting in a compromise in audio quality. In this study, JEN-1 adopts a strategy that preserves the
raw waveform data in a continuous space format, facilitating the generation of high-fidelity stereo
audio at a sampling rate of 48kHz.
Autoregressive vs. Non-autoregressive. Music generation draws inspiration from both natural
language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), incorporating both autoregressive (AR) and
non-autoregressive (NAR) models. AR models, such as PerceiverAR Hawthorne et al. (2022), Au-
dioGen Kreuk et al. (2022), MusicLM Agostinelli et al. (2023), and Jukebox Dhariwal et al. (2020),
predict audio tokens sequentially based on prior context. However, their processing speed limi-
tations hinder their utility in music in-painting tasks. Conversely, NAR models generate multiple
tokens concurrently, offering faster processing and improved generative performance. Modern NAR
models, such as StableDiffusion Rombach et al. (2022), excel in image generation, while diffusion
models Ho et al. (2020) have gained attention for their NAR generative capabilities in music gen-
eration tasks. These models progressively refine random noise into latent representations, enabling
efficient synthesis of high-quality audio. Some approaches, including Make-An-Audio Huang et al.
(2023b), Noise2Music Huang et al. (2023a), AudioLDM Liu et al. (2023), and TANGO Ghosal et al.
(2023), extend latent diffusion models (LDM) Rombach et al. (2022) and demonstrate significant
speed advantages in music generation tasks. In this study, JEN-1 pioneers a hybrid AR and NAR
structure to enhance sequential dependency and improve concurrent sequence generation.

3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   C ONDITIONAL G ENERATIVE M ODELS

In the field of content synthesis, the implementation of conditional generative models often in-
volves applying either autoregressive (AR) (Agostinelli et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023) or non-
autoregressive (NAR) (Liu et al., 2023; Ghosal et al., 2023) paradigms. The inherent structure of
language, where each word functions as a distinct token and sentences are sequentially constructed
from these tokens, makes the AR paradigm a more natural choice for language modeling. Thus,
in the domain of Natural Language Processing (NLP), transformer-based models, e.g., GPT series,
have emerged as the prevailing approach for text generation tasks. AR methods (Agostinelli et al.,
2023; Copet et al., 2023) rely on predicting future tokens based on visible history tokens. The
likelihood is represented by:
                                                N
                                                Y
                                pAR (y | x) =         p (yi | y1:i−1 ; x) ,                        (1)
                                                i=1

where yi represents the i-th token in sequence y.
Conversely, for the image generation task where images have no explicit time series structure and
images typically occupy continuous space, employing an NAR approach is deemed more suitable.
Notably, the NAR approach, such as stable diffusion, has emerged as the dominant method for


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Task 1                                       Task 2                                         Task 3
      Text-guided Music Generation                 Music In-painting                              Music Continuation
                                                     Random Noise                                   Random Noise
        Random Noise            Text Prompt                                    Text Prompt                                   Text Prompt
                              Pop dance track                                Pop dance track                              Pop dance track
                            with catchy melodies                           with catchy melodies                         with catchy melodies
       Full-Maksed Music
                                                     Maksed Music                                    Prefixed Music

                        JEN-1
                                                                   JEN-1                                           JEN-1
                Bidirectional Mode &
                                                             Bidirectional Mode                             Unidirectional Mode
                Unidirectional mode


                  Generated Music                              Inpainted Music                                 Inpainted Music


Figure 1: Illustration of the JEN-1 multi-task training strategy, including the text-guided music
generation task, the music inpainting task, and the music continuation task. JEN-1 achieves the
in-context learning task generalization by concatenating the noise and masked audio in a channel-
wise manner. JEN-1 integrates both the bidirectional mode to gather comprehensive context and the
unidirectional mode to capture sequential dependency.

addressing image generation tasks. NAR approaches assume conditional independence among latent
embeddings and generate them uniformly without distinction during prediction. This results in a
likelihood expressed as:
                                                 N
                                                 Y
                                  pNAR (y | x) =    p (yi | x) .                            (2)
                                                                           i=1
Although the parallel generation approach of NAR offers a notable speed advantage, it falls short in
terms of capturing long-term consistency.
In this work, we argue that audio data can be regarded as a hybrid form of data. It exhibits character-
istics akin to images, as it resides within a continuous space that enables the modeling of high-quality
music. Additionally, audio shares similarities with text in its nature as a time-series data. Conse-
quently, we propose a novel approach in our JEN-1 design, which entails the amalgamation of both
the auto-regressive and non-autoregressive modes into a cohesive omnidirectional diffusion model.

3.2    D IFFUSION M ODELS FOR AUDIO G ENERATION

Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) constitute probabilistic models explicitly developed for the pur-
pose of learning a data distribution p(x). The overall learning of diffusion models involves a forward
diffusion process and a gradual denoising process, each consisting of a sequence of T steps that act
as a Markov Chain. In the forward diffusion process, a fixed linear Gaussian model is employed to
gradually perturb the initial random variable z0 until it converges to the standard Gaussian distribu-
tion. This process can be formally articulated as follows,
                                                     √
                             q (zt | z0 ; x) = N zt ; ᾱt z0 , (1 − ᾱt ) I ,
                                                              t
                                                              Y                                                                                (3)
                                                     ᾱt =          αi ,
                                                              i=1

where αi is a coefficient that monotonically decreases with timestep t, and zt is the latent state at
timestep t. The reverse process is to initiate from standard Gaussian noise and progressively utilize
the denoising transition pθ (zt−1 | zt ; x) for generation,
                             pθ (zt−1 | zt ; x) = N (zt−1 ; µθ (zt , t; x) , Σθ (zt , t; x)) ,                                                 (4)
where the mean µθ and variance Σθ are learned from the model parameterized by θ. We use prede-
fined variance without trainable parameters following (Rombach et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). After
simply expanding and re-parameterizing, our training objective of the conditional diffusion model
can be denoted as,                                h                   i
                                                                    2
                              L = Ez0 ,ϵ∼N (0,1),t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t)∥2 ,                           (5)
where t is uniformly sampled from {1, ..., T }, ϵ is the ground truth of the sampled noise, and ϵθ (·)
is the noise predicted by the diffusion model.


                                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The conventional diffusion model is characterized as a non-autoregressive model, which poses chal-
lenges in effectively capturing sequential dependencies in music flow. To address this limitation,
we propose the joint omnidirectional diffusion model JEN-1, an integrated framework that lever-
ages both unidirectional and bidirectional training. These adaptations allow for precise control over
the contextual information used to condition predictions, enhancing the model’s ability to capture
sequential dependencies in music data.

4     M ETHOD
In this research paper, we propose a novel model called JEN-1, which utilizes an omnidirectional
1D diffusion model. JEN-1 combines bidirectional and unidirectional modes, offering a unified
approach for universal music generation conditioned on either text or music inputs. The model op-
erates in a noise-robust latent embedding space obtained from a masked audio autoencoder, enabling
high-fidelity reconstruction from latent embeddings with a low frame rate(§ 4.1). In contrast to prior
generation models that use discrete tokens or involve multiple cascaded stages, JEN-1 introduces a
unique modeling framework capable of generating continuous, high-fidelity music using one single
model. JEN-1 effectively utilizes both autoregressive training to improve sequential dependency and
non-autoregressive training to enhance sequence generation concurrently (§ 4.2). By employing in-
context learning and multi-task learning, one of the significant advantages of JEN-1 is its support for
conditional generation based on either text or melody, enhancing its adaptability to various creative
scenarios (§ 4.3). This flexibility allows the model to be applied to different music generation tasks,
making it a versatile and powerful tool for music composition and production.

4.1   M ASKED AUTOENCODER FOR H IGH F IDELITY L ATENT R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

High Fidelity Neural Audio Latent Representation. To facilitate the training on limited compu-
tational resources without compromising quality and fidelity, our approach JEN-1 employs a high-
fidelity audio autoencoder E to compress original audio into latent representations z. Formally,
given a two-channel stereo audio x ∈ RL×2 , the encoder E encodes x into a latent representation
z = E(x), where z ∈ RL/h×c . L is the sequence length of given music, h is the hop size and c is the
dimension of latent embedding. While the decoder reconstructs the audio x̃ = D(z) = D(E(x))
from the latent representation. Our audio compression model is inspired and modified based on pre-
vious work (Zeghidour et al., 2021; Défossez et al., 2022), which consists of an autoencoder trained
by a combination of a reconstruction loss over both time and frequency domains and a patch-based
adversarial objective operating at different resolutions. This ensures that the audio reconstructions
are confined to the original audio manifold by enforcing local realism and avoids muffled effects
introduced by relying solely on sample-space losses with L1 or L2 objectives. Unlike prior endeav-
ors (Zeghidour et al., 2021; Défossez et al., 2022) that employ a quantization layer to produce the
discrete codes, our model directly extracts the continuous embeddings without any quality-reducing
loss due to quantization. This utilization of powerful autoencoder representations enables us to
achieve a nearly optimal balance between complexity reduction and high-frequency detail preserva-
tion, leading to a significant improvement in music fidelity.
Noise-robust Masked Autoencoder. To further enhance the robustness of decoder D, we propose a
masking strategy, which effectively reduces noises and mitigates artifacts, yielding superior-quality
audio reconstruction. In our training procedure, we adopt a specific technique wherein p = 5% of
the intermediate latent embeddings are randomly masked before feeding into the decoder. By doing
so, we enable the decoder to acquire proficiency in reconstructing superior-quality data even when
exposed to corrupted inputs. We train the autoencoder on 48kHz stereophonic audios with large
batch size and employ an exponential moving average to aggregate the weights. As a result of these
enhancements, the performance of our audio autoencoder surpasses that of the original model in
all evaluated reconstruction metrics. Consequently, we adopt this audio autoencoder for all of our
subsequent experiments.
Normalizing Latent Embedding Space. To avoid arbitrarily scaled latent spaces, (Rombach et al.,
2022) found it is crucial to achieve better performance by estimating the component-wise variance
and re-scale the latent z to have a unit standard deviation. In contrast to previous approaches that
only estimate the component-wise variance, JEN-1 employs a straightforward yet effective post-
processing technique to address the challenge of anisotropy in latent embeddings as shown in Algo-


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Normalizing Latent Embedding Space
Input: Existing latent embeddings {zi }N
                                       i=1 and reduced dimension k
                            N
 1: compute µ and Σ of {zi }i=1
 2: compute U, Λ, U T √ = SVD(Σ)
 3: compute W = (U Λ−1 )[:, : k]
 4: zei = (zi − µ)W
Output: Normalized latent embeddings {e  zi }N
                                             i=1


rithm 1. Specially, we channel-wisely perform zero-mean normalization on the latent embedding,
and then transform the covariance matrix to the identity matrix via Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) algorithm. We implement a batch-incremental equivalent algorithm to calculate these trans-
formation statistics. Additionally, we incorporate a dimension reduction strategy with 5% least
important channels to enhance the whitening process further and improve the overall effectiveness
of our approach.


4.2    OMNIDIRECTIONAL L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODELS


In some prior approaches (Liu et al., 2023;                                 Convolutional Block         Transformer Block
Ghosal et al., 2023), time-frequency conver-
sion techniques, such as mel-spectrogram, have
been employed for transforming the audio gen- Bidirectional
                                                     Mode
eration into an image generation problem. Nev-
ertheless, we contend that this conversion from
raw audio data to mel-spectrogram inevitably                                                                   attend to all
                                                              padding                           padding
                                                                                                           self-attention mask
leads to a significant reduction in quality. To
address this concern, JEN-1 directly leverages
a temporal 1D efficient U-Net. This modified
version of the Efficient U-Net (Saharia et al.,
2022) allows us to effectively model the wave- Unidirectional
                                                     Mode

form and implement the required blocks in the
diffusion model. The U-Net model’s architec-                                                                  attend to left
ture comprises cascading down-sampling and                      casual padding                            self-attention mask


up-sampling blocks interconnected via resid- Figure 2: Illustration of bidirectional mode and
ual connections. Each down/up-sampling block unidirectional mode for convolutional block and
consists of a down/upsampling layer, followed transformer block. In the unidirectional mode, we
by a set of blocks that involve 1D temporal con- use causal padding in the convolutional block and
volutional layers, and self/cross-attention lay- attend the self-attention mask only to the left con-
ers. Both the stacked input and output are rep- text in the transformer block.
resented as latent sequences of length L, while
the diffusion time t is encoded as a single-time embedding vector that interacts with the model via
the aforementioned combined layers within the down and up-sampling blocks. In the context of
the U-Net model, the input consists of the noisy sample denoted as xt , which is stacked with addi-
tional conditional information. The resulting output corresponds to the noise prediction ϵ during the
diffusion process.
Task Generalization via In-context Learning. To better achieve the goal of multi-task versatility,
we propose a novel omnidirectional latent diffusion model without explicitly changing the U-Net
architecture. As shown in Figure 1, JEN-1 formulates various music generation tasks as text-guided
in-context learning tasks. The common goal of these in-context learning tasks is to produce diverse
and realistic music that is coherent with the context music and has the correct style described by
the text. For in-context learning objectives, e.g., music inpainting task, and music continuation task,
additional masked music information, which the model is conditioned upon, can be extracted into
latent embedding and stacked as additional channels in the input. More precisely, apart from the
original latent channels, the U-Net block has 129 additional input channels (128 for the encoded
masked audio and 1 for the mask itself).


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From Bidirectional Mode to Unidirectional Mode. To account for the inherent sequential charac-
teristic of music, JEN-1 integrates the unidirectional diffusion mode by ensuring that the generation
of latent on the right depends on the generated ones on the left, a mechanism achieved through
employing a unidirectional self-attention mask and a causal padding mode in convolutional blocks.
In general, the architecture of the omnidirectional diffusion model enables various input pathways,
facilitating the integration of different types of data into the model, resulting in versatile and pow-
erful capabilities for noise prediction and diffusion modeling. During training, JEN-1 could switch
between a unidirectional mode and a bidirectional model without changing the architecture of the
model. The parameter weight is shared for different learning objectives. As illustrated in Figure 2,
JEN-1 could switch into the unidirectional (autoregressive) mode, i.e., the output variable depends
only on its own previous values. We employ causal padding (Oord et al., 2016) in all 1D convo-
lutional layers, padding with zeros in the front so that we can also predict the values of early time
steps in the frame. In addition, we employ a triangular attention mask following (Vaswani et al.,
2017), by padding and masking future tokens in the input received by the self-attention blocks.


4.3   U NIFIED M USIC M ULTI - TASK T RAINING

In contrast to prior methods that solely rely on a single text-guided learning objective, our proposed
framework, JEN-1, adopts a novel approach by simultaneously incorporating multiple generative
learning objectives while sharing common parameters. As depicted in Figure 1, the training pro-
cess encompasses three distinct music generation tasks: bidirectional text-guided music generation,
bidirectional music inpainting, and unidirectional music continuation. The utilization of multi-task
training is a notable aspect of our approach, allowing for a cohesive and unified training procedure
across all desired music generation tasks. This approach enhances the model’s ability to generalize
across tasks, while also improving the handling of music sequential dependencies and the concurrent
generation of sequences.
Text-guided Music Generation Task. In this task, we employ both the bidirectional and unidirec-
tional modes. The bidirectional model allows all latent embeddings to attend to one another during
the denoising process, thereby enabling the encoding of comprehensive contextual information from
both preceding and succeeding directions. On the other hand, the unidirectional model restricts all
latent embeddings to attend solely to their previous time counterparts, which facilitates the learning
of temporal dependencies in music data. Moreover, for the purpose of preserving task consistency
within the framework of U-Net stacked inputs, we concatenate a full-size mask alongside all-empty
masked audio as the additional condition.
Music inpainting Task. In the domain of audio editing, inpainting denotes the process of restor-
ing missing segments within the music. This restorative technique is predominantly employed to
reconstruct corrupted audio from the past, as well as to eliminate undesired elements like noise and
watermarks from musical compositions. In this task, we adopt the bidirectional mode in JEN-1. Dur-
ing the training phase, our approach involves simulating the music inpainting process by randomly
generating audio masks with mask ratios ranging from 20% to 80%. These masks are then utilized
to obtain the corresponding masked audio, which serves as the conditional in-context learning inputs
within the U-Net model.
Music Continuation Task. We demonstrate that the proposed JEN-1 model facilitates both music
inpainting (interpolation) and music continuation (extrapolation) by employing the novel omnidirec-
tional diffusion model. The conventional diffusion model, due to its non-autoregressive nature, has
demonstrated suboptimal performance in previous studies (Borsos et al., 2023; Agostinelli et al.,
2023). This limitation has impeded its successful application in audio continuation tasks. To ad-
dress this issue, we adopt the unidirectional mode in our music continuation task, ensuring that the
predicted latent embeddings exclusively attend to their leftward context within the target segment.
Similarly, we simulate the music continuation process through the random generation of exclusive
right-only masks. These masks are generated with varying ratios spanning from 20% to 80%.
The overall training objective is the sum of the different types of JEN-1 tasks described above.
Specifically, within a training batch, for 1/3 of the data we use the bidirectional text-guided gener-
ation objective, for 1/3 of the data we employ the bidirectional music inpainting objective, and the
unidirectional music continuation objective is calculated with the rest of 1/3 data. To gain a more
comprehensive overview of JEN-1, we kindly direct your attention to our demo page.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 2: Comparison with state-of-the-art text-to-music generation methods on MusicCaps test set.

                            Q UANTITATIVE                Q UALITATIVE              E FFICIENCY
       M ETHODS        FAD↓     KL ↓    C LAP↑    T2M-QLT ↑       T2M-ALI ↑      PARAMETERS ↓
       Riffusion         14.8    2.06      0.19        72.1           72.2            890M
       Mousai             7.5    1.59      0.23        76.3           71.9            857M
       MusicLM            4.0       -         -        81.7           82.0            860M
       Noise2Music        2.1       -         -         -              -              1.3B
       MusicGen           3.8    1.22      0.31        83.8           79.5            3.3B
       JEN-1 (Ours)       2.0    1.29      0.33        85.7           82.8            746M

5     E XPERIMENT
Implementation Details. For the masked music autoencoder, we used a hop size of 320, resulting
in 125Hz latent sequences for encoding 48kHz music audio. The dimension of latent embedding
is 128. We randomly mask 5% of the latent embedding during training to achieve a noise-tolerant
decoder. We employ FLAN-T5 (Chung et al., 2022), an instruct-based large language model to
provide superior text embedding extraction. For the omnidirectional diffusion model, we set the
intermediate cross-attention dimension to 1024, resulting in 746M parameters. During the multi-
task training, we evenly allocate 1/3 of a batch to each training task. In addition, we applied the
classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) to improve the correspondence between samples
and text conditions. During training, the cross-attention layer is randomly replaced by self-attention
with a probability of 0.2. We train our JEN-1 models on 8 A100 GPUs for 200k steps with the
AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), a linear-decayed learning rate starting from 3e−5
a total batch size of 512 examples, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95, a decoupled weight decay of 0.1, and
gradient clipping of 1.0.
Datasets. We use total 5k hours of high-quality private music data to train JEN-1. All music data
consist of full-length music sampled at 48kHz with metadata composed of a rich textual descrip-
tion and additional tags information, e.g., genre, instrument, mood/theme tags, etc. The proposed
method is evaluated using the MusicCaps (Agostinelli et al., 2023) benchmark, which consists of
5.5K expert-prepared music samples, each lasting ten seconds, and a genre-balanced subset con-
taining 1K samples. To maintain fair comparison, objective metrics are reported on the unbalanced
set, while qualitative evaluations and ablation studies are conducted on examples randomly sampled
from the genre-balanced set.
Evaluation Metrics. In our quantitative evaluation, we employ both objective and subjective met-
rics. Objective evaluation encompasses three metrics: Fréchet Audio Distance (FAD)(Kilgour
et al., 2019), Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL)(Van Erven & Harremos, 2014), and CLAP score
(CLAP)(Elizalde et al., 2023). FAD gauges audio plausibility, with a lower score indicating higher
plausibility. KL-divergence measures the similarity between generated and reference music in terms
of label probabilities, utilizing a state-of-the-art audio classifier trained on AudioSet(Gemmeke et al.,
2017). A lower KL score suggests greater conceptual similarity. Additionally, the CLAP score quan-
tifies audio-text alignment, using the official pre-trained CLAP model. For qualitative assessments,
we follow the experimental design outlined in Copet et al. (Copet et al., 2023). Two aspects of the
generated music are evaluated qualitatively: text-to-music quality (T2M-QLT) and alignment to the
text input (T2M-ALI). Human raters assigned perceptual quality ratings on a scale of 1 to 100 in the
text-to-music quality test. In the text-to-music alignment test, raters assessed the alignment between
audio and text using the same rating scale.

5.1   C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ARTS

As shown in Table 2, we compare the performance of JEN-1 with other state-of-the-art meth-
ods, including Riffusion (Forsgren & Martiros, 2022), and Mousai (Schneider et al., 2023), Mu-
sicLM (Agostinelli et al., 2023), MusicGen (Copet et al., 2023), Noise2Music (Huang et al., 2023a).
These competing approaches were all trained on large-scale music datasets and demonstrated state-
of-the-art music synthesis ability given diverse text prompts. To ensure a fair comparison, we evalu-
ate the performance on the MusicCaps test set from both quantitative and qualitative aspects. Since
the implementation is not publicly available, we utilize the MusicLM public API for our tests. And
for Noise2Music, we only report the FAD score as mentioned in their original paper. Experimen-


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 3: Ablation studies. From the baseline configuration, we incrementally modify the JEN-1
configuration to investigate the effect of each component.

                                          Q UANTITATIVE                Q UALITATIVE
          C ONFIGURATION              FAD↓    KL ↓     C LAP↑   T2M-QLT ↑       T2M-ALI ↑
          baseline                      3.1    1.35      0.31        80.1           78.3
          + auto-regressive mode        2.5    1.33      0.33        82.9           79.5
          + music in-painting task      2.2    1.28      0.32        83.8           80.1
          + music continuation task     2.0    1.29      0.33        85.7           82.8

tal results demonstrate that JEN-1 outperforms other competing baselines concerning both text-
to-music quality and text-to-music alignment. Specifically, JEN-1 exhibits superior performance in
terms of FAD and CLAP scores, outperforming the second-highest method Noise2Music and Music-
Gen by a large margin. Regarding the human qualitative assessments, JEN-1 consistently achieves
the best T2M-QLT and T2M-ALI scores. It is noteworthy that our JEN-1 is more computationally
efficient with only 22.6% of MusicGEN (746M vs. 3.3B parameters) and 57.7% of Noise2Music
(746M vs. 1.3B parameters).


5.2   P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS

Ablation Studies. To assess the effects of the omnidirectional diffusion model, we compare the
different configurations, including the effect of model configuration and the effect of different multi-
task objectives. All ablations are conducted on 1K genre-balanced samples, randomly selected
from the held-out evaluation set. As illustrated in Table 3, the results demonstrate that i) JEN-
1 incorporates the auto-regressive mode greatly benefiting the temporal consistency of generated
music, leading to better music quality; ii) our proposed multi-task learning objectives, i.e., text-
guided music generation, music inpainting, and music-continuation, improve task generalization
and consistently achieve better performance; iii) all these dedicated designs together lead to high-
fidelity music generation without introducing much extra training cost.
Generation Diversity. Compared to transformer-based generation methods, diffusion models are
notable for their generation diversity. To further investigate JEN-1’s generation diversity and credi-
bility, we provide identical textual prompts, such as descriptions involving general genres or instru-
ments, to generate multiple different samples. As demonstrated on our demo page, JEN-1 showcases
impressive diversity in its generation outputs while maintaining a consistently high level of quality.
Generalization and Controllability. Despite being trained with paired texts and music samples in
a supervised learning manner, our method, JEN-1, demonstrates noteworthy zero-shot generation
capability and effective controllability. Notwithstanding the challenges associated with generating
high-quality audio from out-of-distribution prompts, JEN-1 still demonstrates its proficiency in pro-
ducing compelling music samples. On our demo page, we present examples of creative zero-shot
prompts, showcasing the model’s successful generation of satisfactory quality music. Furthermore,
we present generation examples as evidence of JEN-1’s proficiency in capturing music-related se-
mantics. Notably, our demo indicates that the generated music adequately reflects music concepts
such as the genre, instrument, mood, speed, etc..


6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose JEN-1, a text-to-music framework that directly models waveforms and
integrates autoregressive and non-autoregressive training. Through multi-task objectives, JEN-1
achieves high-quality music generation from text descriptions. Extensive evaluations show JEN-1’s
superiority in quality, diversity, and controllability over strong baselines. This research advances the
state-of-the-art in controllable text-to-music generation. Future directions include exploring hierar-
chical multi-stem music generation and external knowledge incorporation. We believe high-quality
text-to-music generation will empower new creative workflows and reshape music composition and
appreciation. As the field matures from research to practical applications, it bears great potential to
augment human creativity.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
  Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. Musiclm: Generating
  music from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325, 2023.

Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matt Shar-
  ifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. Audiolm: a
  language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
  and Language Processing, 2023.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexan-
  dre Défossez. Simple and controllable music generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05284, 2023.

Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio
  compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13438, 2022.

Prafulla Dhariwal, Heewoo Jun, Christine Payne, Jong Wook Kim, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Jukebox: A generative model for music. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00341, 2020.

Benjamin Elizalde, Soham Deshmukh, Mahmoud Al Ismail, and Huaming Wang. Clap learning
  audio concepts from natural language supervision. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.

Seth* Forsgren and Hayk* Martiros. Riffusion - Stable diffusion for real-time music generation,
  2022. URL https://riffusion.com/about.

Jort F Gemmeke, Daniel PW Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R Channing
  Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for
  audio events. In 2017 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 776–780. IEEE, 2017.

Deepanway Ghosal, Navonil Majumder, Ambuj Mehrish, and Soujanya Poria. Text-to-audio gen-
  eration using instruction-tuned llm and latent diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13731,
  2023.

Curtis Hawthorne, Andrew Jaegle, Cătălina Cangea, Sebastian Borgeaud, Charlie Nash, Mateusz
  Malinowski, Sander Dieleman, Oriol Vinyals, Matthew Botvinick, Ian Simon, et al. General-
  purpose, long-context autoregressive modeling with perceiver ar. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 8535–8558. PMLR, 2022.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Qingqing Huang, Daniel S Park, Tao Wang, Timo I Denk, Andy Ly, Nanxin Chen, Zhengdong
  Zhang, Zhishuai Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Christian Frank, et al. Noise2music: Text-conditioned music
  generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03917, 2023a.

Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Dongchao Yang, Yi Ren, Luping Liu, Mingze Li, Zhenhui Ye, Jinglin
  Liu, Xiang Yin, and Zhou Zhao. Make-an-audio: Text-to-audio generation with prompt-enhanced
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12661, 2023b.

Kevin Kilgour, Mauricio Zuluaga, Dominik Roblek, and Matthew Sharifi. Fréchet audio distance:
  A reference-free metric for evaluating music enhancement algorithms. In INTERSPEECH, pp.
  2350–2354, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Devi
  Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. Audiogen: Textually guided audio generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.15352, 2022.
Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and
  Mark D Plumbley. Audioldm: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.12503, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for
  raw audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Flavio Schneider, Zhijing Jin, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Mo\ˆ usai: Text-to-music generation with
  long-context latent diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11757, 2023.
Serkan Sulun, Matthew EP Davies, and Paula Viana. Symbolic music generation conditioned on
  continuous-valued emotions. IEEE Access, 10:44617–44626, 2022.
Tim Van Erven and Peter Harremos. Rényi divergence and kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 60(7):3797–3820, 2014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Li-Chia Yang, Szu-Yu Chou, and Yi-Hsuan Yang. Midinet: A convolutional generative adversarial
  network for symbolic-domain music generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10847, 2017.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
  Language Processing, 30:495–507, 2021.


                                               11
